House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 121, 1981 Tuesday, 24 March 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 805

Tuesday, 24 March 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2. 1 5 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The ClerkPetitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to t,he appropriate Ministers:
Funding ofChildren's Services
To the tIonourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of childrens services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 Budget. And further, that annual budget allocations in the area of childrens services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Metric System
To the Honourable thc Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan to obliterate the traditional weights and measures of this country does not have the support of the people.
That the change is causing and will continue to cause, wide spread, serious and costly problems,
That the compulsory tactics being used to force the change are a violation ofall democratic principles.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Metric Conversion Act be repealed to ensure that the people are free to utilize whichever system they prefer and so enable the return to imperial weights and measures wher ever the people so desire;
That weather reporting be as it was prior to the passing of the Metric Conversion Act; , That the Australian Government take urgent steps to cause thetraditional mile units to be restored to our highways;
That the Australian Government request the State Governments to procure that the imperial and metric systems be taught together in schools.
And your petitioners as in duty bound witl ever pray.
by Mr Anthony, Mr Chapman and Mr Fife. , ', Petitions received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humhie petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that your pet itioners are gravely concerned at the prospect of any legislation regarding plant variety rights.
'1 The reasons are as follows:

I . We believe it would transfer control, the key aspect of
agriculture in this country, to overseas interests not re sponsible to the Australian Government.
2. We believe it would restrict the growing and trading of many seeds.
3. We believe it would cause a decline in the genetic diver sity of crops making them more subject to destruction by pests and diseases.
4. We believe thorough investigation of the effect of similiar legislation overseas and a full public debate is required hefore any decision is made.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament re frains from enacting any legislation on Plant Variety Rights.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jacobi, Mr Nixon and Mr Porter.
Petitions received.
Confidential Medical Records
To the Honourable the Speaker and M embers of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we are gravely concerned by the invasion of privacy caused by Government agents seizing patients' medical records.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, should-
Legislate to protect the private and confidential nature of medical records from scrutiny except on the express and informed consent of the patient or an order from a presiding jUdge.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bungey and Mr Rocher.
Petitions received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament in Canberra assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That the right to work without discrimination on any ground including, inter alia, discrimination on grounds of race, ethnic origin, pregnancy, marital status, sex and/or sexual preference, is a fundamental human right; and
That it is both the duty and the responsibility of society to fully support those denied work and therefore those who are unemployed as a result of society's inability to provide full paid employment should be guaranteed an adequate income without discrimination on any ground, including inter alia dis crimination on grounds of race, ethnic origin, marital status, sex and/or sexual preference, or pregnancy.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray-
That appropriate and adequate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in Commonwealth employ ment, in employment of persons by statutory bodies and quasi-governmental organisations, in employment of individ uals under federal awards, and in employment of all persons in areas over which Commonwealth and Australian Capital Territory equal opportunity legislation should have jurisdic tion; and
That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits to all persons without regard to race, ethnic origin, marital status and/or sex.

806 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Petitions

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hunt and Mrs Kelly. Petitions received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned shows that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the prospect of the proposed Plant Breeders Rights Legislation.
The reasons are as follows: 1 . P.B.R. will encourage the take-over of seed companies
by chemical companies. 2. Will link available varieties to a particular package of
agricultural fertilizers and pesticides. 3. WiII reduce genetic diversity in seed lines for sale. We
believe this legislation should be publicly debated and a referendum held before a final decision is made. Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take positive action as soon as possible to arrest the im plementation of such legislation. And your petitioners as in duty bound wiII ever pray.
by Mr Kerin. Petition received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the under signed citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
I . Note that legislatio establishing plant breeders' rights in other countries !las had serious adverse effects, namely:
a. Virtual monopoly control ofseed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
b. The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and wiII not grow without the aid of artificial fertilizers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regardfor the interests of growers and consumers.
c. The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
2. Recognize that maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and topre vent exclusive control over plant genetic materials from faIl ing into private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant breeders' rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound wiII ever pray.
by Mr Ian Robinson. Petition received.

Human Rights Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
We express our grave concern at the terms of the Human Rights Commission Bill 1 979 and the Racial Discrimination Amendment BiIl l979.
We note that strong opposition to the form of these Bills was expressed by the majority of our elected Senators. We note that the Billsonly escaped amendment because a number of our elected Senators who opposed the Bills could not be in the chamber when the crucial votes were taken.
We note that the Human Rights Commission Bill is totally inadequate for a number of reasons which include the fact that the Bill does not permit the Commission to investigate breaches of human rights which occur under State law, e.g. Queensland or Wcstern Australia. Further there is no power to prosecute violations ofhuman rights.
We note that the Racial Discrimination Amendment Bill 1979 is alsogravelydeficient in a number of respects including the fact that the Commissioner for Community Relations loses his independence, powers ad staff.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Legis lature will listen to the voices of the Aboriginal and Ethnic communities, women and other disadvantaged groups, who are opposing these Bills in theirpresent form.
We call upon the Legislature to ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Righ-ts. But most importantly in the name of Democracy we call upon the Legislature to send the proposed legilation back to the Senate so that all our elected Senators are able to be present and vote on the legislation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Giles Petition received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the procedures used to determine eligibility for unemployment benefit (Work Test) are considered inappropriate in times ofhigh unemployment.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament take note of the Norgard Review of the Commonwealth Em ployment Service and the Myer Inquiry into the Administra tion of Unemployment Benefit and make the necessary legis lative changes to repeal the amended "Work Test" procedures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding. Petition received.
Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic prod ucts, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms ofreference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict

Petitions

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 807

the activities of the Cosmetic Companies which produce cos metics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were subjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling ofperfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
( 1 ) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that prod uct or any of its ingredients involved experimen tation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
( 1 ) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valor following war action, they have been prisoners of war and should there fore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Govermnent amend the Repatriation Act ( 1 920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen duringWorld War II.
Andyour petitioners as in duty bound will everpray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1 . That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the interim list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heri tage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the pro tection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed a further mining lease against the advice of conservationists.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Metric System
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:

The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showcth objection to the Metricsystem and request the Government to restore the Imperial system.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jull.
Petition received.
National Women's Advisory Council
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled: The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth.
That the National Women's Advisory Council has not been democratically elected by the women of Australia;
That the National Women's Advisory Council is not rep resentative of the women of Australia;
That the National Women's Advisory Council is a discrimi natory and sexist imposition on Australian women as Australian men do not have National Men's Advisory Council imposed on them.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the National Women's Advisory Council be abolished to ensure that Australian women have equal opportunity with Australian men of having issues of concern to them considered, debated and voted on by their Parliamentary rep resentatives without intervention and interference by an un representative 'Advisory Council'.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jull.
Petition received.
Sales Tax on Recorded Music
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth.
That the current rate of Sales Tax at 27t per cent on recorded music is unjust. We request that this rate be abolished or at least substantially reduced.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jull.
Petition received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of Parliament assembled in the House of Representatives. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that.
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other taxpayers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly.
Petition received.
Community Health Centres
To the Honourablethe Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth.

808 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 198 1

Petitions

That the continued cutback of our local community health centre will lead to a decline in the health status of our community. We appreciate their varied services, which include: baby health services, counselling, chiropody, physiotherapy, community nurses, preventative services etc.
We believe that the community health program will cut rising health costs by supporting people in their own homes. Therefore, we support the basic health care and prevention carried out by our health centre.
We request that adequate funding is provided for the con tinuation of and expansion of these valuable services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore, humbly pray that your honour able House consider this petition.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Klugman.
Petition received.
Airline Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the present two airline domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.
That this policy has resulted in expensive airfares and poor service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visiting WA and vice versa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition and formulate an Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley, Mr N. A. Brown, Mr Bungey and Mr McLean.
Petitions received.
Telephone Services
To the Honourable the Speaker of the House of Representa tives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Macquarie respect fully showeth:
That we consider the lack of service provided by Telecom Australia in Sydney's 047 telephone zone is not only inconvenient but is affecting families, business concerns and employment in the area.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government direct Telecom Australia to provide an adequate service to subscribers and users in the 047 telephone zone.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free.
Petition received.
Ballarat Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House,of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the under signed citizens of Ballarat and district respectfully showeth that the 1981 funding allocation for the Ballarat C.Y.S.s. project operating under the auspices of the Ballarat Y.M.C.A. is such that it will lead to a reduction of staff with a conse quent loss of service to the young participants.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that:

( 1 ) the funds be immediately restored to a level that wiII permit the maintenance of the project's current staffing;
(2) Public acknowledgement of the fact that the Ballarat c.Y.S.S. project requires maintenance of funding at 1980 levels, in real terms, if it is to continue serving existing clients efficiently, be made;
(3) a repudiation must be made of any policy that aims to save money at the expense of disadvantaged and unemployed youth.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mildren. Petition received.
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-I informed the House on 24 February that the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) had been sworn in as Minister for Home Affairs and Environment in addition to his existing responsibilities. Mr MacKellar has now resigned the lat ter portfolio and, following recommendations I made to the Governor-G!!neral, His Excellency appointed the Honourable Ian Wilson to be Min ister for Home Affairs and Environment on 1 9 March. I have appointed Mr Cadman to the office of Parliamentary Secretary. I also inform the House that the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) left Australia on 1 3 March to attend a ministerial meeting of the Organisation for Economic Co operation and Development Committee on Scien tific and Technological Policy in Paris and also to attend the Zimbabwe Conference on Reconstruc tion and Development in Salisbury. The Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) will act as Minister for Science and Technology until Mr Thomson returns to Australia on 8 April. The Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) left Australia on 14 March for trade meetings in the Middle East. The Minister for Communi cations (Mr Sinclair) will act as Minister for Trade and Resources until Mr Anthony returns on 1 April.
MINING RIGHTS Disallowed Notice of Motion Mr Humphreys proceeding to give a notice of motionMr SPEAKER-Order! The notice is out of order.
TASMANIA: AIR FARES Notice of Motion
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) -Mr Speaker, 1 give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:

Questions Without Notice

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 809

That, because of Tasmania's heavy reliance on air travel, this House is of the opinion that air fares to and from that State should not be increased.

will be, as I am sure the honourable gentleman will understand, very significant spin-off effects for Australian manufacturing industry. In fact 70

MINING RIGHTS

per cent of this investment is likely to be spent

Notice of Motion Mr H UMPHREYS (Griffith) -I give notice that, on the next sitting, I shall move:

locally on plant, equipment, wages and salaries, services and infrastructure support items. This will, of course, provide many diverse oppor tunities for manufacturing industry, particularly

That this House-

the fabrication and construction material sectors,

( 1 ) condemns the Queensland Government for awarding for transport and for many other service indus

an authority to prospect (a) to a consortium tenderer tries generating, obviously, many new jobs in

dominated by a foreign oil company and (b) on guidelines that were not made known to all parties;

manufacturing and for Australia generally.

(2) abhors veiled Queensland Government threats to other major tenderers concerning the release of bids;

Of course, a considerable amount of the equip ment required in the resource development will

and

come from overseas. That is natural, and I am

(3) urges the Federal Government to instigate a royal sure the honourable gentleman would want the

commission into the Queensland Government's hand ling ofall mining development decisions in the last five years.

companies involved to seiect that equipment which is best for the projects concerned, whether that equipment is produced domestically or

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

abroad. The honourable gentleman is very much

aware of the firm guidelines which the Govern

ment has established to maximise Australian

MINING PROJECTS: EXPENDITURE ON equity in the resource development boom.

EQUIPMENT Mr HURFORD-I direct my question to the Minister for Industry and Commerce. Is it a fact that reports of his own Department and also the Department of Trade and Resources indicate that a significant proportion of capital expenditure on mining projects will be spent on imports? For in stance, is it a fact that one of these reports shows that such predominantly foreign-owned projects as the Alumax and Utah projects will be 50 per

AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS Mr PORTER-I ask the Treasurer whether average weekly ordinary time earnings for full time non-managerial male employees grew by 1 5.2 per cent in 1 980. Will that increase, which is substantially above the consumer price index increase for the same period, have a general inflationary impact especially on prices and interest rates?

cent supplied from overseas while projects with Mr HOWARD-The honourable member for

greater Australian ownership source more equip Barker rightly reminds the House of the quite

ment locally? Does this demonstrate the import unacceptably fast rate of growth in wages that be

ance of having more Australian involvement in came evident when figures for increases during

these potentially valuable enterprises as well as the December quarter were released recently. The

government influence to ensure that their benefits - rise in average weekly earnings has been revised

are spread to other Australians by equipment upwards to 1 4 per cent and the earnings men

being sourced here, thus creating jobs in Australia tioned by the honourable gentleman rose at an

instead of more profits being taken overseas? even higher rate, by 1 5.2 per cent. It needs to be

What action will the Government take to rectify stated plainly that this development is one of the

this situation?

reasons the Government put to the Loan Council

Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-The point made by the honourable gentleman is certainly well taken. He can be well assured that the areas in which he has indicated possible apprehension are very much in the Government's mind in its overall industrial development policies, particularly with respect to resource development. Subject to vary ing qualifications, the figure which has been put

a proposal to increase the rate of interest on Australian savings bonds. It ought to be made plain to the critics of that decision that if wages continue to rise at a rate which is inimical to the economic recovery which is so clearly taking place else where, the Government must respond with the tools that are available to it. One of those tools is the effective use of monetary policy.

down for the extent of resource development be I take this opportunity to put at rest some of the

fore Australia during the years ahead presently nonsense that has been put around in the last few

stands at about $33 billion. Outside the direct im days about the effect of interest rate rises on the

pact which that resource development will have availability of money for housing in Australia.

for the working of the Australian economy, there That is something of importance to honourable

8 1 0 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 198 1

Questions Without Notice

members on this, and I hope on the other, side of the House. The facts are simply that over the three months to January, lending by the major institutions-that is, building societies and banks-was 1 .2 per cent above the level of the previous three months and no less than 1 3.6 per cent above the level for the same period a year earlier. Those are the sorts of figures that ought to be kept in mind by honourable members when people charge in and suggest that the Government's interest rate policy is having an unsatisfac tory, even drastic, effect on the availability of money for housing in Australia. The forces of supply and demand dictate that we, like any other borrower, have to offer competitive rates if we are to raise money. It is as simple as that. The Government does not intend to allow the critics of its monetary policy to get away with the totally false accusation that funds available for housing have dried up. The figures give the lie to that. There has been some restructuring between banks and building societies but the overall volume of funds available for housing remains at an extremely high level.
RESOURCE INDUSTRIES: EFFECT ON BALANCE OF PAYMENTS

into Australia, our much healthier external posi tion and the fact that so far as our balance of payments is concerned, contrary to what was alleged from the other side of the House as recently as 1 2 months ago, the Government has not found it necessary to continue the very large borrowing program that was commenced in 1 977. The pre diction made then that that borrowing program was required to supplement a temporary shortfall in the volume of capital flowing into Australia has been demonstrated by the turn of events to be ab solutely correct, and is another example of the success that we have had with the economic policies we have followed.
MILITARY PERSONNEL Mr ROCHER-My question is directed to the Minister for Defence. Are certain skills possessed by military personnel deemed to be more import ant than others, particularly those involving specialist military technology? Does the cost of training men and women to operational levels warrant the striking and payment of graduated re enlistment bonuses? If so, will the magnitude of any re-enlistment bonuses reflect the cost of train ing replacement personnel?

Mr FREE-Has the attention of the Treasurer been drawn to Press reports of estimates, prepared by the Department of Trade and Re sources, of the effects of expanding resource industries on the balance of payments? Does he agree with the Department that increased inflation and an appreciation of the Australian dollar are alternative responses to this expansion? Does he agree that these options would result in a 2.4 per cent increase in annual inflation or a 1 . 1 per cent annual increase in the value of the dollar, as estimated by the Department? What economic policies does he propose to pursue as an alterna tive to these unacceptable options?

Mr KILLEN-The short answer to the first part of the honourable gentlemen's question is yes. In general terms the pay structure of the Ser vices would reflect just that. I am bound to tell the honourable gentleman and the House that the re engagement of specialists, particularly senior non commissioned officers, is a matter that causes both me and the Services a great deal of concern because these highly trained and highly experienced men are, in Service terms, absolutely invaluable. I would like the honourable gentleman and the House to know that the Government is consider ing ways and means of possibly re-introducing a re-engagement bonus scheme which would-

Mr HOWARD-The economic policies that I will continue to recommend to the Government are in substance the economic policies that have been followed over the past few years with gather ing evidence of success. Insofar as external policies are concerned, the contribution made to the growing competitiveness of Australian industry by the management of the exchange rate in particular is something which is now very widely recognised, and it is one area of economic policy in which the wisdom of decisions taken by the Government some time ago has been vindicated with the passage of time.
Quite obviously the external policies that we followed have been highly successful, as indicated by the improved volume of private capital inflow

Mr Scholes-Was your earlier decision wrong? Mr KILLEN-Unlike my honourable friend, I am quite prepared to say that I have made an error in my lifetime. Mr Hayden-To catalogue them all would take longer than Question Time. Mr KILLEN-The honourable gentleman would still be walking to Canossa. I say to the honourable gentleman, yes, we are considering re introducing a re-engagement bonus. As presently advised it will be done on a selective basis to ensure that the more valued skills are retained. I will keep the honourable gentleman and the House informed.

Questions Without Notice

24 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 8 1 1

NATURAL RESOURCES Mr CHARLES-My question is directed to the Treasurer. I refer him to a statement in the Internal Research Memorandum No. 2 prepared by the Department of Trade and Resources, which reads:
. . . it has been estimated that in the period since the late 1 960s only 2 per cent ofdomestic savings has been allocated to mining investment and clearly scope exists for local investors to play a more significant role in the development of Australia's natural resources.
I also refer the Treasurer to a proposal to establish a resources development fund, designed to provide the Australian public with an opportunity to invest in resource developments-an Australian Labor Party proposal, but similar to one sup ported by the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs. In the light of these proposals, does the Government intend to introduce such a scheme? If so, will the Treasurer acknowledge that this would be another example of a Labor initiated policy being used by the coalition parties?
Mr HOWARD-J remind the honourable member for Isaacs that when the House last met I indicated both through a statement on taxation and in response to questions that the Government was anxious to maximise the opportunities available for Australians to participate, particularly by way of investment, in resource development. I said then, and I repeat for the benefit of the House, thal one of the subjects that I believe the Commission of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System-which I imagine will be reporting to the Parliament in the course of this year-will be covering in some detail is the investment climate, particularly for small -investors in Australia. It will also study constraints on those people and, generally, those aspects of the economy that affect investment including, I imagine, taxation. The Government makes no secret of the fact that it wants to see maximum opportunities reasonably aVHilable for Australians to invest. If it has the support of the Opposition in that aspir ation, all the better. I would be anxious as far as possible to see a bipartisan approach to that sort of matter emerge in this House because all of us have an interest in maximising the opportunities for Australians to share in the development of our resources. I simply say to the honourable gentle man that, taking things in a logical sequence, we ought to see what the Campbell Committee has to say on that subject without prejudice to what other examinations the Government might wish to undertake on the subject.

PROMOTION OF AUSTRALIAN FRESH FOOD
Mr FISHER-Is the Minister for Primary Industry aware of a proposal by Mr Peter Russell Clarke to have rural marketing authorities finance a national television program to promote Australian fresh food? If so, does the Minister think there is merit in such a proposal? Has Mr Russell-Clarke's previous promotional work on television been successful, and would a broader scale promotion campaign be beneficial?
Mr NIXON-Mr Russell-Clarke's efforts in advertising milk, eggs and cheese have been spec tacularly successful. His work with the Australian Dairy Corporation has been first class. There is no doubt statistically that advertising has yielded a great benefit to the industry. Mr Russell-Clarke called to see me last week. On the basis of the suc cess that he has had in the egg industry and in the dairy industry, he put to me a proposition that work of this sort ought to be spread on a wider basis to cover the fresh foods industry. There is no doubt that Mr Russell-Clarke has a high recog nition rate and a high acceptance rate by tele vision audiences. This is because he is a very cred ible person. He is a believable person because he tells the truth. The fact is that dairy products and eggs are good for you. If the honourable member for Adelaide were to concentrate his diet a bit more on real food and get away from eating fast foods and putting pork around the barrel he would be a much healthier person. I think Mr Russell-Clarke has a good proposition. I am having that proposition put to other primary industries that might be interested. We could talk about the grape industry-not the wine industry necessarily.
Sir Phillip Lynch W - hat about wine? Mr NIXON-Wine sells itself for some reason. I do not need to expand on that. But certainly the proposition could interest the dried fruits industry, the beef industry and the lamb industry. Im agine what Mr Russell-Clarke could do with a barbequed lamb chop on television and how ap pealing such an advertisement could be. He put to me a serious proposition that all these food indus tries ought to come together in one big program that would have other components of interest to the viewing public. I think the project would have every element for success.
FORTESCUE OIL FIELD Mr KEATING-I refer the Prime Minister to the Government's stated policy of not imposing the crude oil levy or a resources rent tax on pro duction from the Fortescue oil field in Bass Strait.

8 1 2 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

Given that State oil royalties are calculated on the hospitals in New South Wales or in any other

basis of the price received by the producer, does State.

this mean that Victorian Government royalties payable on Fortescue will be calculated on the full import parity price, presently at $30.23, rather than the existing producer price of around an average of $8 a barrel? Is this another example of a State collecting a tax for itself on a resource that is the property of the nation, particularly an off-shore resource for which constitutional con trol resides with the Commonwealth? What does the Government intend doing about this wellhead value question in relation to Fortescue to guaran

I checked further because there is a system whereby States request the Commonwealth to pay one month in advance the appropriations which are due. At the present time all the requests for payment from New South Wales have been met. I n fact, they are some $ 1 7m short of the ap propriation which is available to New South Wales. I am not quite sure why Mr Stewart needs that extra $ 1 0m if in fact the appropriations available to him and not yet claimed amount to $ 1 7m.

tee that the nation and not just Victoria benefits from this development?

Mr Hurford-Have you asked him? Mr MacKELLAR-'Yes, I have asked him. I

Mr MALCOLM FRASERThere are quite firm arrangements between the Commonwealth Government and the State of Victoria in relation to royalties. It is a matter that the Premier has raised with me in recent times. I will be respond ing at the appropriate time to whatever he might want to put. I make no further comment on that. The honourable gentleman introduced a some

sent him a telex yesterday to try to get his response.
The other fact that I would like to put before the House is that in 1 979 Mr Stewart got in touch with the Commonwealth and asked whether the Commonwealth would agree to New South Wales introducing outpatient charges. Of course there was agreement from the Commonwealth that out

what detailed and technical question. I would like patient charges be introduced in New South

to look at it so that he might get a completely pre Wales. That would bring in a substantial amount

cise answer to the technical points that he put. I will therefore treat the main thrust of the honour able gentleman's question as being on notice.

of revenue for Mr Stewart which would be available to pay for any shortfalls that he may see there. Unfortunately he has not introduced those

charges because he says it is too administratively

PUBLIC HOSPITALS: NEW SOUTH WALES
Mr CADMANMy question is addressed to the Minister for Health. Has the New South Wales Minister for Health requested an additional $5m from the Federal Government to be

difficult to arrive at an arrangement with the health insurance funds. He is a particularly slow worker. It has taken him two years to try to work out these administrative arrangements. 1 hope for the sake of the hospitals there that he gets on with the job.

made available to fund public hospitals in his

OIL SPILLS

State? What is the basis of such a request? Is it justified?

Mr WEST-Has the Minister for Transport noted yesterday's report by the New South Wales

Mr MacKELLAR-I have noticed, as has the honourable member, statements emanating from the New South Wales Minister for Health, Mr Stewart, relating to an alleged crisis in the hospi tals in that State. I was very interested in the basis of his claim that an extra $ 1 0m was needed. He was prepared to put up $5m if the Commonwealth was prepared to put up $5m. Naturally enough, I was very concerned about this statement. I thought it may have something to do with the projected State election, and talks of hospital crises may be gilding the lily a bit. So I checked to see the state of play in respect of New South Wales hospitals. In fact, the Commonwealth has made available about $475m to the State this year

State Pollution Control Commission that large oil spills are inevitable in B otany Bay and that emerg ency services to deal with them are most inad equate? As there is a national plan which suppos edly combines Commonwealth and State resources to combat oil spillage pollution, will the Minister and the Government now afTer increased assistance to the New South Wales State Pollution Control Commission to upgrade these vital emergency measures? Finally, as Botany Bay was formerly regarded as the best equipped port in Australia for pollution control, does the present situation indicate that the national plan to deal with major oil spillages has now reached a stage of unmitigated disaster?

which is an increase of about 1 1 .8 per cent on the Mr HUNT-Firstly I will deal with the oil spill

funds made available in the previous year. So possibilities in Botany Bay, which are primarly a

there is no question of a reduction of funds to matter for the State of New South Wales. We

Questions Without Notice

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 8 1 3

have a national plan in association with the States to assist the States should there be an oil spill within the waters under their control. We have also a plan for spills occurring outside the juris diction of the States. They come completely within the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth. At recent meetings of the Marine and Ports Council of Australia there have been discussions between the Commonwealth and the States about updat ing equipment and facilities where it was thought necessary and about examining the desirability of increasing the levy on shipowners to meet the costs of additional facilities that may be required.
I have asked my Department to submit to me the models of action that would be taken in the event of a spill in Botany Bay and on the open seas. J am quite satisfied that the Department, in association with the States, has a plan that could cope reasonably well with most situations. There is a need to ensure that the Government of New South Wales is also up to date with all the fa cilities and measures that are necessary so that it can cope with problems completely under its own jurisdiction. If it cannot handle oil spills any better than it can handle the sewage situation in Sydney it ought to get out of office.
HOMOSEXUALITY KIT Mr BIRNEY-J ask the Minister for Edu cation whether the Commonwealth Government has provided an amount of $5, 1 26 to the Gay Teachers and Students Association of New South Wales for the production of a kit on homosexu ality to be distributed in New South Wales high schools. If it has, will the Minister advise the House what action he proposes to take in the light of extensive public disquiet which has been ex pressed about the possible adverse effects of the widespread distribution of this kit on the children of New South Wales? Mr FIFE-I am able to advise the honourable member for Phillip and the House that a grant of $5, 1 26 was approved under the Schools Commission special projects innovation program for two teachers employed by the New South Wales Education Department, Mr E . Ashmore and Mr G. Ostling, to develop materials for possible in clusion in a teachers handbook for personal development courses in New South Wales high schools. The grant was not made to any organisation, as was claimed in some media reports. At the time that I approved the funds for the project, which is one of 276 projects so far funded under this program this year, I was not informed that the project was, in fact, for the production of a kit on homosexuality. The Schools Commission did not make this known to me in its recommendation,

nor was I informed until last Friday that the Act ing Director-General of Education in New South Wales had written to the Schools Commission in early January to the effect that although his De partment was happy to support the project he could give no guarantee that the materials produced would be used in New South Wales government schools. Had I been advised of the full details of the project and that the Acting Director-General in New South Wales could give no guarantee that the materials produced would be used in New South Wales government schools I would not have approved the provision of funds for the project.
I am informed that an initial payment of $3,280 was made in January and that there is a balance remaining of $ 1 ,846. I have sought legal advice as to whether I have the power to withhold further payment. I have also sought advice regarding the money that has already been paid for the project. J am extremely concerned that the Schools Commission withheld from me details of the project when my approval for funds was sought in December of last year. The information contained in the recommendation made to me was different from that placed before the Schools Commission. I have informed the Chairman of the Schools Commission that it is completely unacceptable for the Commission to have adopted a procedure which led to my being given insufficient details of the project for which J was asked to approve funds. I have sought his assurance that this prac tice will not continue.
Mr Dawkins-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. Will the Minister table the documents from which he was quoting?
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the Minister whether he was reading from a document.
Mr FIFE-I was quoting from some notes. I have said everything that is contained in the notes. If the honourable member wishes to look at them he may do so.
PROPOSED COMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE
M r INNES-I ask the Minister for Com munications whether a job impact study has been conducted on the likely effect of the proposed communications satellite on the job security of the 1 ,800 Australian Telecommunications Commission employees working on maintenance and installation in the inter-capital network and the 3,000 employees working in similar areas in the rural network. What percentage of these workers would stand to lose their jobs if the satellite is interconnected with the terrestrial system? What

8 1 4 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

does the Government propose to d o to meet the needs of the workers in terms of continuing job se curity and/or retraining should they be made re dundant as a result of that policy? Will the Minister assure the House that in the interest of security and privacy the communications system in this country will continue to operate under the com mon carrier system that now pertains? Will the Minister assure the House also that the economic viability of Telecom will not be called into question by the intrusion of some other body into the area of communications when all the evidence shows that that very limited market can take only one participant?
Mr SINCLAIR-I am appalled that the honourable member is prepared to intrude into the area of generating emotionalism about the im pact of changing technology which is designed to bring the benefits of improved facilities to the Australian people. He is trying hard to generate fear among those who are presently employed in providing a network of communications around Australia. Our Government has demonstrated very effectively that it is a good employer. It has demonstrated concern for those who work within its employ. Its concern extends to those who pay the wages.
Opposition members interjecting Mr SINCLAIR-I am interested to hear that honourable members on the other side of the House have no concern about the taxpayers of Australia. Our concern is to marry the provision of services with a level of taxation which the Australian people can provide. We will continue to do so in respect of the extension of the satellite system, as we will in every other field of government responsibility. Mr Innes-I raise a point of order. Mr Speaker, in the past you have ensured that the answers of Ministers are relevant to the questions. There is no relevance between the sermon which the Min ister is now reading to me and the likelihood of people becoming redundant as a direct result of the Government's policy. Mr SPEAKER-The answer is relevant. Mr SINCLAIR-The Government is concerned about providing an improved level of com munications around Australia. It believes that the introduction of the satellite will supplement ter restrial forms of transmitting a signal. We as a government are committed to ensuring the maxi mum benefit to the Australian public. In doing so, of course, we will be concerned about the impact on those who are employed, whether with Telecom Australia, the Overseas Telecommuni cations Commission ( Australia) or any other

government agency. Our prime concern, however, is to make sure that we meet adequately the communication requirements of the Australian people.
DEFENCE THREATS Mr SHIPTON-My question to the Minister for Defence concerns external threats to Australia. Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the evidence given last week by the Chief of Defence Force Staff, Admiral Sir Anthony Synnot, to the defence sub-committee of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and De fence concerning possible threats to this nation? Has the Minister made an assessment of this evidence? What are current threats facing this country? I include those threats from Monday to Saturday as well as those on Sunday afternoon. Mr KILLEN-I have not yet had an opportunity to consider in the fiat the evidence given by Admiral Synnot because the transcript of his evidence will not be available until, I believe, tomorrow afternoon some time. This is due to mechanical difficulties that face the Hansard people. But I am thoroughly familiar with Admiral Synnot's views on the issue. It is an issue I have discussed with him on many occasions. I simply say that the temptation to try to reduce the subject to simplistic terms should be avoided. There are some countries in the world-I empha sise 'some'; Australia is certainly not among them-which can reduce a threat to their national integrity to clear, simplistic terms. Australia can not. Australia is not in that position. There are a great range of threats. I notice the honourable member for St George nodding assent. This is the case. I have been just reading the report by Mr Brezhnev, the secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, to the 26th Congress of that party. It is a very substantial document. But it is a very clear asseveration of the basic Marxist Leninist doctrine that world dominion remains the aim of the Communist Party. There is no am biguity about it at all. Any person vaguely tutored in Marxism-Leninism will reach that conclusion. Mr Bany Jones-Leninism, not Marxism. Mr KILLEN-I am grateful to my honourable friend for his interjection and his reassurance that he is so alive. It is a term that Mr Brezhnev has used. I am quite sure that His Excellency the Rus sian Ambassador will be delighted to pass on to Mr Brezhnev the fact that the honourable member in the Australian Parliament now cor rects the secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The document lays out the

Questions Without Notice

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 8 1 5

program. To the extent that that ambition is pursued it remains a threat to the entire world. The fact that in the last 1 2 months the Soviet Union has moved more fighter interceptor aircraft into its Far Eastern inventory than the United States of America holds in the whole of its Pacific Air Force is, pro tanto to those countries involved, a clear threat. The fact that this year the Soviet Union is spending some $50 billion more on pro curement, on military construction and on re search and development than the United States of America is a threat to the nations of the world. There is only one other authority that I would cite. I hope my honourable friend will take an interest in this because this is the view of a highly neutral and highly respected academic, Professor J. B. Kelly, a distinguished historian specialising in British relations with the Middle East. In the English magazine Encounter of April 1 980 he observed:
Soviet Russia is now in a stronger position than ever before in her history to accomplish her ambitions in the Middle East, whether they be to dominate the routes from Europe to the East, to command the landward and maritime approaches to the eastern Mediterranean, the Red Sea and the Gulf, or to lay hands upon the massive oil reserves of the region.
I happen to believe in every syllable that Professor Kelly has used. Again, that is a threat to the world. Every geo-political disturbance which flows from the stated ambition of the Soviet Union, the fact that the Soviet Union has moved so many fighter interceptors into the Far East, the fact that the Soviet Union is spending such vast sums of money-all these things represent a threat. The temptation-I know that it is difficult for some people to resist--is to seek to define a threat in clear, simple terms; to say: 'There is the only threat'. That is not the case.
This country must be prepared for a wide range of threats, varying in terms of reasonableness and seriousness. It was in that sense that Admiral Sir Anthony Synnot spoke.
Mr Young-Is this the good old Jim Killen of the fifties?
Mr KILLEN-I think the honourable member has a noogoora bur between his legs. I repeat, it was in that sense that Admiral Sir Anthony Synnot spoke. He was giving evidence to the Committee and explaining the complexity of seeking to find a single threat. There is no single threat for this country. We must be prepared to face a variety of contingencies and it is in precisely that sense that the Admiral spoke.
B52 BOMBERS Mr HAYDEN-The Minister for Foreign Affairs will recall stating in the House on 1 2

March that he would provide me with a copy of the written agreement between United States Secretary of State Haig and himself in relation to re strictions on the operational mode of B52 stra tegic bombers using Darwin air base. He is, of course, providing a copy of that document for my inspection today. Is it a fact that the document is expressed in exactly the terms used in the first full paragraph of column 1 on page 667 of Hansard of 1 1 March? Is it a fact that, with the exception of the heading-stating that these words would be the agreed form of expression by the Prime Minister to the House when speaking to the tabling of the relevant agreement-there is no other comment or notation and certainly no signature or sig natures on it? In these circumstances, will he agree that the document has absolutely no stand ing in any respect at all? Therefore, how can the Government claim that the United States Government will inform it of any intent to carry nuclear weapons on B 52s using Darwin, especially when the United States refuses to supply such information to allies who are at least equally as important as Australia, such as West Germany and Japan, and when Washington datelined newspaper reports, in the wake of this announcement on behalf of the United States State Department, repudiated any such obligation or intent to advise on the part of the United States Government? Finally, in short does he not agree that the document he referred to is worthless and that no other document exists, including the relevant agreement, stipulating explicitly and in a binding way that B52s will be unarmed, let alone requiring the disclosure of the carriage of nuclear armaments?
Mr STREET-As I indicated some time ago to the Leader of the Opposition, I have produced for his inspection the document referred to. It was in the same terms, with perhaps a very few minor alterations, as the words of the Prime Minister's statement. It was in virtually the same words. There was no other comment on the document. There are no other documents. I gave the Leader of the Opposition that assurance.
He then asked whether the document had any standing. It has standing in this context: As the Leader of the Opposition well knows, the form of words finally agreed, as I made clear in this House some time ago, for use in the presentation of the agreement to this Parliament, was between the Secretary of State for the United States and me. If he believes a document made between representa tives of government in that way has no standing, he does not have the same perception of government as J do. [f he impugns the integrity of the United States Government and the member of

8 1 6 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

Cabinet who represented it on that occasion, let COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY

him get up and say so.

ASSOCIATION

LIVE SHEEP EXPORTS Mr HICKS-I direct to the Minister for Pri mary Industry a question which I preface by pointing out to the Minister that the Australasian Meat Industry Employees Union has claimed that the live sheep export trade is causing a loss ofjobs in Australian meat works and is calling for a ration of one live sheep for every sheep carcass exported. Is the Minister aware of claims now being made by. the union that live sheep exports are having an adverse effect on the nation's wool clip? Is that in fact the case? Mr NIXON-The AMIEU has run a long campaign against live sheep exports. The basis of its claim in the first instance was that live sheep exports were affectingjobs for Australian workers in abattoirs and that, therefore, that trade should cease. The Bureau of Agricultural Economics conducted a study on the matter, as the House will know. The study demonstrated that in fact that was not the case and that, in the longer term, it might well be that jobs would be created by the continuance of the live sheep export trade. The fact of the matter is that there has been no dimin ution in requests from the Middle East for live sheep. I point out to the House that, despite the apparent presumption of the AMIEU, we cannot dictate to the Middle East what sort of sheep or sheep meats it buys. It has a preference for fresh killed meat. The fact is that we are supplying only some 28 per cent of the live sheep trade to the Middle East, so obviously there are other markets from which the Middle East would draw if that trade were to cease. 1 point out that, whilst some 5.5 million head of live sheep have gone to the Middle East, at the same time some 4.2 million head of carcass equivalent have gone as well. So as well as the live sheep sales, there is a significant sale of sheep meats. The AMIEU is drawing a long bow in its latest claim that the quality of the wool clip is affected by the fact that approximately 6 million wethers are going out of the country each year. I dispute that it is affecting the quality. It may well be affecting the composition of the flock and there may well be an increasing percentage of ewes in the total flock, but I dispute that it is affecting in anyway the quality. The fact is that over the years there has been a change in the composition of the sheep flock of this country and the Australian wool grower has always met the demands placed upon him for the types of wool required by the world's wool users, so I think the AMIEU is draw ing a very long bow on this issue.

Mr SPEAKER-I present the interim report of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Study Group on Parliament and the Scrutiny of Science Policy.
TAIWANESE FISHING VESSELS Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Pri mary Industry) -For the information of honour able members. I present an agreement with Kaoh siung Fishing Boat Commercial Guild-access to the Australian fishing zone by fishing vessels of Taiwan.
ABORIGINES: SOCIAL IMPACT OF URANIUM MINING
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs) -For the information of honourable members. I present the report of the Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies to the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Senator Peter Baume) on the social impact of uranium mining on the Aborigines of the Northern Territory, together with the text of a statement by the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs relating to the report.
DEPARTMENT OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Mr SPEAKER-For the information of honourable members. I present the third annual report of the Department of the House of Representatives. The report deals with activities of the Department in 1 980 and refers to business and activities of the House itself. An important development within the Department in 1 980 was the expansion of the existing familiarisation pro cedures for new members into a more detailed seminar program. Following the general elections last year, the seminar program was arranged by the Clerk of the House, with involvement by my self, the Deputy Speaker, the Whips and long serving members of all parties, and officers from the parliamentary and Executive departments. Both new and existing members have expressed support for the concept. Seminars in future will be held before the first sitting of each new Parliament.
A major feature of the 1 980 parliamentary year was the selection of a designer for the new Parliament House, and approval by Parliament to pro ceed with preparation of a detailed design and with the site. The building program has now begun after an extensive planning period. Site work has almost reached the building level on the western side and the concept of the final position ing of the main structure is emerging.

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

2 4 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 8 1 7

Estimates committees operated again in 1 980 under sessional orders amended to incorporate a number of suggestions for improving the working of the committees. Different opinions are held among members as to the role of Estimates com mittees and further modification of the sessional orders may be necessary when the committees are re-established in this Parliament. Legislation com mittees operated to a limited extent in 1 980. Members of both sides of the House continue to assess these committees as a valuable addition to the legislative process. The sessional orders have been re-introduced in this Parliament with some minor amendment. By analysing its experience and adjusting where necessary, the House con tinues to refine its rules of procedure along the road of parliamentary reform.
I have previously stressed my commitment to parliamentary reform. 1 re-assert that commit ment, and will continue to work, for example, towards the adoption of the Westminster conven tion relating to the Speaker, the televising of pro ceedings and a revision of our Standing Orders so that committees can perform the tasks we expect of them. The recent reforms of Parliament's pro cedures have not been great. The parliamentary institution has exhibited a resistance to change and the fact that there has been reform at all is a major advance. We must ensure that we continue to examine critically our own procedures and proposed avenues of parliamentary reform. We must implement revised practices where necess ary. We must ensure that our procedures, or in itial moves toward reform, are not allowed to atrophy.
The public is generally critical of the role of Parliament today. There is a continuing demand for Parliament's reform. The rising levels of education and sophistication among the public have led to greater expectations of the Parliament. We must ensure that we respond to these expec tations, and mould a parliamentary institution which more effectively monitors the activities of modern day government. T commend this report to the House.
ASSENT TO BILLS Assent to the following Bills reported:
CommonwealthTeachingServiceAmendment Bill 1981. Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amend ment Bill 1981 . Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amend ment Bill 198 1 .

MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND YOUTH AFFAIRS
Suspension of Standing Orders
Motion (by Mr Sinclair)-by leave-agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent notice No. 43, General Business, being called on forthwith.
Motion of Censure
Mr HAWKE (Wills) (3. 1 4)-1 move:
That this House censures the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs for deliberately and persistently misleading the House in respect of the possible extension of SAMIN, the Statistical and Management Information Network, in the Commonwealth Employment Service, beyond Brisbane on a national basis.
Mr Speaker, in opening the debate on this censure motion against the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) , I ask you and members of the House to contrast some statements. The first statement is taken from the annual report of the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs for 1 979-80, tabled by the Minister in this House on 2 December 1 980. The statement. I quote without qualification from that document tabled by the Minister was in these terms:
SAMIN has been implemented in all CES offices in Bris bane using the Public Service Board's MANDATA facilities. An evaluation is being undertaken of the system in an oper ational environment before further implementation.
The statement that the extension of the Statistical and Management Information Network was con templated and was waiting upon the outcome of an evaluation in Brisbane caused the members on this side of the House to put a number of questions to the Minister. Indeed, I asked one-third of such questions on 1 1 March this year. In answer to my question the Minister, speaking in this House, said the following words:
That was done initially on the basis that its continuing to be linked into Mandata would depend upon the decision to extend SAMIN nationally and on the capacity of Mandata, given the demands upon it by the Public Service Board and other departments, to fulfil the requirements ofSAMIN.
He further said:
The position is still that an evaluation of the operation of SAMIN in Brisbane will be undertaken before any decision is made to extend it nationally. At that time a decision will have to be made as to whether the Mandata computer or some other computer will be used.
There we have two statements made by the Minister: One which appeared in the annual report was about the possible extension of SAMIN nationally, depending on the outcome ofan evalu ation. That report was tabled on 2 December last year. On 1 1 March the Minister said again that the position was still that an evaluation of SAMIN would be undertaken before any decision

8 1 8 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

was made to extend it nationally, and a t that time the decision would have to be made as to whether the Mandata computer or some other computer would be used. I ask honourable members to con trast those statements made by the Minister in December 1 980 and March 1981 with these two statements: On 4 September 1 980, during the hearing of Senate Estimates Committee B, an in terchange occurred. The person being questioned was Mr MacDonald, Assistant Secretary of the Finance Branch of the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs. Senator Evans asked him:
How on earth did you chalk up a surplus in that area? Is it just obsolete equipment?
The answer given to that Estimates Committee was in these terms:
No, the machines were bought when we thought that we were expanding SAMIN, in 1 979-80, into other States from Brisbane. As it turned out we cannot do that and we have had to disposeofthe terminal printers.
That reply is quite unequivocal. On 4 September Mr MacDonald said:
As it turned out we cannot do that and we have had to dispose of the terminal printers.
Mr MacDonald was asked why he could not do that, and his answer was quite clear, concise and unequivocal. He said:
The Mandata computer has not sufficient computing capacity to allow us to expand Mandata beyond Brisbane.
He was asked further questions and he went on to say:
The Mandata system indicated to us that a certain amount of computing time would be available. This was agreed to some two years ago by the interdepartmental committee on ADP matters. The arrangement was that although the com puter time would be offered to us under Mandata we would have to buy peripheral equipment to run our own system. I n other words, w e had to buy terminal printers. W e proceeded to buy the equipment in 1979-80. Subsequent to the letting of contracts and purchase of equipment, the Mandata organisation advised us that in fact, because of its own requirements there was no longer sufficient capacity for us to expand SAMIN, our statistical collection system, beyond Brisbane.
I suggest to the House through you, Mr Speaker, that we could not have a clearer contradiction out of the mouth of one of the senior members of the Minister's Department. It was put on record before the Senate Estimates Committee in September of last year. That was before he tabled the report in the House on 2 December. He followed this up with three answers culminating in the one to which I have alluded which is in stark contradiction.
But in case that is not enough, in case someone would like in some way to wriggle around that stark contradiction, let me read to the House what is contained in a document from the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs concerning the

revised estimates for 1 980-8 1 . This document would have had to have been before the Minister by the end of December 1 980. It would have been to the Department of Finance in January of this year. What does this document say on this issue? Let me read it. The heading on the document is 'Revised Estimates 1 980-8 1 ', the division is capital works and services, plant and equipment, Commonwealth Employment Service, computer equipment and the variation item under consideration amounts to $393,000. Under the heading 'Reason for variation' these words appear, which would have been considered by the Minister before the end of 1 980:

The appropriation provided funds to cover the purchase and installation costs of 26 visual display units required in Queensland following the Department's decision not to extend SAMIN to other States.

That is the document that was before the Minister. It was considered by him at the end of 1 980, following which he misled this House about the possibility of the extension of SAMIN, and possibly Mandata. He said that it all depended upon the outcome of an evaluation of what was going on in Brisbane. Let me repeat what was stated in this document that was considered before the end of last year. Under the heading 'Reason for vari ation' the document stated:

The appropriation provides funds to cover the purchase and installation costs of 26 visual display units required in Queensland following the Department's decision not to extend SAMIN to other States.

Mr John Brown-He ought to resign.

Mr HAWKE-Of course he ought to resign. The document that was sighted and authorised by the Minister went on:

Following discussions between this Department, the De

partments of Finance and Administrative Services and Infor

mation Electronics Ltd, it was decided that all the equipment

should be purchased requirements.

and

all

but

26

VDUs

declared

surp. lus

There you have it, Mr Speaker. The contrast is stark, clear and unequivocal. Against the state ments that this Minister gave to the Parliament on three occasions in answer to questions following up what was contained in the document he tabled on 2 December last year, we have, in terms of what was said to the Senate Estimates committee in September 1 980 and in a document considered by him before the end of 1 980 and which went to the Department of Finance in January of this year, clear evidence of the Department's decision not to extend SAMIN to other States.

Mr Speaker, so that there be a clear understanding that what we are talking about here is not some peripheral minor issue, let me remind you, sir, and honourable members, ofjust how important is this thing SAMIN we are talking about

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 8 19

because it may be regarded as something esoteric. I refer the House to the 1 978-79 report of the National Director of the Commonwealth Em ployment Service tabled in the House in May last year. This is what is said about the importance of the SAMIN system. The report states:
During 1 978-79 the design and development of a new stat istical and management information network (SAMIN) was completed. The objectives of SAMI N are to:

of the House in regard to this fundamental matter. The statement to which I have referred was contained in the report which was tabled at the end of last year. A number of questions were asked. I have referred to the one that I finally asked. The first one was asked by the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) on 3 March. She referred to the statement in the annual report, and in reply the Minister said:

produce statistics which are more useful for management

No steps have been taken to extend SAMIN beyond Bris

purposes and the assessment of local and national labour bane. The function of SAMIN is still being evaluated against

market conditions;

the background of experience in Brisbane.

provide a data information base which will aid the development and evaluation of programs and labour market studies;

A similar sort of answer was given to the honour able member for Griffith (Mr Humphreys) on 5

rationalise the statistical burden on CES offices; and re March, when he asked a question about this

duce the costs of collection; and maintain and enhance the current statistical series.
The report continues:

evaluation. The Minister said:
The evaluation is ongoing. I am not aware of a precise com pletion date for it. I will make inquiries of my Department

The SAMIN system will operate on the Public Service and provide the honourable gentleman with an answer.

Board's Mandata network which consists of a central com puter facility in Canberra linked to small computers in each

I believe this answer has now been provided.

State capital.

Let us look at what emerged, how this situation

In metropolitan and larger provincial centres CES offices has arisen and the circumstances in which the

will be equipped with visual display units and printers. This
will allow each office to enter data directly into the SAMIN system and receive daily reports of applicant and vacancy transaction volume. In country offices data will be recorded manually and forwarded to the regional processing and con

Minister found it necessary to mislead this House. In the latter part of 1 979 difficulties became ap parent in regard to this system on which work had commenced in 1 976. By the end of 1 980, ap

trol centres for input into the system.

proximately $3m had been expended upon the

The report concludes on this point:

work of investigation and the initial implemen

Progressive implementation of the SAMIN system is planned with its introduction into Queensland late in 1979.

tation of this system in Brisbane. By the end of 1 979 difficulties were becoming apparent and, in

Subsequently, SAMIN will be extended to all other States the result, through the period January to April

with the aim of having the system operating nationally by early 1981.
That is what we are talking about, a sophisticated basically important piece of computerised equip ment which is asserted by the Department in its annual report tabled in this House as being essen

1 980 discussions took place between the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs, the Public Service Board, and computer consultants, Burroughs Ltd, regarding the problems of the operation of SAMIN and the Mandata network. Those discussions resulted in the appointment, on

tial to the more efficient discharge of these funda 3 April last year, of Burroughs as official consult mental programs concerned with employment ants to the Department to deal with the problems and unemployment and the matching of people concerning the operation of SAMIN in relation to

registered for employment and vacancies. It is an the availability of time on the Mandata system.

absolutely fundamental matter. Then we pick up the statement of 2 December to which I have referred as to what will happen about the national extension of this program. In the report tabled at the end of the year the Minister said that the program would be extended depending upon the outcome of the evaluation. In answers to quesI tions, into which I will now go in more detail;

Even then we see the beginning of the weaving of this fabric of deceit. The day before, on 2 April, the Minister had given a misleading answer to the honourable member for Griffith, who had asked a question on that occasion. Because of time limi tations I cannot go into that. I simply say that that is when the pattern of misleading started.

further statements were made misleading this Mr Young-Wasn't he telling the truth?

House about the position in regard to the possible extension when in fact, as I have established, the decision was already clearly taken that that exten sion would not take place.

Mr HAWKE-No, he was not telling the truth, as he obviously was not telling the truth on those occasions to which I have had the time to allude. Let us see what followed. Mr Speaker, I apologise

Having opened in time available to me,

that way, let me try

taonfdleisnh tohuet ltihmeitdeed

that I have to do this very quickly. When the Minister's Department appointed Burroughs as con

tails and background of this grotesque misleading sultants to the Department on 3 April because of

820 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

the difficulties that had already emerged quite clearly in regard to the availability of adequate time on the Mandata system, Burrough's made a thorough examination and reported to the De partment that there was not a sufficient avail ability of time and that there could not be a national system of SAMIN under the Mandata system. That report was submitted to the Department, and obviously to the knowledge of the Min ister, by the end of June. So it was known that this problem existed.
Despite that situation a contract was let for the supply of 202 visual display units. It was entered into with Information Electronics Ltd on 28 May after this report had been made. That was a disas trous decision. Honourable members will recall that it is in that context that we lead up to the situation in September, to which I have alluded, with the terminal printers. Flowing from the Department's decision not to extend SAMIN nationally because of the unavailability of time it was stuck with surplus equipment. In September we wanted the Department to explain what it was doing about disposing of equipment which had been ordered on the basis that the Department was to have a national system. But having made a decision before August not to have a national system, the Department had to go about the business of disposing of that equipment.
The evidence which I have put before the House shows-the revised estimates at the end of December last year, at which the Minister looked-that the Department was operating on the equipment necessary only for Brisbane. It had to get rid of the equipment because it had made the decision not to go national. Yet this Minister tabled a report on 2 December 1 980 and, on three occasions in this House answered questions on the basis that there still might be an extension of SAMIN possibly on Mandata. On 1 1 March the answer he gave to me was that there still may be a decision to extend SAMIN on Mandata when, in fact, the decision had been taken not to extend and the Department had actually engaged in the disposal of equipment which was necessary to enable that decision to be taken.
In the very short time available to me let me just anticipate the further misrepresentation in which I believe the Minister may try to engage. I warn him that I know all the facts and he had better be very careful about attempting to mislead this House again. He may try to say that a thing called Job Bank may be a basis upon which there may be some extension. I am waiting with eager ness to see what he has to say about that because

we know the answer. It is one which does not sus tain in the slightest way the lies which he perpe trated in this House. The final point I wish to make before my time expires is that: if the Minister wants to mislead this House about the evalu ation that has been undertaken in Brisbane I hope he proceeds upon that basis because we will answer him with the facts. The evaluations have not been undertaken on the basis of a possibility of an extension of SAMIN. The facts are that as I have proved, the Minister has lied to this House and, therefore, is deserving of its censure.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired. Is the motion seconded?
Mr HoldingI second the motion and reserve my right to speak.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs) (3.35)-1 welcome the opportunity to debate this matter, which was set down on the Notice Paper during the last sitting week of this Parliament. As I will demonstrate, there is no foundation for the assertions so extravagantly made by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) . Having regard to the tone of his speech and his actions in the House; I might say that those assertions were rather hysterically made. The honourable member for Wills alleged on a number of occasions that I misled the Parliament on the future development of the Statisti cal and Management Information Network, SAMIN-not a fish to be played with but some thing to be seriously considered. It is the Statisti cal and Management Information System currently operating in the Brisbane offices of the Commonwealth Employment Service. The honourable gentleman suggested that a decision had been taken that SAMIN would not be' ex tended to operate on a national basis. I will quote directly from a question asked by the honourable gentleman on 1 1 March this year. He asked:
Is it a fact that a decision was taken by the Minister's De partment prior to September last year -
I stress thisto abandon the planned introduction of the Statistical and
Management I n formation N etwork on a national
basis . . . cTihsieonanhsaWserbeteonthmatadqeuetsotioanbai'ns dcolenarSlyAnMoI.NNoondea national basis. It is the usual practice of the Opposition to attempt to besmirch the reputation of Ministers with wild and unfounded allegations. I acknowledge that that is part of the game of poli tics. We deal with such things in the House not every day but as they come along. However, in this case the allegations made by the honourable

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 821

gentleman reflect on the competence and integ rity of officers of my Department. I take such allegations very seriously. The honourable gentleman has challenged statements in the annual report of my Department for the year 1 979-80. That is an attack upon the integrity and honesty of officers of my Department.

I say that because SAMIN is a system designed

to aid departmental management. Explanations

of its development have been given to committees

of Parliament and to the public. These expla

nations have been based on the understanding

that SAMIN would go national after an evalu

ation case .

..

It

has

always

been

thus

and

it

still

is

the

By way of background, SAMIN was introduced in Brisbane as a system to keep the management of the CES better informed of the volume and nature of transactions conducted by its officer. Although a system of this kind had been considered for some time, the discovery that the Public Service Board's Mandata system at that time had spare automatic data processing capacity led to SAMIN 's development . SAMIN was introduced in September 1 979 in Brisbane to test its efficacy and efficiency. At that time Mandata was developing. At a point where SAMIN was reasonably well developed in Brisbane, early last year, consultants-the consultants to which the honourable gentleman referred, Burroughs Ud were hired by the Department to assess the system and the scope for its further development.

Those consultant's reports which were available to the Department in mid-1 980 led to the De partment taking the view that Mandata would not continue to have the spare capacity, the basis on which SAMIN was originally implemented, to allow SAMIN to be operated nationally on that equipment. If at that time SAMIN was to be ex tended nationally, it would have been necessary to obtain additional central ADP equipment. In other words, it would have been necessary to up grade Mandata equipment. The estimated cost was about $ 1 . 7m. The Department decided not to seek additional ADP equipment as its own proposals for acquiring that equipment for the Commonwealth Employment Service, the Job Bank system, of which public notice has been given, were already well advanced. I was informed of the Department's decision in early July 1 980 and I endorsed a course of action which is well sum marised in an information bulletin of September 1 980 of the National Director of the Commonwealth Employment Service. That bulletin, dated 8 September 1 980, was circulated. to CES staff members throughout Australia. I will .quote from one passage of the bulletin which dealt with CES

computerisation and described what was happen ing regarding Job Bank. It pointed out that SAMIN had by then been implemented success fully in all Brisbane offices and, after initial teeth ing problems, was operating reliably. It stated:
Unfortunately, there are difficulties in extending SAMIN beyond Brisbane in the near future. The Public Service Board'8 MANDATA computer which processes SAMIN data has no further spare capacity. Consequently, SAMIN could only be extended beyond Brisbane by upgrading MANDATA's computer or acquiring other computing resources.
I draw the attention of the House to that passage particularly in relation to the passage at the end of the answer I gave on 1 1 March 1981 . I stated:
At that time-
Namely, a fter a n evaluation was to be completed-
a decision will have to be made as to whether the Mandata computer or some other computer will be used.
After I gave that answer I sought from my De partment the papers relating to the matter in order to refresh my memory and to check the ac curacy of my statement. The honourable member for Wills tries to make something of that, but the facts are that iri July the advice before me from my Department was that if the Government was prepared to spend $ 1 .7m to upgrade Mandata, SAMIN could be extended nationally. The alternative was to extend SAMIN nationally by using other computing resources. It might fairly be said that my answer last week contained an error of fact, but one can see clearly what has happened. That information has been made public by the National Director of the CES to all its staff. For the information of the House I table that document.
What had become apparent by that time was that SAMIN appeared, on the face of things and to the extent of the evaluation at that time, to be a success, providing better and more timely information about job seeker and vacancy trans actions. Therefore, the Department decided to undertake more detailed evaluations of the program. Two separate internal reviews were undertaken. The first reviewed the technical aspects of the system and the second reviewed its impact on the work load of the CES. The techni cal review was completed in late 1 980. It showed that the equipment was reliable and that output and operations were satisfactory. That technical review was referred to the Secretary of my De partment. Because of its technical nature, it was not referred to me, nor did it need to be. The second review has been completed only recently. Coincidentally, it was completed on the day on which the honourable member for - Griffith

822 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

(Mr Humphreys) asked me a question about SAMIN. The findings of that review are still being considered by senior officers of my Department. When they have completed their work they will refer the report to me. I seek leave to have incor porated in Hansard a copy of the letter which I wrote to the honourable member for Griffith on 1 3 March providing the information I promised to give him in my answer to his question of 5 March.
Leave granted.
The document read asfol/ows
D'ear Mr Humphreys,
You asked me in the Parliament on 5 March 1981 , about the current state of the evaluation of SAMIN. I undertook to enquire of my Department when the evaluation was expected to be completed.
My Department informs me that two reviews of the oper ation of 'SAMIN have been undertaken by Departmental officers.
The first of these, a technical assessment of the syste,m, commenced in September 1980. This review studied the re liability of the equipment; the appropriateness of the pro cedures and the condition of the operation. It was completed in November 1980.

the Job Bank national computer network. Conse quently, paragraph 1 .2.2 on page 5 of the request for tender documents issued on 27 September 1 980 for the supply of computing facilities for Job Bank stated:
This request for tender is aimed at acquiring hardware and software to support two major applications. These are:
(a) Job Bank. The circulation of vacancies amongst officers and supportive job filling action.
(b) SAMIN. The collection and reporting of management statistics.
I would have thought that it was quite clear to all honourable members, if not to the honourable member for Wills, that the Department was issu ing tender documents calling for the tenderer to include his tender provision not only for Job Bank but also for SAMIN. On 1 0 December 1 980 the Commonwealth Employment Service issued another information bulletin. Again, that bulletin referred to Job Bank and SAMIN. Under the heading 'News points. Job Bank-Tenders Called' it stated:

A second investigation, commencing in November 1980, looked at the impact of SAMIN on the workload of CES offices in Brisbane. I am advised that this study was corrlpleted on 5 March and a draft report is currently beingconsidered by senior officers of the Commonwealth Employment Service.

Mr B. C. Humphreys MP Member for Griffith Parliament House . CANBERRA ACT 2600

Yours sincerely, R. I. VINER

Mr VINER-In that letter I referred to the two evaluations that I have mentioned. One can see that the answer I gave to the honourable member for Griffith was absolutely correct. I also refer to the answer I gave to the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) on 3 March 1981 . After some preamble the honourable member asked:

Can the Minister indiCate what progress has been made in the implementation ofSAMIN beyond Brisbane?

I answered:

No steps have been taken to extend SA.MIN beyond Bris bane. The function of SAMIN is still being evaluated against the background of experience in Brisbane.

Tenders were called in October for the supply of computer equipment including terminals for the CES Job Bank system. Tenders close in February 1981 and after that a Departmental evaluation team with consultants from Logica--
They are the consultants in respect of Job Bank-
will evaluate the responses and make recommendations later in the year. The equipment will support Job Bank and enable extension of the SAMIN statistical and management information system to all Regions.
For the edification of the honourable member for Wills, that means that SAMIN will be extended to a national network. I table that bulletin. Thus it will be seen that no decision has been taken not to proceed with the implementation of SAMIN on a national basis. The evaluation of the system is currently before my Department. The tender document for Job Bank includes acquisition of soft ware and hardware for the implementation of SAMIN in all regions. J repeat that that means ac quisition on a national basis. This is fully reflected in the information bulletins issued by the National Director of the Commonwealth Employment Ser vice to all staff.

That answer is absolutely correct. It will be seen, therefore, that the only decision taken on the extension of SAMIN beyond Brisbane was a decision that it could not be done using Mandata without the costly upgrading of Mandata, amounting to $ 1.7m, which I have mentioned. In the judgment of my Department, with which I concurred, it was considered that the more appro priate course to follow was to look at extending SAMIN in the context of the implementation of

The honourable member for Wills has sought to impugn the honesty and integrity of officers of my Department at the most senior level, including the Secretary of my Department and the National Di , rector of the CES, by alleging that false state ments were made in the annual report of the De partment for 1 979-80 tabled by me in September 1 980. I simply point out to the honourable member that he should first read the preamble. It is my preamble and it states:

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 823

In accordance with the provisions of Section 22 of the Commonwealth Employment Service Act 1978, I submit for pres entation to Parliament this Report for the year ended 30 June
1 980.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman's time has expired.

Motion (by Mr Viner) agreed to:

That the question be now put.

Question put:

That the motion (Mr Hawke's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

48

Noes

64

Majority

16

AYES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett, N. Bowen,"Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell, G. Charles, D. E. Child, J. Cohen , B . Cross, M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling,E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Hawke, R . J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R .

Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R. J. Kent,L. Kerin, J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton, P. Morris , P . F . Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Ureo, T. Wallis, L. G. West , S . J . Willis, R. Young, M.J.

NOES
Adermann, A. E . Baume, M. E. Birney, R . J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N. A. Burr, M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Connolly, D. M . Cowan, D.B. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R . Falconer, P . D. Fife, W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom, R . J. Hall , S teele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J.

Jarman, A. W. Jull, D.F. Katter, R. C. Killen, D . J. Lloyd , B . Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R . MacKenzie, A . J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh,D. T. Millar, P.C. Maore, l.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F.
Spender, J. M . Street, A . A.

NOES Hodges, J. C. (TeLLer)
Hodgman, w. M.
Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde, J. M.

Tambling, G. E. J. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Cass, M. H. Fry, K. L.

PAIRS

Anthony, J. D. Thomson, D. S.

Question so resolved in the negative.

INTEREST RATES Discussion of Matter of Public Importance Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The likely prospect of a further general increase in interest rates and its adverse impact on home buyers, small business, the level ofeconomic activity and employment.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (3.59)-The Opposition is greatly concerned at the likelihood of a further round of interest rate increases of the order of one per cent or so. We are so concerned because of a decision made by the Government yesterday evening in which it announced an increase in the Australian savings bonds interest rate from 1 1 t per cent to 1 2t per cent, a rise of three-quarters of a per cent. That is by far the highest level that the interest rate on savings bonds has reached since they were introduced. The savings bonds rate traditionally has been closely associated with the building society rates. When there has been movement in the savings bond rate it has been normal for there to be an increase in the building society rate, if the savings bond rate movement was upward, and with the increase in deposit rates by building societies in evitably there has been an increase in their loan rates and therefore higher loan repayments for home buyers purchasing their homes through building society loans. That, of course, is tremen dously important for all those buying homes through building societies or intending to do so. It is also important in relation to those who would be seeking bank finance-more so now since the decision of the Government last December to deregulate deposit rates by the banks.

824 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Interest Rates

Now we have the situation where the banks can also attempt to keep pace with savings bond increases by increasing their rates on deposits with out having to depend on the Government to ap prove increases in those rates. Of course, there is a limitation in the sense that there is still control on the lending rate so that the extent to which the banks can increase their deposit rates is limited to some extent by that fact. Of course, that means that the banks then put pressure on the Government for an increase in those loan rates.
At present we are greatly concerned that given that increase in savings bond rates the banks will be pressuring the Government very vigorously for an increase in their loan rate. That has become particularly important since the Government's decision to deregulate bank deposit rates last December. Since that time there has been a significant increase in bank deposit rates. Savings bank investment account rates are up from 9 per cent last December to l O t per cent now--an increase of 1 t per cent. Rates on fixed deposits by trading banks are up by at least three-quarters of one per cent, in some cases more. This indicates that there was a strong increase in bank deposit rates before last night's decision to increase savings bond rates. Therefore, even before the Government made its decision to increase those savings bond rates, which was announced last night, there was pressure on the Government to allow a further increase in the loan rates charged by the banks for overdrafts and home loans. Now, with that increase in the savings bond rate, that pressure must be greatly exacerbated because the

banks are very much competing with savings bonds, as are the building societies. An increase of the order of three-quarters of one per cent must affect the competitive abilities of the banks. Therefore, the banks will be wanting to increase their deposit rates to maintain funds and we are likely to see further pressure for higher rates in the banking area.
It seems to us, therefore, that we are looking at about a one per cent general increase in interest rates occurring again. This is because of the press ures developing prior to last night and because of last night's announcement. This prospect of rising interest rates is absolutely alarming because interest rates are already at record levels. Interest rates in this country have never been higher than they are at present. Yet we now appear to be fac ing the prospect of another one per cent or so increase. Coming on top ofrecord high interest rates that is absolutely alarming. Of course, it makes an absolute mockery of the Government's election promise in 1 977 to reduce interest rates by 2 per cent. Home loan rates are now one per cent higher than they were when the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) made that election promise in 1 977. Of course, if the rates increase by another one per cent it will amount to an increase of some 2 per cent on the level operating when the Government promised to reduce rates by 2 per cent. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table which sets out changes in interest rates on housing mortgages.
Leave granted. The table read as follows-

CHANGES I N INTEREST RATES ON HOUSING MORTGAGES (percentage)

Savings Banks

Trading Banks

Building Socities

NSW

Vic.

Finance Companies

December 1 977 January 1 978 January 1 979 June 1 979 December 1 979 January 1 980 June 1980 October 1 980 December 1 980 February 1 980

9.251 0.0 9.25 1 0.0
8.75-9.5 8.759.5 8.75-9.5 8 . 7 5 -9 . 5 9.5-10.5 10.0-10.5
1 1.5 1 1.5

10.5

1 1.5

1 2.2512.5

1 6.5

10.5

1 1.5

1 2.25 1 2.5

16.5

9.5

10.5

1 1.5

1 5.0

9.5

10.5

1 1 .5

15.5

9.5

1 0.5

1 1 .5

1 5.5

9.5

10.5

1 1 .5

1 6.0

10.0

10.5

1 1.5

16.0

10.5

1 1.0

1 2.5

16.0 16.5

1 1.5

12.0-12.5

12.5-1 3.0

1 7.5

1 l .5

12.0-12.5

1 2.5-13.0

1 7.5

Source: Syntec.
Mr WILLIS-I thank the House. The table demonstrates movements in housing mortgage interest rates for savings banks, trading banks, building societies and finance companies from December 1 977 to the present. We can see from those figures that there has been an increase in the

order of 1 t per cent over that period. Although there was a decline in those rates in 1 979, last year we saw significant increases. In fact, in less than 1 2 months we have had an increase of 2 per cent
in home mortgage interest rates-D.S per cent last April, 0.5 per cent last July and one per cent last

Interest Rates

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 825

December. That is 2 per cent in less than 1 2 months. Here we are facing a prospect o fa further one per cent increase. This would mean a stagger ing rise of some 3 per cent in interest rates in the course of a 12-month period. That is not bad for a government that promised to cut interest rates by 2 per cent!
If we have this increase in interest rates, which seems nigh unto certain, this will have a very significant impact on home buyers, small businesses and economic activity generally. Home buyers, both actual home buyers and potential home buyers, of course, are most heavily affected by interest rate increases because they must bear the full impact. Business is to some extent sheltered from the increase in interest rates because of its

involving a tax deduction. The Government picks up the tab for something like half of the interest rate increase. Still, the increase has a significant impact. It increases the cost of capital and there fore the price of investment and, therefore, makes such investment perhaps less likely. So it is also important in that regard. For home buyers the interest rate is, of course, very important indeed. There are no tax deductions for housing interest rates so home buyers and potential home buyers must bear the full impact of any such increases. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard another table which shows the effects of increased interest rates on home loan repayments.
Leave granted. The table read as follows-

EFFECT OF INCREASED INTEREST RATES ON HOME LOAN REPAYMENTS

Loan (25 year term)

$20,000

$25,000

$30,000

Interest rate (per cent)

Monthly

Total Monthly Monthly Monthly

Total

repayment repayment repayment repayment repayment repayment

9.0

1 67.83 50,351.78

209.79 62,939.72

251.75 75,527.67

9.5

1 74.73 52,421.79

218.42 65,527.24

262.10 78,632.69

10.0

1 81 .74 54,522.04

227 . 1 7 68,152.55

272.61 8 1 ,783.06

10.5

1 88.83 56,650.90

236.04 70,81 3.62

283.25 84,976.35

1 1.0

1 96.02 58,806.78

245.02 73,508.48

294.03 88,2 1 0. 1 7

1 1.5

203.29 60,988.13

254. 1 1 76,235 . 1 7

304.94 91,482.20

12.0

21 0.64 63,193.44

263.30 78,991.81

3 1 5.96 94,790. 1 7

12.5

21 8.07 65,421.24

272.58 81,776.56

327. 10 98,1 3 1 .87

Mr WILLIS-I thank the House. This table shows for 25-year loans amounting to $20,000, $25,000 and $30,000, with varying interest rates, what the monthly repayments and total repay ments would be. If we take perhaps the typical home loan of $30,000 we find that a comparison of repayments on the 9+ per cent interest rate, which we had 1 2 months ago, and on the I I + per cent rate, which is the interest rate now, shows that the. monthly repayment has gone from about $262 to about $305-a $43 increase. That is a very significant increase indeed. If the rate were to go up by another one per cent the repayment would go up by another $22 a month which would be an increase of $65 per month on repayments 1 2 months ago. A further increase in interest rates will have a very important impact indeed. The size of repayments will be greatly increased. The ability of people to obtain home loans will be greatly reduced.
The Housing Industry Association has cal culated that for every 0.5 per cent increase in mortgage interest rates some 4,000 potential home buyers per annum are excluded from the market. With the increase of 2 per cent in interest

rates that we have seen already in less than the last 12 months some 1 6,000 potential home buyers have been excluded from the market. With another one per cent rise there would be another 8,000 people excluded making 24,000 people excluded in the course of the last 1 2 months. This has, of course, a very significant impact indeed on the building industry and on the housing situation at large. Of course, the reason those people are excluded is simply that they cannot meet the re payments. To obtain a $25,000 loan from a savings bank at 1 2+ per cent interest over 25 years on the basis that these repayments are no more than 25 per cent of gross earnings, which is the normal provision required by banks, a buyer would need a gross weekly income of $273 a week. Average weekly earnings are only just slightly above that amount at $278 a week. Over 60 per cent of wage and salary earners earn less than average weekly earnings. Quite obviously the ma jority of wage and salary earners are excluded from obtaining a home loan of that normal kind at the likely interest rate of 1 2+ per cent. Therefore, we find the great impact on the housing market which I mentioned.

826 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1 981

Interest Rates

Of course, this applies not only in relation to home purchase but also it creates enormous problems in the home renting area, particularly when the Government has been slashing funds for pub .lic housing and therefore creating a shortage of rental accommodation. That plus the exclusion of people from the ability to buy puts enormous pressure on rents which are currently increasing rapidly and are likely to increase even more if these policies are pursued, as apparently they will be. Therefore, in the housing area this has a very significant impact indeed and an impact on the building supplies industry and through that the economy in general which, of course, is also affected by higher interest rates increasing the price of investment and therefore making less investment likely, having impacts on employment. Why then do we have this interest rate spiral which is clearly so damaging? There are basically three reasons as we see it. Firstly, there are the monetarist policies of this Government. This Government is increasingly monetarist in its approach at a time when such policies are increasingly being exposed as disastrous and unworkable.
The rise in the savings bond rate is designed to enable the Government to keep the money supply growth within its budgeted rate of 9 to I I per cent. The Treasurer has decided to increase the rate by another three-quarters of a per cent to bring in more money, so he can keep the rate of growth of the money supply down to his target rate. This is in contrast with the position in previous years. Last year the rate blew out by some 3 per cent more than the target or budget rate. In the previous year there was a similar blow-out, but this year the Government seems to be more determined to ensure that there is no blow-out of the money supply rate of growth. Therefore, we can say that it is increasingly monetarist in its approach. This is at a time when all over the world great concern is being expressed about the auth enticity of monetarist policies, particularly in the United Kingdom, where it is a subject of enormous discussion.
The Government says that we need to restrict the rate of growth of the money supply to reduce inflation, but there is no evidence here, or any where, of a clear relationship between the rate of growth of money supply and the rate of inflation. I challenge the Treasurer to produce one skerrick of evidence that there is a clear relationship between the rate of growth of money supply and the level of inflation. One certainly cannot find it in Australia's history or in the history of any other country, so far as I am aware. Indeed, there is no economic theory which holds that there is such a

relationship. Not even the Friedmanites in their basic economic theory hold that there is such a close relationship. All we have is the basic relationship, adhered to by economists for many years, that the amount of money in the economy, times its velocity-the speed with which it is turned over-equals the quantity of goods produced as determined by the price level of those goods and services. It is a simple, basic relation ship. It does not follow that if M, the amount of money in the community, is reduced the price level is also reduced. The quantity of goods and services in the community might be reduced. Indeed, that conclusion was reached by two Adelaide economists, Davis and Lewis, in an article published in The Australian Monetary System in the 1 970s, edited by Michael G. Porter. In the chapter on money and income determination they say, speaking of their economic study:
. . . these results suggest that the Liberal-NCP Government's strategy of pitching the monetary growth rate target well below the ongoing rate of growth of consumer prices is likely to have a more reliable impact upon output than upon prices.
In other words, if one follows this Government's monetary policy one is more likely to reduce out put than inflation. That is what we are seeing at present in the real world. We are seeing it in Australia while this Government is pursuing its monetary policies of 1 976-77 and 1 977-78. It has let them blow out a bit since. We have certainly seen it in the United Kingdom, where those mone tarist policies are continuing in a period of high inflation and devastating impact on output and employment.
What does undoubtedly go with monetarist policies is high interest rates; there is absolutely no doubt about that. This is because inflation remains high and that tends to bid interest rates up. It is also because a contraction of the rate of growth of the money supply creates a shortage, so its price, that is, interest rates, is bid up. I refer honourable members to a cable, received today from Europe, on a statement by the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. It states:
The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) today warned governments that reliance on tight mon etary controls to tame inflation without an incomes policy
could lead to a heightening of social conflict . . .
The report suggested that monetarist strategies being fol lowed by several governments that have turned away from in comes policies could increase social strains caused by higher unemployment, and said the effectiveness of such an
approach was yet to be proven . . .
The survey added: 'One consequence of the present mone tarist strategy has been a widespread escalation of interest rates, which have now reached very highlevels, particularly in the United States'.

Interest Rates

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 827

We have there evidence from the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe that mone tarist policies are leading to a declining economy and higher interest rates. That situation is likely to occur here, although resource development pro vides an offsetting factor in regard to the level of economic activity.
Deregulation is another reason we have such spiralling interest rates, a matter to which I referred in my opening remarks. If the Government persists in its support for deregulation in the middle of the year, when the Campbell committee report comes down, we can expect further increases in interest rates. The banks, in their sub mission to that committee said that deregulation would lead to higher interest rates.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (4. 1 5 ) - [ welcome this matter of public import ance because of the opportunity it affords to ana lyse the different approaches of the Opposition and the Government on the question of interest rates, and to draw out the absolute unrealism of the approach that is taken by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) . It is an approach, I might add, that brings him into some conflict with statements made until fairly recently by his own leader, the honourable member for Oxley (Mr Hayden) who certainly, when he was Treasurer, and since he has become Leader of the Opposition, acknowledged the link between the rate of growth of the money supply and the level of inflation. Therefore, my opening point is that the honourable member for Gellibrand has indicated a very significant difference between his approach and that of the Leader of the Opposition who, in his calmer moments and when better advised, knows as well as do honourable members on this side that there is a very import ant link between the rate of growth of the money supply and the level of inflation.
Obviously, no honourable member likes high interest rates. Government members are as concerned as anybody else that interest rates should now be higher than they were some months ago. We are naturally concerned, in particular, about the level of interest rates in the sensitive areas that affect Australian home buyers. But in a debate like this we have to ask ourselves some fundamen tal questions. We have to ask what causes interest rates to go up and whether there are any realistic alternatives to the policy that the Government is currently following. The honourable member for Gellibrand might acknowledge that the ultimate

pressure on the level of interest rates in the community is the pressure of supply and demand. He would surely acknowledge that ultimately the price of money is determined by the volume available and the demand for it. It follows that those who are interested in bringing down the level of interest rates must demonstrate a capacity to follow policies which reduce the demand on funds available for lending. That is the central point in any debate on interest rates.
It is no good bewailing the level of interest rates, or saying that they were at a certain level some months ago and are now at another. It is necessary, if we are to bring down the level of interest rates, to produce a coherent strategy which is better than that followed at present. The first thing that any government has a responsibility to do in regard to interest rates is to curb its appetite for borrowing funds from those that are available in the community. It is sometimes for gotten by people on the other side that governments, by their own activities, have an effect on the amount of money that is available and its price. Every time a government spends more, through borrowing, than it raises through taxation, it puts pressure on interestrates. Every time governments do more than they ought to do in providing services they enter into open competition with financial institutions which provide money to Australian home buyers. Therefore, every politician on the other side who bewails the price of finance to home buyers ought to look to his own commitments in the public sector-and none more so than the honourable member for Gellibrand who is on record, as every honourable member on this side knows, as being in favour of a much larger public sector. He stands for increasing the competition by the government sector for funds and therefore for forcing up further the price of money. He knows, as well as we do, that when governments increase their own demands for funds they increase competition; that there fore they have an effect on the price of money.
Anyone who wishes to know who stands for re ducing pressure on interest rates in Australia must consider the comparative policies of political par ties as to the size of the public sector. Lower deficits, reduced borrowing demands and a smaller public sector borrowing requirement ultimately reduce the pressure imposed by the government sector. The answer of the Opposition is to ignore that fact, although some, and in particular the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) , if his questions of some ten days ago are any guide, would have us reduce some of the private sector demands for funds so that more could

828 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Interest Rates

be made available for the public sector. If the argument is about the size of the private sector, or the public sector, in the economy let us at least have an honest debate on whether the public sec tor should be larger or smaller.
Let us not cloud the issue. If we have a certain volume of money available for lending in the community and the public sector demand for it is increased, then there will be as much impact on the price of that money as if the private sector's demand for it were increased. That is why this Government has been so concerned to reduce the overall demand made by Government on funds available in the community. That is why we have been concerned about the size of the Budget deficit. That is why since 1 975, largely through what has been done to reduce the size of the Budget deficit, we have reduced the overall public sector borrowing requirement from 6.5 per cent in 1 975-76 to an estimated 3.4 per cent in 1 980-8 1 .
Most of that reduction has been on account of what the Commonwealth Government has done. In 1 975-76 the Commonwealth sector borrowing requirement accounted for 5 per cent of gross domestic product; in 1 980-8 1 that figure was down to only 1 . 5 per cent. In 1 975-76 the State and local sector accounted for 1 .4 per cent and that figure has risen to 1 .9 per cent in 1 980-8 1 . Over the last five years we have seen a reduction in the overall public sector borrowing require ment, all of which has been due to the reduction by the Commonwealth Government of its own Budget deficit and its own borrowing require ment. In fact, there has been an increase in the States. The Commonwealth has carried more than the lion's share of reducing the public sector borrowing requirement in the Australian community and has played more than its part in re ducing government pressure on funds.
Of course, interest rates are higher now than they were some years ago. They are higher now than when the party to which the honourable member for Gellibrand belongs was in office. That is for the simple reason that when the Australian Labor Party was in office it cared not about how the money supply grew or about the level of inflation but it was quite prepared to allow a huge un funded Budget deficit. It did not care one bit about the growth of the money supply, it did not care one bit about the effect of inflation and it did not care one bit about the consequences of that for investment and employment in the Australian community. I have said before, and it needs re peating in a debate such as this, that one cannot hope to control at the one time both the rate of growth in the money supply and the level of interest rates. We believe there is a link between

the rate of growth of the money supply and the level of inflation. We are not obsessed by that link but it is a very important fundamental of our economic strategy, and we make absolutely no apology whatsoever for that. The honourable member for Gellibrand tried to take honourable members on a Cook's tour-a very selective one-to look at the performance of economies around the world. He neglected to tell the House that in growth, prospects, increases in the number of jobs and attracting investment across all sec tors, the Australian economy is doing far better than most others. Any objective analysis of economic conditions around the world at present would acknowledge that.
One area of great concern to the Government is a too-rapid escalation of wages. A rate of growth of 1 4 per cent in average weekly earnings over the 1 2 months to the end of December is much too high. It is more than the Australian economy can afford. It diminishes the prospects for further re ducing the level of unemployment in Australia. [t will cost Australians jobs if it goes on unchecked and, coupled with the 35-hour week, it represents the greatest single threat to the economic recovery which on all other indicators is so clearly under way at this time. That is one of the reasons the Government is concerned to redouble its efforts to have a firm monetary policy. Of course we would like to see our money supply projection of 9 per cent to 1 1 per cent achieved, because we believe that that will make a very significant contribution towards achieving the sort of economic stability and maintenance of investment levels so very important for the economic recovery now very much under way. The honourable member for Gellibrand, during his remarks, challenged me to produce some evidence of the link between controlling the money supply and the level of inflation. The best evidence is the evidence of which he is acutely aware-the evidence of the Labor years between 1 972 and 1 975 when there was absolutely no attempt to recognise that link and an absolutely irresponsible approach was taken towards allowing the money supply to ex pand. One of the consequences of that was an unacceptably high level of inflation.
If the honourable member for Gellibrand is looking for hard evidence to establish the link, he has only to recall the experiences of that period and their consequences. I remind him again that he ought to look at some of the speeches that the now Leader of the Opposition made after he be came Treasurer. He ought to look at some of the speeches that the Leader of the Opposition made after he became the Leader of the Opposition. Is the honourable member for Gellibrand now

Interest Rates

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 829

ditching the Leader of the Opposition, as well as some of his other colleagues? The difference that has developed between the two of them on this subject is very interesting. The alternative Treasurer of this country has said today that there is absolutely no link between the rate of growth in the money supply and the level of inflation. He has said there is no evidence or economic theory to link the two. He ought to look very carefully at some of the speeches made by the Leader of the Opposition as far back as the time when he was Minister for Social Security in the Whitlam Government and no doubt coveting the position of Treasurer, when he quite regularly made speeches which certainly demonstrated a far more responsible approach to economic management than was being followed by the Treasurer of the time. In fact, there is a very important link between the rate of growth in the money supply and the level of inflation.
The best contribution that any Government can make towards keeping interest rates down is to reduce its own borrowing demands on the Australian financial markets. Every time an Opposition spokesman calls for more expenditure and more public sector borrowing by governments in Australia, in effect he is advocating more competition and therefore greater pressure on building societies, banks and other lending institutions to obtain funds. Apparently certain forms of press ure are acceptable and other forms are totally un acceptable. This Government has recognised from the outset that if one believes in allowing the private sector to provide the wherewithal for economic recovery, it has to be given room to move and to grow, and the demands of the public sector on the community have to be reduced.
This Government shares in the regret expressed by the honourable member for Gellibrand about the present level of interest rates but one must ask what the real alternative is. The honourable member for Gellibrand would simply leave interest rates where they are; he would not have any real money supply target, he would completely dismiss any connection between the rate of growth of the money supply and the level of inflation and would imagine that by following that pol icy somehow all would be well in the end. Of course, that is fairyland stuff. It was fairyland stuff when it was tried a few years ago and it would be fairyland stuff if it were tried again. We would be back to the levels of inflation that were experienced then. This Government has recog nised that the price of money is dictated by the forces of supply and demand, and to do otherwise is to be totally unrealistic and to fly in the face of

the economic experience of this country Over the past few years and to fly in the face--
Mr Young-That is not what you said at election time. What about your promises at election time?
MI' HOWARD-What [ said at Budget time, and what the Government will say at the time of the next Budget, is that there remains a very important link between the rate of growth of the money supply and the level of inflation in Australia. The honourable member for Port Adelaide invites me to say what we said at election time on the subject of interest rates. The honourable member for Port Adelaide will know very well that at that time. I made it very plain that the Government was making no guarantees whatsoever about the future level of interest rates. We reasserted then, as I do now without any qualification at all, our commitment to the pur suit of firm monetary policies as the most effective anti-inflationary weapon. At that time the honourable member for Gellibrand took issue with it and the Australian people made their judgment.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (4. 30)  The Treasurer (Mr Howard) has failed completely to answer those--
Motion (by Mr Hodges) agreed to:
That the business of the day be called on.
A USTRALIA'S FOREIGN RELATIONS POLICY
Ministerial Statement Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs) by leave-It is now five months since I was appointed Minister for Foreign Affairs; not long enough to justify a com prehensive survey of Australia's foreign relations and interests, but long enough, and full enough, to justify my setting out some preliminary im pressions concerning the nature of this country's foreign policy and some of the more urgent tasks facing it. The first thing that is brought home very forcibly to a new Minister for Foreign Affairs is the complexity which Australia's external relations have now assumed. In this respect there has been a profound change in recent years. The much tighter integration of the international community; the gradual recognition of interdepen dence and the emergence of institutions to man age it; the development of Australia itself; changes in our region-all these have moved us rapidly to the stage where Australia is now a significant middle power with a range and depth of relations comparable to any country, other than a handful of great powers.

830 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 198 1

A ustralia's Foreign Relations Policy

Today our foreign policy is concerned increasingly not only with the classic issues of se curity and political relations, but also with trade and aid, with energy and food, with immigration and refugees, and with communications and transport. In its role as a middle power, Australia needs a foreign policy which encompasses not just bilateral relations but the multilateral diplomacy of international organisations and blocs of countries acting together. And, of course, it continues to include the day to day problems of individual people which assume even greater proportions as the personal contacts between nations rapidly increase.
In a general sense, of course, this is well known, but we need to come to terms with what such a wide-ranging or total foreign policy means; what implications it carries in terms of co-ordination; the balancing of differing and sometimes compet ing interests, the addressing ofmultiple audiences, and the use of scarce human resources. Increasing complexity also makes it more important than ever to have a clear sense of Australia's national interest, defined in an enlightened and long term way, so that we can determine our priorities sensibly.
I believe that it is essential to understand the needs that have to be served by the foreign policy of a middle power such as Australia. If we are to get things right in what, by general consensus, is going to be a difficult and dangerous decade, the gap between the complexity of our foreign policy, as it really is, and public perception and discussion of that policy must be narrowed.
I intend to give this matter careful consideration, to see what can be done on the Government's side, to stimulate and promote discussion of the issues which face us. I have just referred to Australia as a significant middle power. This has become a familiar term of self-definition in recent years, but I do not think that we give sufficient attention to what such a status implies, what characteristics a middle power has as an actor on the world scene.
The first point to make is that the designation 'middle power' refers to one's overall global position and one's status in terms of the whole range of international issues. It does not define a nation's importance in terms of particular issues or circumstances. The 'weight' of a middle power can be very considerable indeed within its region-as ours is in South East Asia and the South West Pacific. It can be very considerable in a particular forum-as ours is in the Commonwealth. And it can be very considerable in relation

to particular resources-again, as ours is in relation to food and energy. In contrast, of course, on a range of other international matters our sig nificance is less. This considerable variability in 'weight', depending on the issue and the circum stance, is one of the key characteristics of a middle power. It is one which demands very considerable judgment and flexibility in assessing situations and Australia's response to them.
Closely allied to this, and again pointing to the need for sure judgment, is the fact that the bal ance of opportunities and constraints facing a middle power is more complicated and ambiguous than it is for either the very small or the very powerful. A middle power has more opportunities, and therefore more temptations to overreach itself, than a small power; and it faces more con straints, and therefore greater danger that it will be unduly cautious and timid, than a great power. Certainly the problem of striking and maintaining a proper, realistic balance between opportunity and constraint is at the core of . middle power diplomacy.
Both these characteristics point to a third feature of middle power foreign policy. That quality of performance is particularly important in determining influence and status. Great powers are, almost by definition, going to be important in any event; while lack of power sets definite limits on the influence of small countries. But the variable positions of middle powers mean that how seriously they are taken and what impact they have on events in which they are involved will depend largely on the quality of human performance-on the skill, knowledge, maturity, determination and imagination of those who for mulate and implement their policies.
Obviously this means that it is essential that the conduct of Australia's foreign policy at the pro fessional level be of a high standard. But it means more-much more-than that.
It means that in the kind of society Australia is-the values it embodies; the degree of consen sus and bipartisanship that exists within it; the clarity with which its national interests are per ceived; the kind of leadership it enjoys; and, if I may use an old-fashioned but indispensible term, the quality of its patriotism-these things have a great bearing on the effectiveness of our foreign policy. In other words, we should not think of the term 'middle power' in fixed terms, as implying a given status which cannot be changed one way or another. The human factor is vital; it can enhance or diminish us very significantly as international actors.

A ustralia's Foreign Relations Policy

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 831

M y fourth point is that the range of issues on which we, as a middle power, can and should COli centrate substantively is necessarily limited, because our resources are limited. We must be selective and resist both temptation from within and pressure from without to extend ourselves unrealistically. The issues on which we can act in this sense must be determined by our national interest and will usually be in our region or will re late to - special political, strategic or economic interests that we have. Having said that, however, it is important to go on to make a distinction between the scope of the substantive policies I have been discussing and the scope of what might be called declaratory policies.
By declaratory policies I am referring to the ob ligation of a middle power to declare its position on all major issues-issues of war and peace, free dom and oppression, racialism, development and poverty. Australia's interests are now sufficiently wide-ranging and our status is sufficiently recog nised for it to be not only legitimate but also proper for us to do just that-proper because ultimately those issues can have a serious impact on us, as indeed history has repeatedly demon strated in this century, and proper also because, in some circumstances, a middle power can be more effective than a great power, precisely because it does not bring too much power to bear on the situation and does not automatically engage the interest of other great powers. Our intervention in the Zimbabwe conflict was a clear case in point. I believe that this is important in considering the opportunities available to a middle power: In some situations limited power is an asset rather than a liability.
In making the distinction between substantive and declaratory policies, it is important to point out that it is a serious mistake to think of the first as the only ones which are real and important and of the second as merely a matter of posturing. If we have not yet learnt that words, symbols and arguments representing genuinely and strongly held views are important in international affa-irs, we have learnt very little. The history of this country has demonstrated that they are often crucial.
My next observation is that for a middle power like Australia which is allied to a superpower, the management of that relationship constitutes a particularly important part of its diplomacy. The ANZUS alliance receives bipartisan support in this country and it is eminently desirable that it should continue to do so. While the alliance is reinforced by ties of friendship and cultural similarities, it is based firmly on considerations of national interest. That is not to say, of course, that

Australia's national interests and those of the United States always coincide. Indeed, it would assist the management of the alliance relationship if it were appreciated that differences must exist in an alliance between powers of a very different magnitude. Far from being peculiar to the Australian-American relationship, it is entirely normal. It derives from the necessary trade-offs between the desire to maximise the benefits of cooperation and shared interests on the one hand, and the concern to safeguard independence of action on the other. We should neither deny the existence of these differences nor engage in para noid exaggeration concerning them. We should rather accept them as a part of life and work out our policies accordingly, appreciating as we do that our superpower ally is a free, democratic and pluralistic country. Quite clearly the development of this middle power concept is closely linked to the practical formulation of foreign policy.
I turn now to some of the issues which are currently in the forefront of Australian foreign pol icy. In doing so I shall not try to be comprehensive but shall focus on those aspects which my pattern of visits to date has highlighted. The first one is Kampuchea. In the last five months I have had the oportunity of discussing this question in four member countries of the Association of South East Asian Nations, as well as in Tokyo, Peking and Washington. That is, I have discussed it in every like-minded country, apart from New Zealand and Singapore, that has a serious interest in the maintenance of peace and stability in South East Asia. Naturally, I will be looking to discuss the issue of Kampuchea with those two countries at the earliest opportunity. During my recent visit to the United States I also had the opportunity to have a very useful discussion on Kampuchea with the United Nations Secretary-General, Dr Waldheim. Australia regards the implementation of the United Nations Resolution on Kampuchea as essential for the restoration of peace in the region.
I want to stress that on the basic issues involved in Kampuchea, our interests coincide with the countries I have mentioned. There should be no misunderstanding about this, either in Australia or outside it, or about the meaning of our derecog nition last month of the so-called Government of Democratic Kampuchea. That act of derecogni tion was based on two considerations, one moral and one practical. Morally, the regime in question was so repugnant that we felt that continuing rec ognition was unjustifiable; practically, as long as the question of recognition remained unsettled it would confuse and distract attention from the basic strategic and political questions at issue.

832 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 198 1

A ustralia 's Foreign Relations Policy

Powerful as these considerations were, the bal In January I visited two great Asian powers

ance of arguments was not clear cut. Against situated further to the north-Japan and China. I

them, the Government had to weigh the opinions was pleased to have confirmed that with both of

and interests of the other countries in the region these ancient and formidable nations Australia

which share our basic interests. Some of them are has been able to establish a sound relationship,

much closer to the sharp end than we are and based in both cases on mutual economic advan

have had to bear a much greater burden as the re tage, goodwill, and a degree of common percep

sult of what has happened to Kampuchea. This tion of the international scene. With Japan, of

affected the timing of our act of derecognition. course, we have more in common-in terms of

The Government makes no apology for this but I similar democratic and free enterprise insti

want to make it clear beyond any doubt and ambi tutions, of our relations with the United States,

guity that our opposition to Vietnam's invasion of and the way we view events on the mainland of

Kampuchea remains implacable. We reject Asia. China is a participant in those events, and a

outright that that invasion proceeded on the basis most important one. Our interests and China's are of a concern for the welfare of the Khmer people. not always the same, but as I said we have many

We reject outright the claim that the Heng perceptions in common-concern about Soviet

Samrin regime, which the invasion installed, is the policies and intentions, for example, and a wish to legitimate representative of the Khmer people. see stability in East Asia.

We deplore and oppose the continued Vietnamese

occupation of Kampuchea because it denies the independence of the Khmer people, because it affects the security of Thailand and other Asian countries, because it holds the threat of Vietnamese hegemony in the region and because it imports a Soviet strategic presence into the re gion. In this last respect, I draw attention not only to the significant strategic presence which the Soviet Union has now achieved in Indo-China, but to the fact that Vietnam launched its invasion of Kampuchea only after it had signed a so-called treaty of friendship and co-operation with the Soviet Union. It was this which gave it the secur

Honourable members will be aware of recent reports of the results of the re-examination of economic policies and priorities that has been going on in China and the restraints which have resulted from this. As far as Australia's own com mercial interests in China are concerned, the pol icy of restraint could well lead to a reduction in demand for some commodities supplied from Australia, but these reductions seem likely to be limited, and Chinese interest in economic and technological co-operation with Australia remains high.

ity guarantee against China which was a condition

for its attack.

It is not an easy task for China's leaders to

maintain a steady policy course, given the scale of

the problems they face and the awakened aspir

We deeply regret Vietnam's refusal to accom ations of their people for a better and more pre

modate the legitimate interests and concerns of its dictable life. However, after the convulsions and

neighbours and to play a more constructive and distortions of the Cultural Revolution, more prag

co-operative role in the region. In the end Viet matic leaders, who seek to meet these aspirations,

nam itself will be the greatest loser as a result of its have emerged. China's present leaders now look

actions, in terms of isolation internationally and back with bitterness at the years of the Cultural

from its neighbours, and of domestic economic Revolution and its wasted efforts. Vice-Chairman

difficulties and social strains, which have been Deng Xiaoping told me in January that it would

identified as causes for serious concern by the take longer to undo the harmful effects of the Cul

Vietnamese authorities themselves. Australia will tural Revolution than it had to cause them. De

continue to support actively the interests of the spite this, Chinese leaders were resolute in saying

ASEAN countries in restoring stability to the re that they were facing up to the task of rehabili

gion and the implementation of the United tation, were conscious of the demands of their

Nations resolution on Kampuchea. With respect people, and that broad policy lines would not

to the region, we want nothing but the restoration change. I found these statements welcome. I be

of peace and stability, the conditions which will lieve that it is in our broad political and strategic

allow its prosperity to grow-but we are serious in interest, as well as in our bilateral commercial

wanting that. We will watch carefully the efforts interest, that China maintain its outward-looking

to create a new political grouping of Khmers orientation and 'Window to the West'. When I

what is sometimes referred to as a 'third force' refer to strategic interests, I have in mind the glo

and will naturally review our position if the situ bal balance, the Asia-Pacific area, and North Asia

ation changes significantly.

in particular, where four great powers-China,

Australia's Foreign Relations Policy

24 March 1981 R EPRESENTATIVES 8 3 3

Japan, the Soviet Union and the United States are all involved, and where China's favourable disposition is of considerable importance.
I turn now to the question of our relationship with the United States under the new Administra tion. Recently, as honourable members will know, I have had the opportunity of speaking to several of the key foreign policy and national security members of the Administration, including Vice President Bush, Secretaries Haig and Weinberger and Ambassador Kirkpatrick. The first point I should make is that I gained a clear impression from my private discussions that what these important members of the Administration have been saying in public is not merely rhetoric for its own sake. They mean what they say, they believe that important changes are required in American foreign policy, and they will not easily be deflected from their course. The Administration is proceeding in a very deliberate way and I believe that the end result of the series of comprehensive policy reviews now in train will be a greater de gree of predictability in the content and conduct of American foreign policy. This is a development which Australia, for its part, will welcome.
Secondly, I was struck by the extent to which the philosophical perspectives and the analysis of the international situation of the Reagan Administration and of the Australian Government-as set out in a series of statements over the last five years-coincide. I refer particularly to a shared concern about the grave implications of the remorseless military build-up by the Soviet Union; about the need to maintain a mili tary balance as a condition for stability and effec tive negotiations; about the need to improve con sultation and co-ordination within the Western Alliance; about the need for purposeful American leadership; and about the need to pay close attention to crisis situations outside the West itself.
Thirdly, I was left with the very firm impression that the attitude of the new Administration to military power is not-I repeat not-that there should be early recourse to it in order to settle disputes. On the contrary, it is that the possession of adequate power is desirable precisely because it reduces the chances of armed conflict. It is believed, and the Australian Government shares this belief, that it is uncertainty, vacillation, disunity and weakness which increase the prospect of war by inviting expansionist, aggressive behaviour by states seeking to change the balance of power to their own advantage. Preparedness and evident resolution diminish the prospect of war. I stress this point because, either inadvertently or deliberately, it is often misrepresented. There are

always some who, hile they find it possible to re main silent in the face of huge military efforts on the part of the Soviet Union, raise the cry of war mongering whenever the West shows any sign of matching that effort.
Fourthly, the new Administration believes that the various elements of foreign policy-economic matters, human rights, strategic and political questions-cannot be treated as separate and dis tinct but that they must all be seen as components of the whole. This may be the most valid meaning of that much used concept 'linkage'. Currently, this is particularly relevant to the way in which the issues at stake in Central America are viewed. For our part, the Australian Government believes that human rights issues are of the greatest im portance. But we also believe it wrong to assume that economic reform issues and human rights can be divorced from questions of security and strat egy. That distinction does not serve the cause of strengthening these rights. There are precious few human rights in the Soviet Union and Cuba, and in the regimes they support and install.
Lastly, the fact that there is broad agreement between the Australian Government and the Reagan Administration on the analysis and evalu ation of international affairs, should not be taken as implying that there will be automatic or across the-board agreement between us. The very nature of international politics means we shan have our differences. Our perspectives as a regional power, as a developed country with almost exclusively Third World neighbours, and as a member of a multi-racial Commonwealth will necessarily differ from those of a global superpower on occasions. As an ally of the United States we will continue to pursue as helpful and co-operative a role as possible in the responses of the United States and the West generally to particular situ ations as they emerge. At the same time, however, Australia will seek to make its contribution on the basis of an independent national judgment, as is currently the case in the Indian Ocean. Equally important, Australian assistance can only be on the basis of complete consistency with Australia's national interests and the maintenance of our national sovereignty. I believe that these realities are well understood and accepted in Washington.
The fourth and last issueor complex of issues-that I want to touch on is that of North South relations. This is an area where Australia, as a middle power and an active and important trading nation, can play a role. Among developed countries Australia has distinctive interests. They derive from OUf geographical position and the re gional concerns flowing from it, as well as some features of our own economy. But there are also

834 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

A ustralia's ForeignReiations Policy

vital global interests to be served in efforts to re solve North-South issues. This Government is deeply committed to the view that the peace and stability of the world between now and the end of this century will depend to a very considerable extent on progress towards easing the tensions between developed and developing countries. Efforts must be made to assist the developing world to solve its problems. Only those with an interest in instability and conflict will benefit if progress is not made.
Promoting the evolution of a better and more equitable international economic order also holds out the prospect of benefits for both North and South. Assisting the South to realise its full poten tial will provide significant economic opportunities for the North. It has to be recognised that in some important respects, this year is not pro pitious for North-South dialogue. There are increasing pressures on scarce budget resources and trends towards restriction of trading oppor tunities which made progress more difficult. The combination of serious economic difficulties in developing countries, including continuing inflation and reduced growth rates, with increased East-West tension centred on Afghanistan, Poland and El Salvador, has distracted attention from North-South issues and created an un favourable climate. Impatience and cynicism feed off each other.
The Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting which is to be held in Melbourne in September will provide a unique opportunity this year for leaders from both North and South to transform the dialogue over North-South issues into practical measures. At the last Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Lusaka, two years ago, those present succeeded in resolv ing the problem of Zimbabwe. Until then it had defeated all efforts at solution. In the same way I hope that at Melbourne the leaders of the Commonwealth will succeed in making that meeting a significant landmark with respect to North-South issues. We should certainly aim for such a result. We would want to see such progress translated into effective and sustainable practical programs which would help to mobilise national and international efforts in the development task. Return ing to the point which I stressed earlier, it may be that a determined initiative by a number of middle powers has a better chance of getting things moving in present circumstances. Certainly Australia, as host, will try to give a resolute lead in that direction.
Mr Deputy Speaker, in concluding what has been in the nature of an interim report to Parliament, I would like to say that in the visits I have so

far paid to heads of government and Foreign Min isters I have been very struck by the regard and respect paid to Australia. I think the point is worth making because, while we have in the past oc casionally exaggerated our importance in the world, more often we are inclined to indulge our Australian gift for scepticism and deflation by insisting on our comparative insignificance. This is not only self-damaging, it is plain wrong. We are, as I have been at pains to emphasise, a significant middle power. There is an important role for us to play in our region, in the Western alliance, in the Commonwealth, in the United Nations and in the North-South dialogue. We must have the will to respond to the challenge, and the determination to make the most of our opportunities.
I present the following paper:
Foreign Policy-Ministerial Statement, 24March 198 1 .
Motion (by M r Hodgman) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Motion (by Mr Hodgman)-by leave-agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Deputy Leader of the Opposition speaking for a period not exceeding 27 minutes.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (4.57)-We have heard an interim report, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) de scribed it, covering his five months in office. He has paid considerable attention to the fact that we now define ourselves a middle power. In fact, some eight pages of the speech is devoted to defi ning a middle power. He has also raised the question of Australia being an actor on the world stage. The problem with that sort of reference, of course, is that actors often fail. Their words might be effective, but their performance might be very limited indeed.
I think the most significant part of what the Minister has said is that we have our own national interests to look after, and that we have consider able weight in S outh East Asia . Having highlighted those words, I want to make the point in my submission that the Government has not acted in accordance with its words. It was about page 1 4 of the speech before the Minister referred to the new Reagan Administration. J want to deal with it from the beginning.
The Foreign Minister spoke of the policies of the Reagan Administration. He does not seem to understand that our ally has a vastly different set of policies now from what it had four months ago. These drastic changes in the way that Washington sees the world have the most serious implications for Australia. It is amazing to note that, as the Minister has now said, there is broad agreement

Australia's Foreign Relations Policy

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 835

between Reagan

the Australian Government Administration on the analysis

anndd

the the

evaluation of international affairs. There was ap

parently broad agreement between this Govern

ment and the Carter Administration a mere five

months ago. The inevitable conclusion is that

since American policies have changed so drasti

cally in the short intervening period we do not

have an independent foreign policy but an imitat

ive and subservient one. A deadly serious choice is

facing us. Will we use our influence to counsel

moderation, to urge a new search for easing inter

national tensions-detente or the Strategic Arms

Limitation Treaty was not mentioned in any part

of the Minister's speech-or will we, as this

Government is doing, take actions and enter into

agreements which will encourage increased mis

trust between the super-powers and trigger a new

and criminally expensive arms race ultimately

operating against our interests by increasing in

stability in this region of the world? It is becomiflg

apparent that if a major international disaster is to

be averted middle powers such as Australia must

play an increasingly important role. Australia's

importance has increased substantially in the past

five years largely because of its resources. It will

increase even more in the next decade.

The American alliance is important, but it is not, and cannot be, a substitute or an excuse for a vigorous policy of independently assessing our own interests. Super-powers such as the United States and the Soviet Union tend to export insta bility and resolve their conflicting interests in places remote from their own territories; for example, in Africa, the Middle East, the Gulf, and in South East Asia. We are still living with the very real problems of Vietnam and Kampuchea. Kampuchea was the first matter mentioned by the Minister. Those problems still affect the United States but pose more ominous problems for the countries of this region, not the least of which is Australia.

The United States, like every great power, will put its interests first. Anyone who thinks other wise has a simplistic and naive view of the international arena. It is we who must worry most about the stability of our region. The easy answer-to leave our powerful ally to call the strategic shots-unfortunately is clearly the wrong answer.

We already have a number of United States bases in Australia, a subject which I will canvass at some later time. We are contributing substantially to the ANZUS alliance. Do we really believe that the staging of nuclear weapons through out Australia, the contingency against which the

B52 agreement has been entered into, will con tribute to stability in our part of the world? It will not. If anything, it will encourage the Soviet Union to escalate its involvement with Vietnam to counter that perceived threat. It will decrease respect - among our regional neighbours for our independence of judgment and, consequently, it will lessen the respect with which our - voice is heard in regional councils. It will be a major contribution to escalating a new cold war between the super-powers and in our region - provoking increased instability.
When - I comenced my speech I said that United States policies have fundamentally changed. The Minister for Foreign Affairs should realise that the United States strategic world view has fundamentally changed. For the past four months we have witnessed the most dramatic changes in American attitudes, not only in the rhetoric of General Haig but also in the American activities around the world. There emerge II clear pattern: Intervention in EI Salvador to prop up a government which, according to the testimony of the United States Ambassador, an experienced and professional man, had slaughtered thousands of its own people; increased armaments and mili tary assistance to the Middle East and to the Gulf; an amount of $600m committed in additional arms supplies to Saudi Arabia; additional military aid for. Egypt and Israel; a mooted decision to supply .arms directly to Afghanistan; increased support for South Africa and its repugnant policies; the establishment of new American bases and the enlargement of old ones in the Horn of Afriqa, in the Gulf and in the Indian Ocean; dra matically increased support for the military dic tatorships and juntas of Latin America; a return to the Cold War rhetoric of the 1 950s in relation to the Soviet Union; and, finally, the establish ment of staging facilities for long range strategic nuclear bombers in Australia.
All these events make it absolutely clear that the United States is determined to increase its power in every region of the world. But are these increases hi Australia's interests? Perhaps it would be comforting to believe that the United States fights for peace, justice and human rights and that the Soviet Union is an unprincipled ag gressor. That the latter is true in the case of Afghanistan unfortunately does not make the former proposition tenable. We have witnessed in Washington unprincipled and transparent policy reversals which scrap human rights as an instru ment of foreign policy and substitute supposedly an all-out attack on terrorism. The problem we face is that General Haig includes amongst those he calls 'terrorists' patriots who oppose dictatorial

836 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

A ustralia's Foreign Relations Polic,y

governments-governments that the United States supports because they further its own interests and strategic designs. Let me be more specific. Washington supports dictatorships or military juntas in South Korea, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and a score of other countries. It is providing them with increased military assistance and weapons which will be used to crush any dissident opinion, or those who attempt to establish a democracy. But Washington encour ages or is about to encourage terrorist activities against such internationally recognised governments as that ofAngola because that Government is socialist or Marxist or perhaps just because it is not in an American alliance.
The Australian Labor Party has never held and will not hold any brief for the Soviet Union. We deplore its abuses of human rights and its invasion of weaker countries. We equally deplore any simple-minded attachment to the United States as the paragon of virtue. Our foreign policy has to be based on a realistic appraisal of the faults of both countries and on a willingness to break ranks with the United States when it acts in a way which fos ters instability in Asia and the Pacific. The Foreign Minister has implied quite clearly that we should trust Washington. But we must learn from the lessons of recent history how governments in Washington behave, how they pursue their own interests, and how they have made tragic mis takes. It is quite wrong for us to be always follow ing the United States ship, no matter who its cap tain is or what course it takes. Will the Americans really come to our aid in the time of a crunch?
I wish to place this matter in perspective. In the early 1 960s the then Australian Foreign Minister, Mr Barwick, returned from Washington and an nounced that the United States would support us if we were attacked by the Indonesians. Those were the days of confrontation between Indonesia and Malaysia. Subsequently, it emerged that Mr Barwick had received a secret assurance to this effect from the American Secretary of State, Dean Rusk a secret assurance which was lodged in the safe in the Embassy in Washington. Some time later President Kennedy became aware of the agreement and he countermanded his Secretary of State and made it clear that the Americans would not feel bound by the ANZUS Treaty to come to our aid in such an event.
This incident gives cause for a long and careful pause because the ANZUS alliance does not com mit anybody to active involvement in anything other than through consultation. Perhaps we should reflect also upon the fact that when Presi dent Nixon and Secretary of State Kissinger de cided to bomb Cambodia they did not even inform

their own Cabinet. Is it any wonder that the American people so revolted against those people who so deceived their own nation that they were thrown out of office? Their policies operated throughout South East Asia and certainly brought about the undoing of Sihanouk in Kampuchea. The Foreign Minister is naive, and dangerously so, if he is asking this Parliament to base our foreign policy on implicitly trusting the American leaders as they change from time to time.
Within the last few weeks Washington has offered $ 1 5 billion in additional weapons and mili tary aid to Latin America, Europe, the Middle East, Africa and Asia. The tremendous danger is that the new Administration in Washington is attempting to impose military solutions on every type of regional problem. United States defence spending next year will be 30 per cent of Federal spending. We have to look at what is happening in the United States. Is not the best defence the welfare of one's own people? In its same Budget the United States has slashed the concessions to the victims of black lung disease-the miners, by $378m. That is where there is a lack of balance and understanding. One can well lose the defence of one's country by a malaise from within. We want to be able to say to new Administrations in the United States: 'Do not forsake diplomacy. Do not forswear subtlety for a simplistic and militar istic approach'. The present policies of the United States smack of not only excessive simplicity but also ill-considered haste. We are concurring in stead of vigorously urging policies which will not create further instability in our part of the world. But the West Germans did not do that. Last week the West German Foreign Minister urged Gen eral Haig not to become so obsessed with the mili tary build up that he neglected arms control. We have not made any such representations and we should do so.
We are in the process of becoming a major power " in South East Asia-we already are a major power in the South Pacificbut we have not taken any initiatives commensurate with our status and regional responsibilities. No one pre tends that the problems in Vietnam and Kam puchea have easy solutions. But if we moved to re establish our program of aid to Vietnam we would have some influence and capacity for initiative in that area. In order to retain our capacity for in itiative we must preserve a substantial degree of independence. If we lock ourselves in completely with the United States of America strategic view of the world-if we become, as we are in danger of becoming, a South Pacific outpost for Washington-we cannot expect to be taken seriously by our regional neighbours. It is about

A ustralia's Foreign Relations Policy

24 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 837

time we formulated our own strategic view and acted accordingly.
In the Middle East the United States Government has now promised another $600m in arma ments for Saudi Arabia. Naturally, that worries Tel Aviv, so another $600m in military aid is given to Israel. That, in turn, worries Sadat in Egypt, so another $ 1 .65 billion in 'security assistance' is given to Egypt. What a recipe for regional insta bility! General Haig has even indicated that he plans to ov'er-arm Israel to deter future adventures by Libya, Syria or other radical Arabs. Is that not a recipe for disaster? No doubt the American economy will improve as the world's biggest arms factories gear up to full international conflict level. Given the way in which Washing ton works and the power of the armaments lobby there, we develop a healthy cynicism about cur rent United States policy. One of President Reagan's aides admitted this last week:
So far the perception we've created is one of willy-nilly shovelling arms all over the world.
How true, but how tragic. The Minister in his speech referred to this belief of the Reagan Administration:
. . . that the various elements of foreign policy economil4,matters, human rights, strategic and political questions ,, ' . . must all be seen as components of the whole.
He continued:
There are precious few human rights in the Soviet Union and Cuba, and in theregimes they support and install.
We could say: 'True, but what about China, South America and a number of other areas'. His sum mary would have been much more impressive and balanced had he pointed out that there are precious few human rights under most of the regimes which the United States supports-as I said, particularly those in Latin America and Asia. A close examination of the report of the Human Rights Commission in Geneva will reveal that of the many countries which systematically practise torture, the majority are supported by the new American Administration.
The fact is that the military dictatorship has become the dominant form of government in those sectors of the Third World which are geographi cally and politically closest to the United States. It cannot last. Why is it that a government has to get arms to suppress its people? How can that possibly last when the only solution for those people is to turn to communism and revolution, which has always been the solution, without any regard for human rights and democratic rights? It is most disturbing that the Minister said:
It has to be recognised that in some important respects this year is not propitious for the North-South dialogue.

We hear that from the wealthy countries every year. No year will ever be propitious. Meanwhile, millions of people will starve.
The Australian Labor Party has always had policies which relate to humanity and human rights. Ours is a party of concern. This Government should not delay any longer making a generous response to the needs of the poorest countries. This Government's performance in providing assistance to the developing world is now at the lowest level it has ever been, This Government is not moving towards meeting the assistance target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product set by the United Nations; it is moving away from it. Its allocation is now down to 0.4 per cent of GNP. The level was highest under the Labor Government. I agree with the Minister in his statement that it is essential that:
. . , the conduct of Australia's foreign policy at the pro fessional level be of a high standard,
But what are the facts? I believe our professional officers are doing their best, but the Government's policies in those areas have led to more than 50 of our career officers recently resigning or transfer ring. That is a development which has weakened our ability even to conduct a foreign policy of a high standard. Perhaps for the most glaring example of this weakness we should return to the situation in Washington. In spite of the Jact that we have there a number of diplomatic officers, and 200 representatives of the Department of De fence and of the armed Services, there is not one person reporting, on a regular basis, changes in the strategic policies of our American allies, It is those policies that determine whether we get involved in a war, yet we have nobody there report ing from that very source.
The Foreign Minister devoted a substantial part of his speech to the issue of Kampuchea. I have been to the Kampuchea border. [ have also been to Vietnam and to Thailand and I have been in the camps catering for the unfortunate ref ugees. What I want to say now is based on that sort of knowledge. There are glaring omissions in the Minister's analysis. He does not recognise the issues at the heart of the Kampuchean problem, namely, firstly, the attempts by the Pol Pot regime between 1 975 and 1 978 to destroy its own people; and secondly, the rescue of the survivors of the Khmer people by Vietnam. The Minister de scribed the Pol Pot regime as morally repugnant. That is mild language indeed for a regime which, in a genocidal fury, slaughtered or starved to death more than three million of its own people. I invite the Minister to go to the refugee camps of the Khmers and ask them who they fear the most. He will find that it is Pol Pot. The Minister did not

838 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1 9&1

A ustralia's Foreign Relations Policy

spell out the horrifying statistics of the Kam The Minister mentioned the possibility of a

puchean tragedy. Further, he made no apology Thin! Force emerging in the affairs of Kam

for the continued recognition of the Pol Pot puchea. But the history of Indo-china since 1 945

regime long after it had been driven from power shows that the Third Force idea is rriainly wishful

and long after its massive crimes had been thinking. It failed in Vietnam and in Laos. In

revealed to a shocked world. The Minister Kampuchea itselfthe United States destroyed the

claimed that the balance of arguments for neutrality of Kampuchea under Prince Sihanouk.

derecognition of Pol Pot was not clear cut. How The Minister rightly pointed to the risk of inter

much more appalling does international behav national isolation of Vietnam but he suggested

iour cut?

have

to

be

to

make

a

recognition

issue

clea" r

nothi!1g to prevent it. Australia itself is at fault in helping to force Vietnam into isolation. Our petty

and thoughtless action in cutting off our aid to

Again, the Minister said that the Govermnent's Vietnam in 1 979 is not, of course, to be compared

opposition to Vietnam's invasion of Kampuchea with the ruthless breaking of United States prom

was implacable. That is a strong word. It is ises of post-war aid to Vietnam.

unqualified by any recognition that the inter7

vention of Vietnam saved the survivors of the Overall, the Minister's remarks on Kampuchea

Kampuchean people. Is Vietnam to get no credit are marked by double standards and a lack of

or even recognition of that fact? Further, the compassion. In the case of Vietnam, we can detect

Minister rejected any suggestion-and it was not the lingering animosity of a member of a party

one made by Labor-that the Heng Samrin which saw its policies on Vietnam totally

Administration represented the Khmer people. discredited, totally defeated, totally humiliated,

The Heng Samrin Administration has struggled to and which towards the end of that war, helped

get Kampuchea back on the road to recovery. It lead his party to political defeat. The offensive in

gets no credit from the Minister yet his Govern Vietnam was to stop the downward thrust of

ment recognised as the legitimate representative China, the new found ally of this Government.

of the Khmer people an exiled junta of genocidal That is the point. This Government bears towards

fanatics. This points up the contradiction in the Vietnam an obvious animosity, but rancour is no

Minister's speech and it makes his analysis pitiful basis for foreign policy.

indeed.

Not one Minister of this Government has ever

Having finally steeled itself to withdraw Aus visited . Hanoi. A lame duck ambassador is in

tralian diplomatic support from the Pol Pot Hanoi because of the Government's attitude

regime, towards

athseettGleomveenrnt,m' toenwtarhdassa

taken no solution in

steps Indo

towards Vietnam. The;;Government ought to re member that people'are entitled to aid. If there is

China. Of course, Labor has long advocated another thrust by China against Vietnam,

derecognition. What the Government has fol Australia will receive millions of refugees. Where

lowed is Labor's policy, and I suggest that it now is the substance of the Government's policy in

follow another Labor policy. Labor advocates an that event? Where is the influence that will stop

independent Australian initiative. We shOUld aim trat happening?' It will not be solved by B52

as our highest diplomatic priority in Asia to ar bombers because the Government has already

range a regional conference on the Indo-China dealt with them. We have to make it clear that

issue as a forerunner of a larger conference which Vietnam is the most important power in South

would have to include the United States, the East Asia. Our neighbours in ASEAN will agree

Soviet Union and China. Australia should strive with that.'What is the 'Government's policy? It is

to play the part of the honest broker in this issue. so short-sighted and so mean-spirited that it is

That is not beyond the capacity of a middle power contrary to Australia's best interests. The Aus

as the Minister correctly describes Australia. Ac tralian people will remember that the parties

cordingly, we should be setting about persuading which comprise this Government took a gener

the Association of South East Asian Nations ation to recognise the realities of China-indeed,

states and Vietnam to confer on the Kampuchean to recognise it at all. ' Fortunately, our national

issue. Such a conference could aim at the with interests will not have to wait that long again to be

drawal of the Vietnamese, linked to cast iron properly protected by realistic and constructive

guarantees that the Pol Pot forces would also' be policies towards Vietnam. The next Labor

disarmed and prevented from rushing back into government will treat relations with Vietnam

the vacuum created. The conference should aim with the importance and urgency they deserve.

also at a genuine act of self-determination within

Kampuchea.

Mr Hodgman-It will be a long time off.

A ustralia's Foreign Relations Policy

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 839

Mr LIONEL BOWEN-It will not be a long time off because the issues are very close to our shores. If the Government thinks it can solve the problems by pitting bombers against flesh and blood it is gravely mistaken. The Vietnamese fought for 30 years against the French and every body else, and the Government ought to realise that. Specifically, the Minister's speech raised the prospect of Australia, as a middle power, having an independent foreign policy but it did not follow through with any initiatives. It is on that basis that I make the point that it is about time Australia de veloped independent foreign policies which will bring peace and stability into the South East Asian region. It has to exercise its own initiative. It should not leave it to somebody else.

This Government has to pursue initiatives that

are in accordance with Australia's interests and

Australian public opinion. By so doing we will be

come a better ally to the United States. We will

lessen the burden that the Haigs and others want

to impose on the American people by the stupid

suggestion that the way to peace is through war

and that the way to detente is through an escala

tion of arms. It is a fallacy. It will not work. The

American people will reject it before long. It is

about time a government in this region stood up

and stated: 'We are an ally but because we live in

this region we have views which are much more

fundamentally orientated to the truth and to the

valid claims of the region than those of any high

powered general or somebody who espouses the

cause of democracy in the world when it is failing

so fast'. What a tragedy it is that all the wars

fnooutlgihi'rtiginbuStoburtihngKaobroeuat

or Vietnam have dictatorships and

done com

munism. They have failed at every level. If people

are not granted human rights and a chance to de

velop their capacity to run their own countries

totalitarian regimes are created.

It is about time General Haig and others started talking again, as Carter did, about human rights and democracy and about giving aid when promised. Honourable members opposite should not groan. They are young enough to have been involved in those conflicts. What about the 450 Australian dead left in Vietnam? The Government should face up to these issues, as have the Australian people. The Government was hounded out of office because of its failure in this area. Today we heard a speech that still puts us in the position of regarding Vietnam as the enemy. That can be a danger, as I have said, if there is a war between China and Vietnam. It is our clear cut responsibility as a nation in this region to get Vietnam and ASEAN together to talk about Viet nam's withdrawal from Kampuchea once Pol Pot

and his regime are disarmed. Those talks should not be held on any other level. Until such time as we organise that conference-we should be ini tiating it-we will have nothing but instability in this region.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins) (5.24)-1 congratu late the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) on the survey of Australia's foreign relations which he presented to the Parliament today. Of particular significance is his assessment of the new Reagan Administration in the United States. He said that the philosophical perspectives and the analysis of the international situation of that new Administration are similar to the policies of the Australian Government over a longer period. That is a very significant statement and I will bring it to the attention of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) later. We in Australia have to decide where we stand. Are we a member of the Western alliance or are we not? We have to accept obligations and responsibilities as a member of that alliance. We have to accept those obligations and responsibilities also under the ANZUS treaty. The Australian Labor Party cannot pretend to have a bipartisan approach to the ANZUS treaty and the United States without accepting that it brings responsibilities and ob ligations with it. All that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition has done today is to criticise the agreement that the Government has with the United States concerning the B52 bombers, which will be unarmed and carry no bombs.
Mr McLean --What did he say about the Soviet Union?
Mr SHIPTON-I will deal with that in a minute. He said nothing about the Soviet Union. ] come back to the matter at hand; that is, the Op position is speaking with a forked tongue. Of course, our relations with the United States have to be two-sided. They have to be based on a mutual respect of differing views, with neither party being subservient to the other. I believe the United States would not necessarily defend Australia in all circumstances. That is why I regard the ANZUS treaty as important. That is why I believe we have to work at our relationship with the United States towards establishing areas where our national interests coincide. There will be occasions when they do not coincide. Obviously there will be times when there will be differences between the United States and Australia. That is only right and proper and to be expected.
I turn to the question of El Salvador. The cur rent instability and uncertainty in El Salvador have provided a dilemma for the United States.

840 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

A ustralia's Foreign Relations Policy

The Minister said this afternoon that human Leader of the Opposition said that there was no

rights are of great importance. But President apparent difference in our policies today from

Reagan has had difficult decisions to make. In the those of four months ago.

Minister's terms, he has had to weigh up the stra tegic and political questions, economic matters and human rights issues. The United States has seen at its front door the threat of the Soviet sur rogate Cuba exploiting instability and the United States has had to take the strategic decision to supply equipment and advisers. That needs to be understood by allies of the United States, and par ticularly by the Opposition. The Soviet-backed Cubans are fostering and further fomenting sub version and instability in Central America. I think the analogy is the Kennedy blockade of Cuba. The United States, faced with a virtual Soviet presence on its front door, has had to act to protect--

I point out to the Deputy Leader of the Opposition the words that I referred to earlier, the words of the Foreign Minister, who is in the House at present. Whilst we agreed with certain Carter initiatives opposite the Soviet Union and particularly the reaction to the Soviet build-up in the Indian Ocean, there is now a new philosophi cal perspective and a new analysis of the international situation by the Reagan Administration. That is the difference. Obviously there were pol icy points on which the Australian Government agreed with the Carter Administration. Now we have an administration in the United States which has a philosophical perspective similar to the per spective of this Government, a perspective which

Opposition members interjecting-

this Government has had for a lot longer than the

Mr SHIPTON--Listen to members of the Op United States has had it.

position scream when one talks about the United The Deputy Leader of the Opposition criticised

States. The United States has had to act to protect the Minister for referring only to the United

its strategic interests; and that needs to be under States on page 14 of his address. However, the

stood. Nobody on this side of the House wants Deputy Leader of the Opposition went on to

another Vietnam-type war. Nobody on this side of spend most of his time attacking the Minister for

the House wants any type of war. But let the what the Minister did say. Then the Deputy

Soviets back off. Let the Cubans back off. Let Leader of the Opposition, T think, committed his

them stop supplying advisers and arms. As most irresponsible act today. He said that we were

Senator Wheeldon, a member of the Australian supporting the staging of nuclear weapons in

Labor Party, has said in the Senate, as long as Australia by the United States. That is not true.

Cuban advisers are present in El Salvador, the That is a fabrication. I ask the Deputy Leader of

United States obviously has the right to provide the Opposition to withdraw that statement be

its advisers. The alternative is a Cuban-backed cause that is an attempt to lead the people of

regime. Does the Opposition in this place want a Australia astray, to misinform the people of

Cuban-backed regime in EI Salvador? Let it tell Australia. 1 assume that the Deputy Leader of the

us that. I believe it does, but let it tell the people of Opposition, by saying that the present Govern

Australia.

ment is supporting the staging of nuclear weapons

Of course, the Soviets must be laughing because they know that reactions of the type shown by the Opposition will be used by propagandists. They will further be used to exploit and to foster the propaganda war to hide the real issue of the Soviet Union's surrogates and of its expansion in Central America.

by the United States and Australia, is trying to confuse members of the Australian public and to deliberately mislead them. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Foreign Minister have said that the B52 bombers that will call at and use the facilities at Darwin and will fly over the Cape York Peninsula will be unarmed and will carry no bombs. The Prime Minister and the

I turn, as I said I would, to what the Deputy Foreign Minister have said that, yet the Deputy

Leader of the Opposition said. I think it was the Leader of the Opposition has the gall to get up in

most disappointing speech that I have heard him this House today to tell the House and the people

make in this Parliament. It was, I think, written of Australia that Australia is being used as a

for him by the left wing of the party. It shows me staging post for the use of nuclear weapons. That

that perhaps there is about to be some sort of lead is terribly irresponsible and is a misleading of the

ership struggle or power play in the Australian House.

Labor Party with the Left being on top at present. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition said that

Mr N. A. Brown-And wrong.

Australia was to be an actor on the world stage. Mr SHI PTON- ---! thank the honourable

He said that this Government has not acted. Of member. 1 accept the interjection of the honour

course this Government has acted. The Deputy able member for Diamond Valley. I have dealt

Australia's Foreign Relations Policy

24 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 841

with the question of El Salvador. Of course, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition attacked United States policy there. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition talked about dictatorships throughout the world. He talked about South Korea. He did not mention any Soviet-backed country.

Mr McLean-Or the Soviet itself.

Mr SHIPTON-As the honourable member for Perth said, he did not talk of the Soviet itself. He did not talk about East Germany. He did not tell us of the Vietnamese invasion of Laos. That seems to be comfortably forgotten.

Mr Hodgman-Or Afghanistan.

Mr SHIPTON-No other mention was made. The Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) , who is at the table, mentioned Afghanistan. That was completely ignored today by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition.

Mr McLean-Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland.

Mr SHIPTON-The countries of

Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland were not

mentioned today by the Deputy Leader of the Op

position. All he said about the Soviet Union was

that he deplored the Soviet attitude to human

rights. Then he said that the United States was

not a paragon of virtue; there are faults on both

sides. I take it from that statement that the

Deputy Leader of the Opposition was advocating

neutrality, advocating a neutral foreign policy for

Australia. That is what I believe the Opposition

stands for. What does that mean? That means

that we do not know where we stand. The Minis

ter for Foreign Affairs said that the lessons of his

tory are that uncertainty, vacillation, disunity and

weakness increase the prospect of war by inviting

expansionist, aggressive behaviour by states seek

ing to change the balance of power to their own

athdm.vakn, taognee.

That statement by the Minister is, I of the most profound statements on

foreign policy matters made in this Parliament. It

needs to be restated time and again. He has stated

the lessons of history; that the weak are walked

over in this world. I think that somebody once

said that power speaks through the barrel of a

gun. The United States is not aiming to invade

anybody; it is responding to the build-up through

out the world of the Soviet Union. We did not

hear from the Deputy Leader of the Opposition

about the Soviet build-up in the Indian Ocean. He

said that we should give more aid to Kampuchea.

The Government has a very creditable record of

giving aid to Kampuchea. I believe that the

Deputy Leader rejected the total United States

presence in the region. I take it that he supports the Soviet build-up in the Indian Ocean.
Mr Hodgman-Whose side is he on? Mr SHIPTON-I believe that the honourable member is on the side of the Soviet Union and his speech today clearly shows that. Furthermore his speech shows that he is an apologist for Viet namese aggression in South East Asia. Mr John Brown-Don't you realise that kick ing the commie can went out of fashion years ago? Mr SHIPTON-I realise that the Soviets have invaded Afghanistan. I realise that the Soviet Union is using Vietnamese facilities at Cam Ranh Bay and that the Soviet Indian Ocean fleet, built up in the Indian Ocean long before the United States responded, is changing at Cam Ranh Bay. [ realise that the Union of Soviet Socialist Repub lics has communication facilities in Vietnam and now has a port 2,000 miles south of Vladivostock. That is what I realise the Soviets are doing. The Soviets have built up in the Indian Ocean. This build-up took place, I think from recollection in 1 979 and started long before any United States build up. We have heard no talk about that today. I am very disappointed with the interjection of the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown). Whilst he is having troubles with Par ramatta Park, I know that he should realise that the Soviets are in Afghanistan. The Vietnamese are in Laos and Kampuchea and are being backed financially by the Soviet Union while it has the use of the facilities I just talked about for ship ping, aircraft and communications. The honour able member ought to know that. The Opposition ought to face up to the fact that the Vietnamese are a threat in South East Asia. They have the largest standing army in South East Asia. They already occupy two countries and represent a di rect threat to Thailand and Malaysia. The Viet namese have made border incursions into Thailand in order to put fear into the people of that country. Vietnam has a larger standing force than the combined forces of the countries I have referred to. Those are the facts of the matter. Why did we not hear the Deputy Leader of the Opposition tell us about that today? We have to assume that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition is an apologist for the Soviet Union and its aggression throughout the world. In the time remaining, I will switch to a discussion of Australia's role as a middle power. I thought that the Minister's statement was an interesting intellectual analysis and one of the best we have heard for some time. I wish to talk of two matters arising from my own experience where Australia has played a small role but a role as a

842 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 198 1

A ustralia's Foreign Relations Policy

middle power. The first concerns the United Nations where the former member for Wills, the Hon. Gordon Bryant, and myself were present as parliamentary delegates. Together with delegates from other countries, we formed a parliamen tarians group at the United Nations. This still functions and has full interpretor services and is part of General Assembly sessions. People from the Third World said to us: 'You as Australians can do that but if one of the superpowers had done it we would not have come along'. That proved to me that Australia has a middle power role. It showed that we are respected throughout the world as a middle power and that we can come with clean hands to a discussion of many issues.
The other point concerns the presence of the Royal Australian Air Force at Butterworth in Malaysia where I was briefly last week. The Australian presence acts as a bridge between Malaysia on the one hand and Singapore on the other. We contribute to the five-power defence arrangements. In fact, we are playing an import ant role that needs to be understood in that region of the world. I believe that our efforts there are appreciated. I do not believe for instance that it is well known that we are helping the Singaporeans to train in Australia members of their army and air forces. That is something that I would encour age. We heard nothing about that from the Opposition today. I congratulate those members of the Royal Australian Air Force who are doing a great job both as ambassadors and in helping the Malaysians and the Singaporeans. My final point concerns Australia and its role in the Commonwealth. The Minister spoke of the effective role that Australia, as a middle power, played in the Zimbabwe solution.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond) -Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (5.40)-1 wish to make a couple of points on the speech of the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton) before passing to the remarks of the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street). Firstly, the honourable member disputed the view expressed by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) that Australia is now a staging point for the deploy ment of American nuclear weapons. I do not see why we have to keep disputing this; we indisputa bly are. Most of the American warships which visit my home town and home port of Fremantle carry nuclear weapons. The agreement which was entered by the Government on the use by B52s of Australian bases does not preclude the possibility that at some point in time B52s passing through

Australia might well be armed with nuclear weapons. We have at North West Cape a facility which is responsible for transmitting fire orders to American ballistic missile submarines. All these facts are well known and well documented from American official sources. Some are attested to by the Government itself. We need a far more mature approach than has been displayed by the honourable member to the problems that we con front in our relationship with the American stra tegic nuclear deterrent.
My second point concerns Vietnam. From 1975 onwards the Opposition made persistent pleas to this Government that if it did not take seriously the moral obligations imposed upon it to provide assistance for the reconstruction of Vietnam that country would be forced to fall back upon the Soviet Union. We pointed to the difficulties that would occur because of the pressures that would be placed upon the Vietnamese administration by the Soviet Union to allow it the use of the Cam Ranh Bay facilities, with the Vietnamese being forced to succumb if they were not provided with the sorts of material assistance they required for economic recovery. We have persistently warned the Government about that and have said that such steps would be against Australia's interests. We have persistently attempted to get the Government to do something about it. Just as per sistently, the Government has done nothing. It is now reaping the consequences of not using the pressure that Australia could undoubtedly place on the United States, or the friendly influence or persuasion in which it could indulge with that country, to persuade it to adopt a similar policy. We are now confronted by the consequences of that failure.
The Minister's statement is extremely general, but follows a visit by him to the United States dur ing which agreements of a specific military nature were entered into. Such discussions must have been based on quite specific understandings about the nature of future directions of American policy and our views on our association with it. Yet none of that appears in this statement-at least not specifically associated with the agreements into which Australia entered. The Minister has dealt with the question of the distribution of power in north-east Asia without giving us the benefit of the Government's views on disputes within the new American Administration on a one-China policy or a two-Chinas policy which, despite former President Ford's visit to China, have not been resolved. Did the Minister express to the United States a view on proposed arms sales to Taiwan? If not, why not? If so, what did he say;

Australia's Foreign Relations Policy

24 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 843

why did he not present the details to the Parliament in the course of his rather lengthy analysis of our relationship with China?
The Minister visited the United States at a time when President Reagan had signalled a shift in United States policy towards South Africa, one potentially of considerable embarrassment to our Government; yet he has given no indication that he exchanged opinions on the matter with the officials he met. The Minister spoke of a commit ment to American objectives in the Indian Ocean, without expressing views On whether features of the burgeoning military involvement of the United States in that area, and the massive arms sales to such states as Saudi Arabia, are appropri ate meanS of responding to the problems that we confront in that region. An unexceptionable analysis of the requirements of a middle power such as Australia's to assume an appropriate role in world affairs was followed by apparently unrelated, but unequivocal applause for the direc tion of the policy of our major ally. This does not really reflect an adequate level of systematic thinking by the Minister on the problems which Australia confronts.
There has been in government ranks some evidence that the Government wishes to leap into the type of relationship that Australia had with its major ally in the 1 960s. To some extent the Minister's statement reflected that view. Probably at no time since the 1 960s has it been more important that this nation's leaders take full adv;mtage of the critical possibilities that years of friendship with the United States permit a country like Australia. It would be wrong to claim substantial influence but ours would probably be more than other powers of an equivalent size, and we are located on the outskirts of regions where the United States is more in need of good advice than anywhere else on the globe.
In the past year the Government has viewed, with a degree of relish, the elevation of military strategic issues to the forefront of international relations and the possibilities for deepening global ideological conflict. In the process it has failed to recognise the extent to which these cut across other international interests which it and we on this side of the House have upheld. The Government endangers a consensus on a sound defence strategy for Australia. It ignores the very real interest that aspects of our relationships with the United States now give us in the sanity and re straint of both super-powers. American facilities in this country give us a very real interest in en couraging caution and stability in the Kremlin as well as in Washington.

The United States is on the verge of committing some serious mistakes in our vicinity-mistakes which this Government recognises but which, if it persists in its current course, it will be powerless to prevent. On the whole, the Government has maintained and nurtured important links with the Third WorId which were established by the Whitlam Government. It has been committed to this out of principle and a sensible appreciation of the realities of political life in our neighbourhood. These are threatened by some contemporary de velopments in United States policy. The Reagan Administration in a number of key policy areas foreshadows moves at variance with our stand. They are moves which with increasing ideological confrontation are inevitable. Perhaps nothing exemplifies them better than the embarrassment this Government will experience in respect of its policy toward South Africa. It is quite evident that President Reagan intends to rehabilitate the South African regime. It is all very well to point out, as the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) did in answer to a question of mine, that the Reagan Administration opposes apartheid. The point is that instead of that being the fundamental feature of United States-South African policy it is now being shifted to the status of a minor snag-a matter we raise with the South Africans but because of their alleged importance we go no further as we deepen our relationship by grounding it on a mutual security interest. That is a strategy this Government must oppose if it values consistency and its standing in our ,-egion. President Reagan expressed his views publicly on the matter while the Foreign Minister was in the United States but there is no record in his statement of his having raised the matter with the President or any of his advisers.
As we have matured over the last decade, im perceptibly Australia and the United States have come to play on different chess boards in the international arena. That appropriate to a super power is one where every regional issue is seen in a global context, and that which is appropriate to a regional power-ourselves-is where we ought to see every regional issue in terms related to the local situation on the ground, that is, isslles of local significance. Our standing in thc Commonwealth is very high as is our standing with a var iety of nations in the Indian Ocean-Western Pacific regions. That standing has bceome more important to us than evcr it was in the 1 960s. There is a price, however, for its main tenance and that is our independence, our willingness to ident ify with ideological positions and economic priori ties which will cut across military-political imperatives in our strategic relations with the

844 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

A ustralia 's Foreign Relations Policy

United States. The United States a t the same time has established a complicated adversary relation ship with the Soviet Union which requires a capacity to respond flexibly to Soviet initiatives, to raise and lower tensions over relatively short periods. It is something which the United States can do because its range of interests and agreements with the Soviet Union is so broad. It is not something that an ally of the United States necessarily can do with the same degree of ease and that is becoming increasingly evident in the policies of the European allies of the United States. They are developing close economic re lationships with the Eastern bloc. Those economic relationship require stability in the essential re lationships between the individual country and the individual Eastern bloc country. They cannot lower and raise the nature of those relationships at will. Therefore they cannot, as the United States can do, respond to every particular Soviet initiative with one of their own. If at some time a catastrophe occurs like a Soviet invasion of Poland then the cut off in relations that will occur between them and the Soviet bloc will not be able, as the American relationship would be in a few years hence, to be subject to the same degree of backing and filling and perhaps a return to a non cold war stance that the United States could per haps hope for itself. A major catastrophe involv ing the Soviet Union would have that effect on the policies of those countries.
Through the B52 agreement negotiated by the Minister while he was away, we are potentially committed to American policy in the Middle East and the Persian Gulf in particular, and yet there is no mention in the Minister's statement of this extremely important area. The B52 aircraft are inti mately linked with various scenarios for inter vention in the Middle East by the rapid deployment force. General Ellis, of the Strategic Air Command, told Congress last year: No other weapons system can match the B-52 in delivering concentrated conventional firepower on the battlefield. In the opening hours of hostilities, B-52s with 30 tons of explosives can provide timely and effective assistance in disrupting enemy actions. The projected conventional battle scenario is one characterised by minimum warn ing time followed by a massive attack from highly mobile forces aimed at a rapid breakthrough of defensive lines. In this situation, employment timing is critical. Ground forces need all available firepower in the first 48 hours, preferably applied directly to attacking and supporting forces.
That is not very much time given the terms of the Government's agreement on consultation about other than surveillance usage of the B-52s

through Darwin. It is now a matter of urgency that we in this country determine whether or not we believe that current directions in United States Middle Eastern policy are appropriate. This in cludes not only the question of United States pol icy on Arab-Israeli issues but also the current United States stress on military response to politi cal developments in the region, a stress which is increasingly being rejected by United States allies. It is a matter which is of increasing concern to them because they know and understand what we ought to understand-that the rapid deployment force simply cannot seize the oil installations because there are too many of them over too great a distance for that to be possible. They cannot inter dict a Soviet invasion, and a Soviet invasion is most unlikely because the United States and its European allies know, as we ought to know, that if the Soviet Union sought to intervene in the oil fields it would be an action that would strike at the very heart of Western economic survival, and the response to it would have to entail the severe possibility of global nuclear war. That is what de ters the Soviet Union in the Middle East, not a rapid deployment force that cannot arrive there in other than a division of strength even at the height of its development, at the apex of what is planned for it, in anything under a month. There is no evidence in the Minister's statement that he has given any serious consideration to this matter.
This country has a direct interest in the stability of the nuclear balance between the Soviet Union and the United States. We have American facilities which monitor compliance with arms control agreements, provide early warning of attack, transmit fire orders to ballistic missile submarines now capable of playing a counterforce role, and assist targeting of Soviet cities and military facilities. The Minister argues, without giving us evidence, that contemporary American military strategy will ensure a stable balance. He owes us more than that. Prima facie contemporary strat egy is likely to produce the opposite effect. In SALT II, to be abandoned by President Reagan, the United States has been provided with con siderable opportunities to enhance its position with regard to the Soviet Union. No projected qualitative or quantitative change planned in the deployment of American forces is precluded by SALT II-not cruise missiles, not MX missiles, not Trident missiles. On the other hand, a cap is effectively maintained on the deployment of Soviet missiles which are capable of carrying up to 30 warheads as opposed to the current half a dozen warheads.
We have the right to express a view on 'these issues in the terms of agreements entered into by

Australia 's Foreign Relations Policy

24 March 1 981 REPRESENTATIVES 845

the Labor Government, and we have a right because of the nature of the facilities that we host. Not to have views on vital issues of nuclear arms control in these circumstances, as the Government has not, is an abdication of responsibility. There are areas of American policy which constitute a reasonable response to aspects of Soviet for ward policy. However, there are a substantial number which do not and which will create dis sension with American allies and will raise the risk of wrong signals to allies, adversaries and neutrals alike. The Foreign Mininster indicates that he values consistency in the policy of the new American Administration. There is value in con sistency but not if one is consistently wrong and when in a complex world achievement of it is un likely. There is no indication in the Minister's statement that he remotely appreciates these problems.
HANSARD: DELAY IN PRODUCTION Mr SPEAKER-The Government Printer has advised the Principal Parliamentary Reporter that as from midnight tonight members of the Printing and Kindred Industries Union employed at the Government Printing Office will stop work for four hours on each shift. It is believed that the stoppages will last for 1 2 hours only. In the cir cumstances, it is almost certain that the daily Hansard of today's meeting of the Parliament will not be available for distribution until Thursday morning, 26 March 1981 .
Sitting suspended from 5.56 to 8 p.m.
AUSTRALIA'S FOREIGN RELATIONS POLICY
Ministerial Statement Debate resumed. Mr McLEAN (Perth) (8.0)-1 welcome the statement made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) and particularly his comments regarding the Reagan Administration. Dur ing his statement he said that he was struck by the extent to which the philosophical perspectives and the analysis of the international situation of the Reagan Administration and of the Australian Government coincided. He referred to a shared concern about the Soviet military build-up, the need to maintain a military balance as a condition for stability and effective negotiations, the need to improve consultation and co-ordination within the Western alliance and the need for purposeful American leadership. I welcome this aspect of the statement by the Minister, particularly in view of the reaction by some civic, religious and other community leaders to the statement made recently by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm

Fraser) with respect to the assistance given to the United States of America in its surveillance of the Indian Ocean.
In my view the arrangements made with the United States to allow B52 bombers access to our Air Force facilities at Darwin are extremely sen sible. I think Australian sovereignty has not been violated; it has been enhanced by our co-operating with our principal ally in a matter of vital stra tegic interest to ourselves. We have thereby con tributed to our own defence efforts and strengthened the ANZUS Pact on which we so heavily depend. I am at a loss to understand how critics of this policy claim that we have no com mon interest with the United States in the Indian Ocean. They obviously ignore the fact that the Indian Ocean is increasingly being seen by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as one of its spheres of influence. J think recent history pro vides ample evidence of this.
Since Great Britain began its withdrawal from east of Suez in 1 967-Britain was then in charge of the key control points in both the eastern and western zones of the Indian Oceanthe Soviet Union has moved in to fill that vacuum. The Soviet Union has treaty agreements with and access to Iraq, South Yemen, Ethiopia, I ndia and, of course, Afghanistan. Each of these countries belongs to the so-called non-aligned movement. Either I do not understand the meaning of the word 'non-aligned' or it is one of the worst mis nomers of all time, but the Soviets are on the island of Socotra. In 1 976 Mozambique granted the Soviet Union facilities to build air and naval installations at its Indian Ocean bases. Of course there is the improved access of the Soviet navy to the Seychelles.
Since the late 1 960s Soviet naval aircraft have undertaken reconnaissance flights over the Indian Ocean. These flights have continued on a periodic basis since that time. A continuous, though fluctuating, naval presence in the Indian Ocean has been maintained, and in the past year Moscow has increased the size of its I ndian Ocean fleet to an average presence of about 30 naval units, including guided missile cruisers, frigates and de stroyers, nuclear and conventional submarines, supply ships and auxiliary vessels. These naval operations continue to be centred in the areas of access to the Middle East oil fields. Given the de pendence of the Western world on Persian Gulf oil, including the substantial dependency of the United States on this source, it is hardly surprising that the Persian Gulf now constitutes the major United States interest in the Indian Ocean. Given recent events in this region, coupled with the increasing Soviet presence there, I am surprised at

846 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

A ustralia's Foreign Relations Policy

the way in which the United States is vilified for increasing its military presence in that region. To suggest that Australia and the United States do not have common interests in this matter is absurd.
Any number of commentators give any number of reasons for the Soviet action in this area. Some of these reasons include the securing of a sea link between the Baltic and Vladivostok, the projec tion of Soviet political and economic power, the denial to the West of access to resources, the op portunity to pressure the oil producing countries as Soviet dependency for outside oil increases, and a long term objective of moving against South Africa and its mineral wealth . These and other reasons have been put forward.
But whatever the real objective may be, I think that three things are obvious: Firstly, Soviet interests and our interests do no coincide; secondly, the Soviet Union is moving to a strategic position which will enable it to achieve its objec tives; and thirdly, on the basis of history we can hardly assume Soviet intentions as being based on a desire to spread cheer and goodwill throughout the region. Given this kind of scenario, coupled with the fact that the United States docs not con trol any of the critical geographical locations that affect access to the Indian Ocean, and the critical shortage of United States bases in the Indian Ocean, I strongly support the Government's in itiative to assist the United States in its efforts to increase its surveillance of and presence in the Indian Ocean. At present the United States is stretching itself to the limit. The American Commander-in-Chief in the Pacific, Admiral Long, recently told the United States House of Representatives Armed Services Committee:
We cannot go it alone. To the European and Pacific theatres of operations has been added a third, the Indian Ocean and the Persian Gulf.
The United States is at present seeking to increase its presence in Egypt, Oman, Somalia, Kenya and Diego Garcia-but that is all in the future. Obviously the Indian Ocean nations are not doing enough and we, in Australia, must provide the United States with the kind of assistance that we are now offering if our common interests are to be properly served.
I turn briefly to the I sraeli-Arab conflict. I was disappointed that the Minister's statement made no direct mention of this matter. I assume that this question is covered by the Minister's referring to the need for purposeful American leadership of the kind which led to the Camp David Accords. I hope that the United States resolve in this issue does not diminish because 1 have a feeling that the Western world is gradually moving from its long

held position of strong support for the State of Israel and that there may be attempts to compro mise the security of Israel for other issues. During the early and mid-1 970s a shift in the debate on the Arab-Israeli peacemaking effort was taking place. The issue of boundaries was giving way to the issue of the future of the Palestinian Arabs, which we all agree must be satisfactorily resolved. At the same time the United Nations has been questioning the legitimacy of the state of Israel while the Palestine Liberation Organisation was being treated increasingly as a legal entity within the United Nations notwithstanding the fact that the PLO continues to deny the right of Israel to exist in direct contravention of unanimously carried resolutions of the United Nations Security Council. This trend was continued last year by the so-called European initiative whereby the Com mon Market governments sought to bypass the Camp David Accords, formally to recognise the PLO and to call for the PLO's involvement in negotiations for a Middle East peace settlement.
My further concern in this matter is that the United States Administration, although it made strong pro-Israeli statements during the 1 980 election, has not as yet enunciated a policy for dealing with Arab-Israeli tensions. I ask the question: Is the United States, in pursuing broader East-West issues, going to subordinate the Arab-Israeli conflict to that of Persian Gulf security? If so, will the security of Israel be in any way compromised? In my opinion Israel has every reason to be concerned with the long term trends which have been operating on this issue. I believe that the Government should do all in its power to ensure that our support for Israel, as embraced in United Nations Security Council resolutions 242 and 338, is in no way diminished.
I was interested in the Minister's comments regarding the linkage of various elements of any foreign policy, those elements being economic matters, human rights and strategic and political questions. These comments cannot be dissociated from my earlier remarks. I think it is quite proper for the Minister to state that although the Australian Government believes that human rights issues are of the greatest importance it is wrong to assume that economic reform issues and human rights can be divorced from questions of security and strategy. There has been a great deal of public comment on the change in emphasis given to human rights in the formulation of foreign policy under the Reagan Administration compared with the Carter Administration. I think it was Dr Kis singer who said on this subject that power is the basis of foreign policy and only a country with power can have a foreign policy based on morality

Australia 's Foreign Relations Policy

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 847

because only such a country has any choices. This is important in determining perceptions of other nations to the United States. In the Middle East context I think it means that a weakened United States could not behave as responsibly as once it would have done. It was President Assad who said to Kissinger: 'You sold out Vietnam and Cam bodia. Why should we not suppose that you will also sell out Israel?' Hence the importance of the United States again reasserting itself, both from a strategic and a moral point of view.
Using human rights as the dominant organising principle of foreign affairs has meant different things to different people. It has created enormous problems for the United States. Those who supported this emphasis constantly sought to dis credit successive United States administrations for supporting politically unattractive regimes. They maintained that if such regimes were sup ported the United States automatically supported their policies. To these advocates the answer was for America to come home while the Soviet Union continued its imperialistic policies. Still other advocates of this principle felt that it provided an opportunity to change things for the better in those nations in which the United States still had some influence. Senator Moynihan, a former United States Ambassador to the United Nations, maintained that the consistent theme of those who placed human rights to the fore in foreign policy decision making was to be more concerned with the wrongdoing of the United States than with other nations that might be adversaries of the United States.
A reliance on human rights alone has led to great difficulties in the United States in recent times. Firstly, it has meant that those seeking ac commodation with increasing Soviet power could not, quite correctly, believe that the Russians could be deterred by the threat to them of American words and arguments. Secondly, those in the United States who were prepared to stand up and respond to Soviet power were hindered by the difficulties that United States human rights policies were causing for non-communist, but equally non-democratic, nations which were United States allies. Thirdly, a quite reasonable view has been put forward by the Reagan administration that an overemphasis on human rights undermines authoritarian regimes which have a capacity for change and increases the chance that they will be succeeded by totalitarian governments, specifically communist ones, which obliterate human rights altogether. For these reasons I am pleased that the Minister raised this important issue in his statement. Obviously, if the United States is to give a lead once again to the

Western world it will need to provide a greater balance between all the elements of foreign policy formulation, to which the Minister referred, which was obviously lacking in the previous Carter administration.
I wish to comment briefly on the speech made by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) late this afternoon in reply to the ministerial statement. In the course of his 27minute speech he spent 26t minutes attacking the United States. He did not at any stage criticise the foreign policy of the Soviet Union. He did not refer to the way in which it has behaved in A fghani s t an , A n go l a , H u ngary, Poland , Czechoslovakia, South Yemen, M ozambique, the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea or any simi lar issues. I thought his speech was a very unbalanced contribution, characteristic of the speeches of Labor Party spokesman in foreign affairs debates in this Parliament over the last five years. Labor Party spokesmen criticise the United States and Communist China but they will not go out of their way to criticise the Soviet Union. They seek to find a reason to defend the Soviet Union for any expansionist policy it undertakes. 1 do not welcome the arms build-up around the world. I think all of us would like to see the resources of the world which are now being devoted to arms utilised to feed the millions of starving people and to increase the living standards of those who live in abject poverty. Unfortunately, that is not the reality. Until the Soviet Union and its allies change their international strategy, we have a responsibility to secure and defend this nation and give all the support we can to the United States and her allies.
Mr MORRISON (St George) (8. 1 5) -The speech by the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) this afternoon on foreign affairs and those aspects of this Government's policy was disturb ing. Throughout the speech ran an emphasis on preparedness for war and a concomitant downplaying of the possibilities of peace. For in stance, there was no mention of efforts to reduce international tension between the great powers. For the benefit of the honourable member for Perth (Mr McLean) I include in that description both the Soviet Union and the United States. Detente has obviously become a seven-letter word. The Minister stated:
. . . the possession of adequate power is desirable precisely because it reduces the chances of armed conflict.
Regrettably, the lessons of history are otherwise. World War I and World War II showed that prep arations for war inexorably lead to war.

848 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 198 1

A ustralia 's Foreign Relations Policy

The Minister has cast Australia as a middle power. I would hope that the main thrust of a middle power would be to bring some sanity to international relations and to seek to reduce the ten sion between the great powers. This Government has supported, as have previous governments, both Labor and Liberal, the United Nations Dec laration on the Indian Ocean which aims to reduce tension in the Indian Ocean. It seeks to set up a zone of peace. There may be some sniggers from the Government on the concept of a zone of peace, but if we cannot get a zone of peace then we will have a zone of war. That is the issue. Very recently, in fact on 1 2 January this year, the Government supported a United Nations resol ution. In part that resolution stated:
Considering that the continued danger posed by the mili tary presence of the great Powers in the Indian Ocean area, conceived in the context of their confrontation, gives greater urgency to the need to take practical steps towards the early achievement of the objectives of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace . . .
That was not simply a statement by a small government. It was a consensus statement in the United Nations that was supported by this Government. Yet in the speech by the Minister for Foreign Affairs no mention was made of this effort to reduce tension in the Indian Ocean area. I point out that the Prime Minister has personally supported a similar resolution. For instance, the communique from the Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting in New Delhi in September 1 980 stated:
Heads of government noted with concern that despite the expressed wishes of the littoral and hinterland States, great power military presence in the Indian Ocean has increased and that there has been a deterioration of peace and security in the Indian Ocean area. They further noted with regret that recent events in the region, together with the worsening international situation, have caused a further build-up of great power military presence.
Neither of these sane and sensible statements was included in the Minister's speech. Regrettably, in practice the Government has taken steps not to decrease tension but to increase it. Many of us will recall that just prior to the general election, in a fit of ridiculous posturing, the Government dispatched the main operating units of the Royal Australian Navy into the Indian Ocean. It was de scribed as the largest and longest Indian Ocean deployment by the RAN since World War 11again this emphasis on war. The Government said the ships were to exercise with the navies of a number of friendly powers and would visit a large number of ports. The deployment was a monu mental flop. There were no major exercises with other navies and the number of ports visited was reduced. In a last minute decision the units were pulled out of an exercise in the northern Indian

Ocean with units from the United Kingdom and the United States. That was a sensible decision, but it made a nonsence of the Government's pre election posturing. So we can say: 'So much for the Minister's only sensible piece of advice in his speech, that we should not extend ourselves unrealistically. '
The Minister's statement is remarkable in another sense. It displays a yawning gap between the principles espoused and the Government's actual performance. The Minister in his speech pointed to a feature of what he describes as middle power foreign policy; that is, that quality of performance is particularly important in deter mining influence and status. H is regrettable that this Government's quality of performance in a number of areas of foreign policy, particularly in Kampuchea, is deficit in relation to their aims. The Minister dealt with Kampuchea at length in his speech. I want to draw the House's attention to a statement on Kampuchea issued by the then Minister for Foreign Affairs on 14 October 1980. [ think the first thing we should note about the statement is the date14 October 1 980, precisely four days before the Federal election. There was, as you will recall, Mr Deputy Speaker, a strong criticism within the then Government, the Liberal Party, about relations with Kampuchea. There was a disenchantment among supporters of the Liberal Party about the Government's policy towards Kampuchea in continuing recognition of the Pol Pot regime. So something had to be done in the pre-election panic. The statement that was issued on that occasion was intended to give the impression that the Government had derecog nised the Pol Pot regime, Democratic Kam puchea. In fact the statement said:
The Minister for ForeignAffairs, Mr Andrew Peacock, said today that Australia has taken a decision in effect to derecog nise the Government of Democratic Kampuchea (the Pol Pot regime) .
As we are all aware, it took the Government another four months to the day1 4 February 1981 -to state that the derecognition of the Government of Democratic Kampuchea, the Pol Pot regime, would take effect as from that day. That statement of 1 4 October-four days before the election-was nothing more than a deceptive piece of window-dressing. It was in fact a con fidence trick.
But there was another deception built into the Government's statement of 1 4 October. That statement followed by only a few hours instruc tions to Australia's United Nations delegatiqn to vote in favour of Democratic Kampuchea in the credentialling committee of the United Nations. That meant that Australia, irrespective of what it

A ustralia's Foreign Relations Policy

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 849

did a couple of hours later, voted for the con did not protest the presence of the Pol Pot rep

tinued recognition of the Pol Pot regime. The resentative. By its action it has continued to recog

Government's inconsistency is patently obvious. nise the Pol Pot regime.

On the one hand it sought to give the impression that it had derecognised the Pol Pot regime and on the other it voted to continue that recognition. We should remember that the United Nations is the only forum in which recognition of a country with which we do not have diplomatic relations has any relevance. The United Nation is the only organisation in which recognition or derecogni tion of Democratic Kampuchea has any relevance.

In short, this Government has misled this House and, more importantly, the Australian people. If it is the intention of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to place an emphasis on the qual ity of performance of a middle power the first thing that the Government must do is act consist ently and act honestly. That is the intent of any foreign policy that an Australian government should seek to perform. This Government has not acted consistently; it has not acted honestly. In

fact, it has not acted in the way that we on this

In 1 979 the Government adopted the policy side of the House believe Australia as a middle

and this is getting back to the history of the power should perform.

credentialling committee-of the previous Liberal-Country Party administrations in arguing, and arguing quite spuriously, that credentialling of delegations in the United Nations is a technical and legal matter and not a matter of policy. For decades the Liberal and Country parties followed that line by denying the very existence of Commu nist China. By this ploy it upheld the fiction that Taiwan was the rightful government of China. But in 1 979 the Australian Government missed an opportunity because in the debate in the United Nations the Indian delegation put forward a proposal-a very sensible proposal-that the seat of Kampuchea should be left vacant. But, oh no, attached to this great ostrich-like policy of con tinuing to recognise the Pol Pot regime, the Australian delegation voted against the Indian del egation's proposal. One of the consequences of that decision was that the Indian Government then decided to recognise the Heng Samrin regime

Mr FALCONER (Casey) (8.29)-The House is debating a statement made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) concerning the nature of this country's foreign policy and some of the more urgent tasks facing us. In replying to the Minister the Deputy Leader of the Opposition ( Mr Lionel Bowen) made one comment that I want to take up at this stage. He said that the 'new United States Administration had scrapped human rights as an instrument of foreign policy. I think that is one of the many dangerous over simplifications which the Deputy Leader of the Opposition made during his speech. I want to quote from an interview which Mr Alexander Haig, the United States Secretary of State, gave to Time magazine. He was in fact asked a question on that very point. He was asked about the sig nificance of human rights diplomacy in American policy at present, and he said:

in Kampuchea. This meant that the support that

We are concerned that open societies sometimes get vic

India could have given to proposals put forward by members of the Association of South East Asian Nations and other countries for a settle

timised by thepractical consequences of their openness and by the lack of access to information about totalitarian regimes where, it is our conviction, the major abuses to human rights are occurring today. But this is an ancillary problem related to

ment in Kampuchea was lost.

our more strongly held concern that past human rights poli

cies have in many instances been counterproductive, not only

to the objective of strengthening human rights but also from

The whole import of what Australia has done the standpoint of vital American interests.

in the United Nations has been to continue to give international respectability it continues today to

He went on:

give international respectability-to the Pol Pot regime because by that vote the Pol Pot regime has full membership status in the United Nations

There are a number of questions related to this. First and foremost, we must continue to be deeply concerned about abuses to human rights wherever they occur; but there are such questions as whether amelioration of those abuses is best

and in the United Nations' specialised agencies achieved under the glare ofpublic criticism and animosity and

and regional organisations for the whole of 1981 . That recognition still continues. I t is not just an

confrontation, or whether it is best achieved in a quieter dia logue between states with a healthier relationship.

academic question. Only last week the Australian What I want to point out is that there are many

delegation to the United Nations Economic and ways of approaching human rights questions,

Social Committee for Asia and the Pacific held in many ways of trying to deal with them where we

Bangkok and led by a Minister of this Govern are dealing with relationships with sovereign

ment sat at the very same table as a representative countries, and I think it is unreasonable to assert

of the Pol Pot regime. The Australian delegation in a sweeping manner that the United States has

850 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Australia's Foreign Relations Policy

effectively scrapped human rights as an instru ment of foreign policy. There can be differences about approach, there can be differences about the end result of various courses of action with respect to human rights and how effective various courses of action mayobe, but in fact it is still a very strong element of United States policy, and indeed should be.
Mr Haig's remarks point to a problem that we face in Australia. There is tendency in Australia, in talking about human rights problems, to em phasise problems that appear in countries such as Indonesia, the Philippines and South Korea. These are countries which are more open than many of the communist or left wing countries in the region. Therefore one has a greater opportunity to find out about instances of breaches of human rights. However, one does not have the same opportunity to obtain information about what is happening in more closed societies, in societies which are often run by socialist or com munist governments, or governments that claim to have that complexion. So effectively a great public emphasis on human rights issues can lead to a sense of protection being given to closed societies which do not allow us to find out what is going on in their countries compared with more open societies where there is a greater possibility for use to move in or send people in to find out what is happening and therefore bring the abuses of human rights to light. That is one of the difficul ties that those of us in Australia who want to take action on human rights face in dealing with the situation in an even-handed manner.
The honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison) said that the lessons of World War I and World War II show that preparations for war inexorably led to war. There is an element of truth in that, but perhaps the word 'inexorably' is over stating it. Many others would say that prep arations for war ensure that we do not face war in future because we deter future enemies. The example that is commonly given to support that argument is the example of the development of power in nazi Germany in the 1 930s and the lack of response by democratic countries to that challenge which was obviously looming on the hor izon. What we want is not an oversimplified statement about preparations for war; what we want is a realistic assessment of what is happening in the world and an appropriate response to what that assessment shows.
With that in mind I want to examine some of the attitudes being adopted by the Reagan Administration towards the Soviet Union, and then to look at the implications of those attitudes for Australian foreign policy. One of the problems

in American attitudes towards the Soviet Union, in recent years is that there has tended to be a swing from one unreal view to another. [n some circles in the United States there has been an undue naivety about the potential to reach some peaceful accommodation with the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. It was an attitude evi dent in much of the eastern liberal academic es tablishment of the United States of America. Many people in that category tended to take the view that if only we understood the USSR and got to know each other as people through more. cul tural exchanges, sporting contacts, regular consul tations, et cetera, our fears of the USSR would fade and we would come to realise that we are all human beings of peaceful intent with common interests. Some people who take this view have a tendency to be highly critical of American leader ship for supposedly having passed up opportunities to lessen tensions between the two super powers. In my view these unreal expectations arise from a lack of knowledge, of Russian history, both czarist and Bolshevik, and a lack of understanding of the essential dynamics of policies aris ing from Marxist-Leninist theories. The Soviet Union sees itself as being on the historically correct side of a fundamental ideological conflict between the forces of socialism and the forces of capitalism. These factors incline the Soviet Union towards an aggressive and expansionist attitude. Addto this some of the tensions within the Soviet Union itself, the failure of its economy to deliver the standard of living which had been promised to the Soviet people, and that increases also the like lihood that any Soviet government will be looking for outside adventures or at least be looking for some outside tensions which it can use to distract attention from problems within the country.
Certainly we must understand the very real fears of the Russian people, the people who suffered at the hands of nazi Germany in the Sec ond World War. A very real basis of fear exists among people in the Soviet Union, perhaps even to the extent of some sort of xenophobic attitude towards countries around the Soviet Union. That is something that we must bear in mind and with which we must sympathise. At the same time we must realise that there are essential forces within Soviet societies, within Marxist and Leninist the ory, which tend to give the Soviet Union an expansionist attitude towards the rest of the world. One problem with the unreal attitude towards the Soviet Union, which I described earlier that if only we could get to know each other as people a bit more then tensions would
lessen, is that when some incident occurs which
breaks down that attitude of trust and general

Australia's Foreign Relations Policy

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 8 5 1

bonhomie, it can lead to a swing in the direction of excessive mistrust and bellicosity. So one can get a return to the bluster, the abuse, and the general tense language of Cold War rhetoric. We all re call, for example, how President Carter made himself look a rather pathetic figure when he complained, after the Soviet Union invasion of Afghanistan, that the Soviet Union had misled him. We then saw something of a tendency in the United States for congressmen, for leading spokesmen on public opinion, to swing towards bellicosity and sabre rattling. in the terms of their attitudes to foreign relations and in particular their attitudes towards Russia.

Union. After all, the United States opening to China under the Nixon Administration, by which Australia's rapprochement with China became more possible, was not an initiative designed to form some United States-China alliance against the Soviet Union. Both President Nixon and Dr Kissinger, the then National Security adviser and after that Secretary of State were at great pains to point out that the detente with China was not intended to lead to a United States-China condo minium to surround the Soviet Union. Rather it was seen as a way of bringing China out of her iso lation and ensuring China her rightful place in an overall world balance.

What then do we make of the rather strident statements which are now coming from President Reagan and Secretary of State Haig? A common fear being expressed by many commentators is that the language of Mr Reagan and Mr Haig may raise unnecessarily the temperature of relation ships and increase the risk of some genuine misun derstanding arising between the super-powers about their intentions. That misunderstanding could then raise the risk of actual cOIiflict. Doubt less the new Administration feels that the United' States needs to show more resolve and, purpose ,in its foreign policies than has been demonstrated in recent years. Perhaps some stiffening of United States resolve is indeed needed at this stage. In that respect, the recent statements by President Reagan may reflect the developments that would have occurred under any President likely to b.e elected in the current political atmosphere. By now, however, I think, the, rhetorical points hav\:l been made. I think some degree of excessive emotionalism has been used in some of the language that has come out of Washington, but that United States resolve should now be ex
pressed by way of the iron fist in a velvet giove ap
proach rather than by waving a cutlass around ac: companied by blood curdling screams. Neither United States leaders nor Australian leaders should fall into the trap of abusing the Soviet Union and its leaders merely to satisfy some emotional requirement in themselves.
In the Australian context" as we are developing closer and more fruitful relationships with China, it is particularly easy to see our interests in 'the short term beingserved by a stridency towards the Soviet Union that brings satisfied smiles to the faces of Chinese trade delegations. I have probably fallen into this trap myself in the presence of
affable Chinese officials when we have both found
common cause in bemoaning the tendencies of the Soviet Union. I believe we would .be wise to ensure that our foreign policy does not tip too strongly in favour of China vis-a-vis the Soviet

I do not believe our desire to pursue harmoni ous relationships with China should lead us to court unnecessary aggravations in any re1ation ship we have with the Soviet Union. In other words, we do not need to be rude to the Russians in order to charm the Chinese. I do not say this in any belief that we can afford to be soft or com pl;icent in our attitude to the Soviet Union. On the contrary, as I said earlier, we must be fully aware of the fundamental ideological struggle between the Soviet Union and western liberal democracies and the possibility of this developing into armed conflict at various points around the world. .
This ha.s ' implications for Australian foreign policy.'Within the context of that super-power relationship between the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics I believe we have a very real role to play. There is no real alternative to Australia being part of the American alliance in both a military and diplo matic sense. Ideologically our society has nothing in common with basic Marxist structures, no matter how much any briefly fashionable romantics in our country like to wear Mao badges or pay hom age to whatever other Marxist leader happens to be in vogue at the time. Our commitment to West ern Liberal democratic traditions and the basic freedoms of such societies gives us a fundamental common ' interest with the United States. The Australian people would feel that they have some natural alliance with the American people whether or not that alliance was formalised in a treaty. In fact, it is formalised in a treaty in the form of the ANZUS treaty. That treaty allows us to play a constructive role of influence in our re lationships with the United States. We have the opportunity of having some input into United States policy considerations. We share the results 01 intelligence gathering, a matter of great benefit to Australia. I believe that also imposes on us a responsibility to play a .part in enabling the United States to carry out its global responsibilities.

852 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

A ustralia's Foreign Relations Policy

I do not want to suggest that the American alliance is the be-all and end-all of all Australian foreign policy and defence policy. We must de velop our own regional network of bilateral and multilateral relationships. Under this Government we have developed practical working re lationships with a number of countries in our region.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr FRY (Fraser) (8.44) -1 must say how pleasing it was to hear the honourable member for Casey (Mr Falconer) delivering such a moderate and well reasoned speech, in sharp contrast to many of his colleagues. It is always a pleasure to listen to the honourable member for Casey because he analyses the issue at stake. He attempts to understand the point of view of the other side and gives a reasonable assessment of it. That is in sharp contrast to the honourable member for Perth (Mr McLean) , for instance, who always gives a very bellicose, reactionary sort of speech and distorts the Labor viewpoint. 1 must refute the honourable member's accusation that Australian Labor Party policy is pro-Soviet and anti American. Every Labor member who spoke in this debate said that we should not have a point of view that was pro any other nation. Our policy should not necessarily go along with the Russians, the Americans, the Indians, the Chinese or any one else. We are saying that we should look at situations objectively and develop our own policy. That is precisely what we do not do. The sorts of views put forward by the honourable member for Casey conform to that view.
I was very disappointed and saddened by the ease with which the new Minister for Foreign A ffairs (Mr Street) has so quickly and pliantly fallen into line to comply with what we see as the tunnel vision of his leader, the hard-line people in his party and the reactionary leaders in the world today such as the Reagans and the Thatchers. It is very sad that those people tend to see things in black and white; they do not see anything in between. Other people are either with them or against them. They do not try to understand the point of view of the other side. The Minister for Foreign Affairs visited countries which he refers to as like-minded countries. They include most of the Association for South East Asian Nation countries-Thailand, the Philippines, Malaysia. He also visited places such as Tokyo, Peking and Washington. He says that those countries are like minded. He should realise that all those countries still support the Pol Pot regime which we have only belatedly derecognised. If those countries are

like-minded he is being very honest in saying that at least they still support the Pol Pot regime and that they see people who support the Pol Pot regime as like-minded people.

It is a great shame that the Minister did not try

to be better informed by talking to officials in

some countries which were not like-minded which

may have been able to enlighten him and give him

a more objective view of the situations on the

ground. The Minister did not go to any of those

countries. If he had he would have had a different

view. By talking only to like-minded people how

does one get out of having a tunnel vision of the

situation in those countries? Of c'ourse, the tunnel

vision leads the Min ister to the wrong

conclusion-as it has led the Government to the

wrong conclusion-that communism and big

power politics East Asia.

are

the

enemy

partic' ularly

in

South

The Government should be looking toward going back to the root-cause of the problem in South East Asia. The root-causes of the problem are the denial of basic human rights to the population at large in many of those countries; gross poverty and starvation for millions of people; gross underdevelopment; and gross corruption in many of the regimes. These are the problems to which we should address ourselves, not some vague abstraction called communism. That tunnel vision leads people to the further view that insta bility in those countries is caused by big power involvement. There is no question about the fact that big powers become involved. Big powers are involved in Kampuchea. Their involvement is made possible by the instability in those countries caused by the poverty, the underdevelopment and, in some cases-as in Kampuchea and Vietnam-by the involvement of Western countries such as the United States of America. West ern countries went into that region and created the conditions which allowed instability to de velop. They destroyed the social infrastructure of those countries, and moved out and left a vacuum. Extreme people such as Pol Pot were able to move into that vacuum with devastating effects on the community. We did the same sort of thing in Vietnam. We said: 'The problem is that the south is being invaded from the north', without looking at the internal position in South Vietnam. The instability was internal and not caused only by external forces.

We seem to be making the same sorts of judg ments in South East Asia, Kampuchea and, of course, El Salvador. I am sorry that the Minister did not look at these countries, make himself better informed and form a more balanced view of what is going on.

A ustralia 's Foreign Relations Policy

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 853

My wife and I recently visited Vietnam, Kam puchea and Phnom Penh. We found that visit very interesting and very enlightening. We came back with a much better balanced view of what is happening in these countries. If the Minister had gone there he would have a different view from the one he has expressed. He would not have any truck at all with countries which are supporting the Pol Pot regime, or he would try to encourage them to derecognise Pol Pot. If the Minister or anybody else has any doubts about the demonic and horrendous nature of the Pol Pot regime they should look at the photographs which my wife took on the outskirts of Phnom Penh where thousands of human skeletons are being dug out of the ground. Mainly these are skeletons of women and children. It is stark and horrendous evidence of how bad the Pol Pot regime was.
If one were to go there and see that and talk to the people one would not be talking about the Vietnamese invading Kampuchea. There is no question that the people in Phnom Penh today see the Vietnamese as their saviours. They are regarded as fraternal people who came in to save them from the horrors of Pol Pot. These people are damned glad to be alive. They recognise that. On our visit to Phnom Penh we would not have know the Vietnamese presence was there. We did not see one Vietnamese soldier in Phnom Penh. We knew they were there because the Kam puchean people told us they were being assisted by the Vietnamese. We know they have 200,000 troops in the north keeping the Pol Pot forces in check. I can assure honourable members that they are exercising a very benign influence over the Kampucheans.
The Kampuchean economy is developing in a complete laissez faire, free market atmosphere. The Heng Samrin regime is allowing the normal market forces to operate so that the country can develop an economy. The proof is shown in the fact that there are now 300,000 people back in Phnom Penh. They are coming back in large numbers. Many of them have come out of the ref ugee camps which twelve months ago were seen as an insoluble problem. They are coming back because they have confidence in the Heng Samrin regime and in the way in which it is running the country. The children are back at school. There are not many teachers because Pol Pot cut the throats of most of them. Agriculture is recovering rapidly. The regime has the support of the people in Phnom Penh. I did not get out into the country so I cannot speak for the people there. I have read of other people who have toured extensively through the country and the story is the same:

They are very grateful for the fact that the Viet namese came in and saved them from the Pol Pot regime. To talk about the Vietnamese invading the Kampucheans, dominating them and standing over them is a complete misreading of the situation.
I can understand the Minister's holding that view because he did not talk to anybody who has a different view and he did not go and look for himself. If he had done so he would have seen that the Vietnamese were not aggressors. If the Kam pucheans want the Vietnamese to get out they know what to do. All they have to do is to encour age some of their like-minded friends to derecog nise Pol Pot and stop giving him support, and the Vietnamese will withdraw the next day. It is very costly for the Vietnamese to be in Kampuchea. They do not want to be there but they will not turn their backs on their brothers in Kampuchea and let them be slaughtered by Pol Pot. It is just not on.
It is quite absurd for the Minister to talk about supporting the third force. The third force is comprised of people who are not even in Kam puchea. It has very little grassroots support. It is absolute nonsense to talk of supporting the third force led by Prince Sihanouk or anybody else. The reality of the situation is that the Vietnamese are there. They will stay there. They have been there for a long time. They have supported the Kampucheans consistently. They supported them in getting rid of the French. They supported them against the Lon N ol regime and they have now supported them in getting rid of Pol Pot. There is nothing new about Vietnam supporting Kampuchea. More and more countries are now recognising that the Indo-China region is a legit imate area of influencc of Vietnam. Vietnam has a population of 40 million or 50 million people. Kampuchea and Laos are both very small countries. They are vital to the peace and prosperity of Vietnam.
As I said, my wife and I went to Vietnam. It is a very rundown country. It is badly in need of aid and support. I found it very distressing and I felt
 quite ashamed of our Government in that the
little bit of aid that we were giving them was c t off. The condensed milk factory which we sel'lt them is sitting in crates. There' is nobody there to assemble it. We sent them 600 head of beef cattle. We were supposed to follow up with a pasture improvement program. In a very petty act we just cut off that program. Whilst it was only symbolic support, its being stopped has created very bad feeling between our Government and the Government of Vietnam, although the Vietnamese know there are many people in Australia who would not

854 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 198 1

A ustralia's Foreign Relations Policy

have agreed with what happened. It is a great shame that the Minister did not go and look at that area, but I know that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) would not want him to go to see the situation for himself. The Government has a tunnel vision about what is going on in the country and does not want that disturbed.
Normally we take our lead from the Association of South East Asian Nations in developing a policy towards Kampuchea. On this occasion, although publicly the ASEAN nations are saying they are opposed to the Vietnamese, privately at least two of them, the Indonesians and the Malaysians, have some sympathy for the Viet namese position. I am sure that when the election, which is being held in April, takes place, the present regime will be endorsed. It is acceptable to the people there. I think at that time many countries will recognise the reality of the situation and will recognise that regime. At some stage we have to think about doing that and getting on with the job of sending real aid-development aid, hu manitarian aid-to these countries, particularly Kampuchea and Vietnam.

we can sustain indefinitely this gross social injus tice involving the majority of the people in the world, mainly those in the underdeveloped countries of the Third World who are living in abject poverty, fighting starvation and undevelopment without basic health and education facilities, shows no understanding of the recognition of the continued long term progress towards social jus tice to which every nation is entitled.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hodges) adjourned.
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION BILL 1981
Bill received from the Senate, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs) (9.0)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

I wish to say a few words briefly on El Salvador. This is another example of a misguided policy of the Americans insisting on sending guns when the President of EI Salvador stated that the strongest army in the world would not overcome the problems of poverty and starvation in that country. It is nonsense for us to be screaming out about these people acquiring arms. My son visited that country last year. He wrote to me and stated how horrifying it was to see, 1 2 months ago, the national guard in EI Salvador shooting demon strators in the back. In the last 1 2 months thousands of innocent peasant people in EI Salvador have been shot down with weapons which were supplied by the Americans to the national guard in EI Salvador. What are these people to do? Are they to sit down and be shot? Of course they will secure weapons. Whether they get them from the Americans or a communist country is irrelevant. These people are driven to desperation. They have to defend themselves. It does not matter where they get the weapons from.
If the Americans listened to the advice of the President of the Government of EI Salvador, they would be aware that he said: 'We do not want guns. We want economic aid. We want to be able to develop our country. We want to be able to feed ourselves'. But the Americans say: 'No, you do not want aid. You want more guns to shoot all these revolutionary people'. That is the situation as it is developing in EI Salvador today. I think anyone who really believes that in the long term

The purpose of this Bill is to establish a Commonwealth Human Rights Commission. The Commission will promote the observance of human rights throughout Australia within the limits of Commonwealth power. In co-operation with the States on human rights matters the Commission will assist the Government in discharging its international obligations in the cause of human rights. Our intention to introduce this legislation was foreshadowed in the Government's policy speech prior to the last election. The most recent attempt by this Government to have Parliament approve a human rights commission foundered because of lack of agreement between this House and the Senate on what became known as the Simon amendment, and was related to the rights of the child before as well as after birth. The Government has arrived at a formula, included in this Bill, which it believes will be acceptable both to those who voted for and those who voted against the amendments.
Since the Human Rights Commission Bill 1 979 was debated in this House last year, several events have transpired which only add to the need for effective human rights machinery in Australia. In August 1 980, Australia ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. To date 65 countries have become parties to this Covenant, many of which have established their own special forms of machinery to promote and protect human rights. The measure riow before the House, and the Commission that would be

Human Rights Commission Bill

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 855

established under it, will help Australia to dis charge the obligations it has assumed under the covenant.
Last August, as well, the Government established the Human Rights Bureau as an interim measure pending creation of a human rights com mission. Recently, the Bureau has begun to re ceive representations from the public in the form of complaints, requests for assistance, and re quests for information in the general field of human rights. The Bureau has also made significant progress in establishing links with non government organisations in the human rights field. It is apparent, however, that there is a need for more effective machinery to promote human rights in Australia than is available through the Bureau, and it is the object of the Bill to provide this machinery. The Commission will not be a large undertaking. Its emphasis will be on quality. Its annual cost is currently estimated at about $850,000, to which will be added the cost of the Office of the Commissioner for Community Relations-estimated at $ 350,000 in 1 980-8 1 .
The main provisions of the Bill are the same as in the Bill considered by the House last year. As such, they have already been the subject of con siderable discussion and debate. I intend in this speech, therefore, to refer to and explain only those changes from the 1 979 Bill that are found in the present measure. The only change of sig nificance is that the charter of the Commission has been extended to three additional international instruments. As with the previous Bill, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights will be the primary point of reference for the Commission. However, in response to the con cern expressed in this House, and also in the Senate, during the debate on the Simon amendment about the rights of both children and handi capped persons, the Commission will also be required to have regard, in areas of Commonwealth responsibility, for the rights of these groups as recognised in three international declar ations, each of which has been supported by Australia. The three declarations are-the Dec laration of the Rights of the child, 1 9 59; the Dec laration on the Rights of the Mentally Retarded, 1 9 7 1 ; and the Declaration on the Rights of the Disabled, 1 975.
The Declaration of the Rights of the Child recognises that the Child, by reason of his physical and mental immaturity, needs special safeguards and care, including appropriate legal protection, before as well as after birth. The declaration also

calls upon men and women everywhere, on volun tary organisations and on governments to strive for the observance of the rights of the child which it proclaims. The rights include the right to special protection to enable the child to develop fully; the right to enjoy the benefits of social security, including adequate pre-natal and post-natal care; and the rights to education and to protection from cruelty and exploitation. Similarly, the two dec larations concerned with the rights of physically and intellectually handicapped persons call for national and international action to protect the rights they declare. The rights of the intellectually handicapped include the right to be accorded as far as possible the same rights as other persons; the right to economic security and a decent stan dard of living; and the right to protection from ex ploitation, abuse and degrading treatment. The rights of the physically handicapped include the right to the same civil and political rights as other persons; the right to respect for their human dig nity; the right to measures to enable them to be come as self-reliant as possible; and the rights to medical and other treatment and to economic and social security and a decent level of living.
The three declarations I havejust been describ ing do not represent commitments in international law, as does the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. But they express important aspir ations, and we are proposing that the Commission should monitor, and report on, the way in which Commonwealth departments and agencies, and activities generally in the Australian Capital Territory, are conforming with them. The three dec larations are defined in clause 3 of the Bill, and are included in the definition of 'human rights' in the same clause. There are consequential amendments, chiefly in clause 3 1 , which envisage the declaration of further international instruments as part of the Commission's charter.
During debate on the 1 979 Bill and in the ensu ing months, comments have been made about certain aspects of the 1 979 Bill that are repeated in the present Bill. Because they are apparently the source of some concern, I should like to discuss three of those criticisms. The first is that the scope of the proposed Commission would extend only to laws of the Commonwealth and the Territories except the Northern Territory-and actions or procedures under such laws. The Commission's mandate will not extend to State or Northern Territory laws or actions or procedures of State and Northern Territory authorities. However, clause 1 1 of the Bill provides for a range of co-operative arrangements to be entered into with the States and it is the Government's intention and expec tation that this mechanism will be fully used.

856 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Human Rights Commission Bill

The ministerial meeting on human rights will of enforcement. In the view of the Government,

continue to exercise a role at top policy level in this may be a possible step for the future, but it is

considering issues which require consultation be not the next step, which is establishment of the

tween the various levels of government and in Commission. It is only when the Parliament has

promoting generally the cause of human rights in laid down laws relating to human rights in a par

Australia. Accordingly, this Bill manifests the ticular areafor example relating to racial

Government's continuing commitment to co discriminationthat the normal law enforcement

operative federalism, which is already developing machinery should be considered. Even there, the

well in the human rights field. The second criti clear cut and authoritative decisions of the courts

cism levelled at the 1 979 Bill is that the proposed may not be the correct way to proceed, at any rate

Commission would incorporate the Office of the in the early stages of the operation of the law. The

Commissioner for Community Relations. Non promotion of human rights in this country will be

government organisations in the human rights achieved more through education, through

field have particularly voiced this concern. It is findingnew balances of interests and through con

motivated by a fear that the work done by the ciliation than through firm measures of enforce

Commissioner for Community Relations will ment. In closing, I should like to refer to the final

somehow be interrupted or curtailed. The paragraph of my second reading speech for the

Government's expectation is in fact quite the op 1 979 Bill. The thoughts and hopes expressed are

posite. Let me emphasise, as I did when the pre as current and important today as they were then.

vious Bill was before the House, that the Com I said:

missioner for Community Relations will continue to carry out the complaint-handling and conciliation functions associated with administration of

Human rights are about the protection of individuals. I believe, and the Government believes, that in an era of social change in which governments exercise wide powers and cor

the Racial Discrimination Act. Further, the porations and large institutions greatly influence the lives of

added resources of the Commission will be available to assist as required in the important task of combating racial discrimination, and there will be

individuals, it is important to have an agency that is active in
the protection and promotion of the rights of individuals. We see in the world around us too many occasions where the rights of individuals are cruelly violated. The purpose of the

a recourse, as there was not previously, to the Human Rights Commission, and of the machinery associated

Meeting of Ministers on Human Rights on racial discrimination matters.

with it, is to help Australia maintain its excellent record in the protection of human rights, and progressively to develop a better and more comprehensive recognition and observance of

the rights of every individual in our community, regardless of

The Government is confident, therefore, that financial standing and whatever his or Iter race, age, sex, re

establishing the Commission will not make less ligion or status.

effective the role of the Commissioner for Com munity Relations in dealing with complaints of

I commend the Bill to the House.

racial discrimination. Thirdly, there have been Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) criticisms that the Human Rights Commission is adjourned.

being given inadequate powersthat it has no

machinery for enforcement of its findings. That

RACIAL DISCRIMINATION

criticism represents a misunderstanding of the

AMENDMENT BILL 1981

essential purpose of the Commission. The purpose of the Commission is to promote discussion and understanding of human rights in the community

Bill received from the Senate, and read a first time.

generally and to recommend to the Government and to Parliament changes in law or practice required to bring that law and practice into line with human rights as defined by the International

Second Reading Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs) (9. 1 1 )-1 move:

Covenant or other human rights instruments. For its job, the Commission has been given adequate

That the Bill be now read a second time.

powers to obtain papers, to call witnesses, to con This is a purely technical Bill, and is associated

duct hearings and to make reports. A survey of in with the Human Rights Commission BiII 1981 ,

stitutions with similar functions in Australia and which I have just introduced. This Bill will make

overseas shows that the Commission is as well, or the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1 980

better, endowed with powers than other bodies effective. That Act was expressed to come into

having similar functions.

operation when the Human Rights Commission

Act 1 980 was proclaimed, but is inoperative be

What the critics of the Commission suggest is cause the Human Rights Commission Bill 1980

that it should have some kind of court-like powers was not enacted.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill

24 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 857

The present Bill will amend the Racial Dis crimination Amendment Act 1 980 to apply to the 1981 , instead of the 1 980, Human Rights Commission Act. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
COMPLAINTS (AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE) BILL 1981 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 1 2 March, on motion by Mr Viner:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-Before the debate is resumed, I remind the House that it has been agreed that a general debate will be allowed on both this Bill and the Australian Federal Police Amendment Bill.
Mr FRY (Fraser) (9. l 3) -When the debate on the Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill was adjourned I was pointing out how important it is in any democratic society that citizens have the right and the means to seek redress for injus tices perpetrated by organs of the state, including the police. In Australia one such important organ is the Australian Federal Police and the Bill pro vides the public with the means of achieving a sat isfactory investigation of almost all types of griev ances linked with the Australian Federal Police. Most importantly, the Bill seeks to establish a mechanism that will not hamstring members of the Australian Federal Police in carrying out their vital role in the community. By strengthening the role of the Ombudsman, the Bill seeks to strike a sensible balance between providig the public with a guarantee that their grievances will be en ergetically and conscientiously investigated and, at the same time, screening the authorities from malicious and destructive complaints.
However, the Bill still has some minor gaps which could be plugged. I refer to the provision by which the Ombudsman has the power to hire police officers to investigate particular com plaints. This is set out fairlyclearly. It would be to the benefit of the legislation and would assist the Ombudsman if that power were extended to the hiring of former police officers. Although some people may be sceptical of the objectivity of a former officer, since there is provision for the hir ing of existing police officers in certain circumstances, there could be very good grounds for hir ing a former police officer if it were clear that a deep knowledge of police procedure would be a great advantage in ensuring a thorough investigation. I am sure that the Ombudsman's office would exercise that right with great discretion.

The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) may care to comment on that proposal.
My other concern with the Bill is the potential problem presented by the sub judice law. The Minister may care to comment on that matter also and indicate whether the Ombudsman could be inhibited in any way by such law. It could happen frequently that, the police having taken action against a citizen, as a result of which charges have been laid, the citizen may wish to lay a counter charge against the police. I can imagine a situation in which the Ombudsman may be inhibited in his investigation by the sub judice law. I believe he would use his discretion in handling such a situation. However, it could present a problem and I would like the Minister to make clear whether the Ombudsman would be inhibited by the sub judice law.
When many complaints are being made against the police it often becomes quite apparent that problems of morale exist within the police force itself. That has been my experience in the Australian Capital Territory. The recent amalga mation of the old Commonwealth Police and the Australian Capital Territory Police was charac terised by many teething problems. Over time many of these have been eliminated, but others re main. In that respect, I know that members of the Protective Services Division feel that they have been disadvantaged in the amalgamation, in regard to wages and salaries in particular. I believe they have a legitimate complaint. A recent deter mination, of August 1 980, although it covered people performing general police duties did not extend benefits to members of the Protective Ser vices Division, who lag considerably behind other officers in that respect. It is possible for police officers performing exactly the same work to be receiving significantly different rates of pay-the difference sometimes being as much as $2,000 a year. The present Minister has been sympathetic to complaints made by the Protective Services Division and I believe he will continue to examine these problems and overcome them as they arise. Many of the initial problems have been overcome, but the wages issue is still a matter of concern for quite a few officers.
Another problem is that there is still difficulty in obtaining suitable uniforms for some policemen and policewomen. I understand that there are no winter uniforms available for the women members of the Protective Services Division, and with winter coming up pretty quickly, the Government should apply itself to the problem and ensure that the morale of the people perform ing this important work is maintained. If there is

858 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill

good morale in the force fewer complaints are made against it by the public. The Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill 1981 is an important step forward for Australia. I hope that its spirit will be copied by all other States. I com mend the Bill to the House.
Mr DONALD CAMERON ( F adden) (9.20 ) -1 want to compliment the Australian Law Reform Commission, which, as all honour able members know, is headed by Mr Justice Michael Kirby, on the success it has had over the years. It could be said that the Commission has not won approval for everything it has recom mended. I suggest it has won more approval than the Opposition and the back bench of the Government side of this Parliament have managed to win in the last five, six or even ten years. Not every thing put forward by the Law Reform Commission commands my agreement, but it has had more than its share of success. The Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill is one example of its suggestions not only being taken seriously by the Government but also being acted upon and incorporated in the nation's legislation.
I am keen to speak on this Bill so that I can ex press the view that this legislation should be regarded as the ideal by all State police forces within the Commonwealth of Australia. As you are fully aware, Mr Deputy Speaker, I come from the State of Queensland. I think that was your home State before you shifted to New South Wales. Undoubtedly the Queensland Police Force, like the police force of every other State, is subjected to varying degrees of criticism from time to time. Some say that the Queensland Police Force is the worst in Australia for its appreciation of the liberties of the individual, and others say that from time to time police forces from other States take that prize.
r do not intend to enter into the question of which State has the best or the worst police force. However, I make the observation that an individ ual policeman is in some cases probably without full appreciation or knowledge of the power that he possesses. There lies in his hands a greater ability to destroy the lifestyle of an individual than perhaps lies in the hands of the vast majority of the members of this House and the Senate. An arrest involving the action of bricking, which all honourable members will realise is the falsifica tion of evidence, or even an arrest based on the personal reaction of a policeman to the behaviour of a person being apprehended can have an effect on a person's life which goes with him or her to the grave. Even the wrongful stopping of a person along the road for a suspected motor offence can have an effect on that person's life at a later stage.

I said earlier that I see this legislation as ideal, and it is my fervent wish that every State government, irrespective of its political persuasion, study the contents of this legislation, which should be an example to the police forces of the nation. I have long held the view that in a number of occu pations one simply cannot win. Those occu pations cannot be free of controversy, and do not always have the respect of the public. Politics is one of those arenas. The public will always be div ided. The lot of a policeman is not that much different. With politicians, a love-hate relation ship exists. The same applies to the police force. A person in trouble cannot ring a policeman quickly enough. A person free of trouble is likely to be either highly critical of police force actions or praiseworthy. The community divides on that subject. Not everybody loves the copper. I think in the Sydney Daily Telegraph today a cartoon showed policemen combing Kings Cross. Some one popping up through a manhole-that represented the underworld-said something to the effect: 'We are trying to keep undesirables out of this district. Why don't you beat off?'
In a nutshell, I am saying that a policeman will not always be given credit and be on top. However, one of the inescapable facts is that there are members of the police force who will let the team down. There are policemen who will put their lives at total risk. Many have paid the supreme sacrifice in their efforts to protect John Citizen or save him from one of the accidents about which we read from time to time. Many have laid down their lives. I think that overall the police forces of this country have given far more to the community than they have ever asked for in return. However, as with the proverbial barrel of apples, there is always a rotten one. This legislation gives the aggrieved John Citizen the opportunity to report an injustice that he believes has been perpetrated.
This legislation will leave open the way for involvement by the Ombudsman. It is opportune to reflect that the role of the Ombudsman since the creation of his position not so many years ago has been greatly enlarged. When a situation gets hot it seems to suit governments of all political per suasions to write a reference in legislation to the Ombudsman so he can settle the matter. The com bination of the involvement of the Ombudsman and the Internal Investigation Division of the Australian Federal Police will go a long way towards ensuring that where a rotten apple causes an overall poor reflection on a police force that rotten apple will have to answer to somebody at some time. One of the facts of life that I have come to appreciate as I make my way through my

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 859

three score years and ten is that 100 men can do something, but if one man does the wrong thing the public-including all members of this House-will spend more time talking about that one man who has done the wrong thing than about the 99 people who have spent their lives doing the right or good thing.
Mr Barry Jones-Mark Antony's oration said the same thing, but not so eloquently.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-I remember that the honourable member's name is Barry Jones, but I do not remember the electorate he rep resents. He is somewhat praiseworthy in his observations.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER ( Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-Order! All honourable members will ad dress the Chair and not each other.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Yes, Mr Deputy Speaker. I appreciate the interjection. Perhaps it is every 2,000-odd years that a man with similar wisdom passes through this world. As I was say ing, this legislation allows that rotten apple to be torn from the barrel. I believe the respect in which the Australian Federal Police Force is presently held will grow as a result of this legislation. I do not wish to repeat the aspects of the legislation which were outlined by the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) in his second reading speech and by other speakers, but I make a special appeal to all the State Ministers of police, including the Queensland Minister for Local Government, Main Roads and Police, the Honourable Russell Hinze, to examine this legislation closely to see what it offers and to balance in their minds the criticism which is directed to their police forces with the high respect in which the Australian Federal Police is held. In so doing they should remember that even though the Australian Federal Police Force is held on a very high pinnacle, this Parliament sees this legislation as being necessary. Indeed, I believe the Whitlam Government in 1 975 attempted to introduce simi lar legislation - and it was the eclipse of that reign which caused the legislation to go into limbo. Two or three years after that this Government recog nised that there was still a need for this legislation.
Whilst we can all allude to experiences that we have had with various police forces, I believe it is probably appropriate that I do not introduce matters of a personal nature. I conclude by simply reminding the various State governments that this legislation is setting a new standard and providing a new opportunity for the Australian people to report their grievances and to feel assured that their

grievances against the police will be fully investigated. That in itself not only protects the Australian public but also ensures the enshrinement of tht': high standard which so many of the nation's policemen endeavour to attain but which is so often eroded by the actions of one or two irresponsible individuals who should have never been given the power in the first place.

My final observation is one that I made earlier in my comments, namely, that so many policemen fail to realise that in their hands more than in those of me in this Parliament lies the power to destroy or to make so many individual lives in our community. Occasionally some of them truly fumble that ball which causes irreparable damage to be inflicted upon the lives of people who are basically as decent if not better than themselves.

Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (9.35)-I rise on

the Opposition side of the House to support this

legislation because I see it as an improvement. As

the last honourable member who spoke, the

honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald

Cameron) , said it is an improvement even on

much of the State legislation. J am not aware of all

the legislation in the States but I am aware of the

legislation in NSW and I must improvement on that. Let me

aqdumicikt ltyharetftrheisshi'tahne

memories Bill when

doefahlionngowuritahbltehemheamnbdelirnsgaos ftocowmhpalta,itnhtiss

against members of the Australian Federal Police

actually proposes could be done. The second read

ing speech of the Minister for Employment and

Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) reads:

A complaint by a member of the public as to police conduct may be made to a police officer or to the Ombudsman; where made to a police officer, the Ombudsman mllst be notified.

I think that is an important point. It further states:

Complaints as to practices and procedures of the force will ordinarily be investigated by the Ombudsman.

That refers to general practices and procedures and not specific complaints against an individual member of the Police Force. The speech continues:

Other complaints as to the police, that is to say, complaints as to conduct of individual officers, will be investigated in itially by the Internal Investigation Division previously mentioned.

That is, the Internal Investigation Division which is set up in the police force. The speech continues:

If the Ombudsman is dissatisfied with the report of the Investigatin Division on a complaint, he may ask for a further
investigation by the Investigation Division or he may carry out an investigation by his own office.

I think that is a very important point and I will refer to it again when I deal with the criticism of what the Ombudsmen in other States are doing. The speech continues:

860 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill

The Minister may, on his own initiative, establish a special inquiry into any matter relating to the Force.
. . . The Ombudsman may recommend that criminal or disciplinary charges should be brought against a member; if the Commissioner does not agree with the recommendation, the matter shall be referred to the Attorney-General, who shall decide what charges, if any, should be brought.
Criminal charges against a police officer will be brought in the ordinary courts; disciplinary charges originating from a complaint from a member of the public will be dealt with by the Federal Police Disciplinary Tribunal to be established under the legislation;
I will not go into details as to what the exact method of appeals and so on is, but I think basi cally the important point is that there is a method for investigating the Police Force. One of the great difficulties when one is dealing with com plaints against the Police Force is that there is no body in the community adequately capable of investigating complaints, apart from the Police Force itself. It is a problem that has arisen in Australia and it is a problem which, probably because we have some similarity with the United States of America and the United Kingdom, has repeatedly been portrayed in films and television programs dealing with policemen who have transgressed the law or people who have made al legations against those policemen. I think it is an important improvement that there is provision for the Ombudsman to investigate the problems. Let me quote from the report of the Ombudsman of NSW for the year ended 30 June 1 979. It is the latest printed report but not the latest report prepared. The Ombudsman, Mr Smithers, is a fairly conservative gentleman who is about to retire. He is certainly not an extremely radical person who tends to criticise the Police Force unnecessarily. In the report he states:
I have experienced some feelings of frustration in carrying out my functions under the Act as the powers of investigation are very different to those under the Ombudsman Act.
He is talking about investigating the police. He continues:
Under that Act I can obtain information from any public authority, inspect papers, obtain reports, enter premises and interview anyone and I can carry out a formal investigation if I think it warranted. None of these powers apply under the provisions of the Police Regulation (Allegations of Miscon duct) Act. My function under that Act is restricted. I receive complaints, making a decision as to whether there should be an investigation or endeavour to conciliate if it might be ap propriate. I then refer the complaint to the Commissioner for Investigation, I receive a report from him, I decide whether it is properly investigated, and when the investigation is completed then decide whether the complaint has been sus tained or not and report accordingly. Under this Act----
That is the New South Wales Act-

I do not investigate in the full sense, I merely act in a super visory capacity and finally report to the complaint on the re sult of the investigation.
I do not, of course, have to follow the police view as to the result of the investigation and in fact in some cases I have not agreed with the Commissioner's conclusion. However, it is somewhat difficult to find otherwise in most instances when there is only available the various statements made by the per sons involved to consider and that there is no opportunity to test the evidence.
That is the important point. The Ombudsman in New South Wales continued:
I have seen in a number of the reports and statements made by the police in the course of an investigation, a tendency to denigrate the complainant and attribute to him some sinister motive. This may be correct in some cases but in many the complaints appear to be genuine ones. Such comments are quite unnecessary and do not help in the carrying out of an impartial investigation.
To 30 June, 1 979,-
that is, for the financial year 1 978-79-
224 complaints were received.
By the way, it is interesting to note that in New South Wales in the following year-that is, in 1 980-the number of complaints against the police increased from 224 to 741 . The number of complaints more than trebled in that time. I do not know what the explanation for that is, whether people have become more aware of the ability of the Ombudsman to receive complaints or whether there has been an increase in the mis behaviour or alleged misbehaviour of police officers, but I assume it is the former. The Ombudsman in New South Wales went on to state:
As detailed earlier, the Ombudsman is limited in his powers under this Act, and has difficulties in making his own independent appraisal of the parties involved. There is no right to in terview the various parties, other than perhaps the complain ant, and any further investigation would be limited to determining whether the police investigation has been prop erly carried out.
Whilst I do not suggest for one moment that the Ombudsman should carry out a full scale investigation of these matters, I consider that at least there should be a right for him to investigate further if he considers that in the public interest he should do so coupled with the right to interview witnesses if he felt it to be necessary.
The Ombudsman in New South Wales went on to make a number of criticisms of the fact that a copy of the complaint in the name of the complainant is furnished to the policeman concerned and that people therefore are worried that there might be cases in which pressure is exerted on the complainant to withdraw his complaint. The Ombudsman in New South Wales stated:
In such event, if possible, I confirm this direct with the complainant but I do express concern that whilst I have no evidence that influence has been brought to bear on cO\llplain ants to withdraw, this would be possible.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill

24 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 861

The 1 980 report of the Ombudsman in New South Wales has not yet been published but it has been tabled in Parliament. In an article in the Sydney Morning Herld of 28 November 1 980 the Ombudsman is reported to have stated in his 1 980 report:
I consider that it is essential for the legislation to be amended so that the Ombudsman, where he is dissatisfied with the investigation performed by the police, has a right to investigate the matter for himself or direct that one of his
officers does so. . . . I think that is an important point. It has been embraced in sub-clause (3) of clause 27 of the Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill, which is before us, if my interpretation is correct. That sub-clause states:
For the purposes of an investigation under this Part, the Ombudsmanmay, by notice in writing, require-
(c) a member, or an officer of a Department or prescribed authority,-
I assume that includes a policeman or a member of the Australian Federal Police-
who is, in the opinion of the Ombudsman, able to give informationrelevant to the investigation;
to attend before him at a time and place specified in the notice and there to answer questions relevant to the investigation.
In other words, under that sub-clause the Ombudsman would be able to investigate the complaint. I am not one who holds a great brief for the police force, my having been associated with the New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties for many years. I was one of its foun dation members and for some 1 3 years I was a member of the executive of that Council. I cer tainly became aware, if I had not been aware before I joined the Council, of many shortcomings in the behaviour of police officers. Having said that, I am aware also that in many ways policemen have fewer civil liberties than do other members of the community. They are unable to refuse to answer questions when cross-examined by their superiors. I draw the attention of the House to sub-clause (6) of clause 7 and the whole of clause 50 of the Bill. Sub-clause (6) of clause 7 states:
Where a member of the Australian Federal Police is direc ted . . . to furnish information, produce a document or record or answer a question, the member is not excused from complying with the direction on the ground that-
(a) the furnishing of the information, the production of the document or record or the answering of the question(i) would be contrary to the public interest; or (ii) might make him liable to a penalty; or
(b) the information, the production of the document or record or the answer to the question might tend to
incriminate him . . . .

So, under that provision, a police officer would be in a worse position in terms of civil liberties than would be an ordinary member of the community who, as I understand the law, is not forced to answer questions for the purpose of incriminating himself. The Bill goes on to state that the answers to such questions are not admissible in evidence against such an officer in any civil or criminal pro ceedings other than proceedings for an offence in relation to a breach of discipline; in other words, if he refuses to answer such questions. Whilst that provides such an officer with some protection, I argue that it is not complete protection. For example, in a case of two police officers being charged with conspiring to obtain a bribe from a member of the public, under this provision those officers would be forced to answer questions which were incriminating and, whilst the answers could not be used in evidence against those officers, they could be used against their alleged co-conspirators. My interpretation of the proposed legislation might be wrong, but the way I interpret it people in fact will be forced to incriminate themselves in some way.
I am sufficiently a libertarian to believe that civil liberties should be extended also to members of the police force. As far as the police force is concerned, the important thing really is for people who misbehave to be cleaned out of it. That is not easily done. It is generally said-I suppose it is the sort of thing that politicians ought always to say that the vast majority of police officers are terribly honest, sincere, able and good people and it is just the odd person in the police force who misbe haves. I have not had extensive contact with members of the police force, but I have had sufficient contact with them. I have listened to them in courts and so on-to believe that many police officers, probably the majority, at some stage perjure themselves when giving evidence. [ am not suggesting that they perjure themselves in the sense of trying to frame an innocent person; they are completely convinced that the person concerned is guilty, or they might even have been present when the person concerned committed a certain act. But I believe that for the purpose of gaining a conviction before a magistrate or a jury they will perjure themselves, they will make up a story.
Let me quickly give an example of this. I refer to my first contact with the New South Wales police force. Many years ago, in the 1 940s, I was involved in a demonstration in connection with the Sydney University Labor Club of which I was the President at the time. It was not a big demonstration but the police expected that it would be.

862 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill

They expected the wharfies to join the demonstra tion. Therefore, members of Squad 2 1 , an aggress ive part of the police force at that time-possibly it still is-were dressed up in what they considered to be wharfies clothing. The wharfies did not turn up for the demonstration. Some 30 or 40 university students were there in Wynyard Park near the Dutch Consulate. The demonstration concerned the attempt at that time by the Netherlands to re-enter Indonesia. Members of No. 2 1 Division moved in on the students, roughed them up and arrested some 1 5 of them, including me. In my case, I took the number of a uniformed policeman who assaulted a student. The next thing that happened was that two detec tives in plain clothes arrested me and took me away. I was later charged with assaulting a police man, resisting arrest and using offensive language. These charges were not true in my case although there is no doubt that such charges were true in some cases. It is true that some people did use offensive language or did resist arrest.
It is interesting to note that in every case the police gave the same sort of evidence. Fifteen people were arrested and in every case the police man would get up in the box and say: 'I am a con stable in the New South Wales Police Force. I was proceeding along Margaret Street in a westerly direction at 3.40 p.m. I saw the defendant wildly gesticulating'. That is a lovely phrase. The police man would then say: 'I approached the defendant and asked him to desist. I said: "I am a constable in the New South Wales Police Force and I tell you to desist".' I notice that the Leader of the Op position (Mr Hayden) , who is an ex-member of a police force, is entering the chamber. In every case the defendant was supposed to have said: 'You are nothing but a so-and-so copper' and then another word referring to parts of the female geni talia. This evidence was given in 1 4 out of 1 5 cases. Even at that time. I was known for my rather strong anti-communist attitude. After much consideration I was charged with saying to a detective in plain clothes who looked like a wharf labourer: 'You are nothing but a so-and-so commo'. I was charged with using the same swear words but the word 'comma' was substituted for 'copper'.
Mr HAYDEN-That is imagination. Dr KLUGMAN-That is imagination and it was the height of imagination at that time in the New South Wales Police Force. I hope that things have improved. But the important point is that many people in New South Wales and many people all over the country know that the police have given false evidence against them in court.

These people ought to be able to take some action against the police.
This brings me to a question which has just recently been raised again, the tape recording and videotaping of alleged confessions. I can see problems associated with that. One of the problems that has been raised with me by a judge whom [ respect very much for his views on civil liberties is that normally a person going into the box can refuse to answer questions put to him. He can refuse to say anything. However, if a videotape is made of an interview at a police station appar ently that videotape could be submitted as evidence. That person may have made statements or admissions at the police station which he would not be p repared to make during cross examination in court. I think that is obviously one of the difficulties.
Many of us have heard stories about the police. Until the last election a very well known ex member of the New South Wales Police Force, the former honourable member for Hunter, was a member of this place. We have heard many stories about police. I think it is terribly important that this Federal legislation is made to work. It is also important that the States take note of the legislation and, i f it works, introduce similar legislation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-Order! I too must ask the honourable member to desist. His time has expired.
Dr EDWARDS (Berowra) (9.50)-- Unlike my honourable friend, the member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) , who just concluded his speech, I enter this debate as an unashamed advocate and sup porter of the Australian police forces. I would like to stress the words of the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) in introducing the Bill in the Senate. He said:
The Bill should be regarded as in no way a reflection on the Australian Federal Police or its members who, with the fewest possible exceptions, perform their difficult tasks with honesty, zeal and devotion to duty.
Any police force, and I think the Australian Fed eral Police in particular, has a difficult and exact ing task to perform which often involves personal danger. As Gilbert of Gilbert and Sullivan fame put it: 'A policeman's lot is not a happy one'. I re peat, the Minister said this Bill should in no way be regarded as a reflection on the force or on its high reputation for honesty, effectiveness and de votion to duty.
In the few remarks that I want to address to the House I wish to refer to the point that the honour able member for Prospect raised concerning the use of tapes. I would like to say something about

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill

24 March 1981 R EPRESENTATIVES 863

the whole issue of the adapting of police methods to modern technology and in particular to micro electronic technology based on the silicon chip. Perhaps this is particularly appropriate on the day when the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) has just announced a project by the National Semiconductor company loo king towards the setting up of a chip facility in the Australian Capital Territory. In this respect [ have in mind in particular the desirability of police officers using tape recorders, not video equip ment, in investigative and interrogation situations. In a spirited debate concerning the much malig ned police 'verbal' on Sydney radio only last Friday, Detective Sergeant Tony Lauer, the Presi dent of the New South Wales Police Association, finished his remarks by saying:
Then the only fair thing to do would be to provide each of the 9,000 policemen in New South Wales with a tape recorder.
With that his radio opponent, barrister Shaun Flood, heartily agreed.
In my view, that is bang on. I am certain that in the great majority of cases in the long run this would be to the benefit of police forces and not a hindrance although I am aware many police officers would initially see it as such. T am convin ced that a very significant contribution would be made to police credibility-this is the key thing-if in fact there were a tape recorder in every policeman's pocket. A small recorder would be the honest policeman's-and that means the overwhelming majority of policemen-best de fence in a complaint situation and in all other aspects of investigative and interrogative police work. Also it would be of great value in sub sequent court recordings.
The Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) in his second reading speech, and my colleague the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron) a few moments ago, ac knowledged the contribution that His Honour Mr Justice Michael Kirby's Law Reform Commission made to the proposals in the legislation. Only recently-at the time of the last week of sitting-in a speech to an international forum of forensic scientists, Mr Justice Kirby stressed the importance of taped evidence in courts. He spoke of sound recordings-and possibly video recordingsas potentially 'a tremendous weapon' in the fight against crime.
r am sure that is absolutely right. What I am stressing is that all along the line, from investigat ory discussions in the field, through interrogation, to the courts, it is the credibility of the police force which stands to gain. I am certain that police officers, understandably initially suspicious of

such gadgetry, particularly the pocket recorder [ have talked about, would come to see the gains all round in combating crime and in underwriting police credibility, and would come to see that these gains would far outweigh the disadvantages.
A report of a British royal commission in January this year, along with other sources, points to problems in this area-the honourable member for Prospect pointed to some of these. There are two main problems firstly, the cost, and, secondly, the area of authenticating tapes, of preventing the tampering with and editing of tapes. Those are problems which I am confident-indeed I know are not beyond the scope of modern micro electronic technology. In this matter, therefore, I believe the ball is in the court of police officers at all levels. I believe they should accept the aid of modern technology and gain the benefits in terms of the more effective combating of crime and-I cannot stress this too much-the gains in the area of police credibility which this technology offers.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) ( 1 0.2)-1 speak in support of both of these BiIls, the Australian Fed eral Police Amendment Bill 1981 and the Com plaints (Australian Federal Police) BiIl 198 1 . 1 believe they will provide a workable system whereby the rights of police officers and the public are protected. The appeals provisions for members of the public to make complaints against police provide several avenues by which action may be taken. The public may appeal either to the Ombudsman or to the Internal Investigation Div ision of the Australian Federal Police. Further provision is made for the responsible Minister to order a special investigation of a specific com plaint. The detailed procedures set down for the investigation of any complaint should ensure that all such matters are handled thoroughly and effec tively while at the same time preserving the rights of both the police and public. Where any com plaint is made to a police officer, the Ombudsman must be notified. Through this legislation the Ombudsman's role is strengthened and extended, and should result in improved safeguards for members of the public in their dealings with the police.
The rights of citizens are further improved under the provisions of clause 4 of the Bill for an Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act 1 979. Under this clause, members of the police force must at all times wear identification numbers on the front of their uniforms and there is provision for a penalty of $500 for failure to do so. The arrangements for the investigation of complaints by means of the Ombudsman, the Internal Investigation Division of the Australian Federal Police and ministerial action should

864 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill

ensure that a n effective mechanism has been established.
The rights of police officers have been enhanced by provision for the Commonwealth to assume vicarious liability for the actions of police in the performance of their duties. In this way, the Commonwealth, like all other employers, will be liable in respect of tort committed by an employee. In large measure the objectives of the Law Reform Commission report of 1 978 have been enacted, with minor variations resulting from the creation of the Australian Federal Police in 1 979. These measures will be welcomed by members of the police force as well as the general community.
This legislation is the culmination of a lengthy procedure for the establishment of the Australian Federal Police Force. We may recall that the proposal to establish a national police force was reac tivated following the bombing of the Hilton Hotel in Sydney on 1 3 February 1 978. Sir Robert Mark's inquiry into the organisation of police resources in the Commonwealth was an urgent matter and the report was tabled on 1 3 April 1 978. The Government acted swiftly to set up a task force to give effect to its in-principle decision to establish a single federal police force incorporat ing the existing Australian Capital Territory and Commonwealth police forces. The Australian Federal Police Bill 1 979 became law in June 1 979, and the force was established with Sir Colin Woods as commissioner.
The Bills under debate today will extend the effectiveness of our police force. They provide members of the general public with additional safeguards and rights of appeal in their dealings with the police. The rights of police officers are protected throughout the complaints procedure and are further strengthened under the provisions whereby Commonwealth liability is extended.
I want to refer briefly to the policewho operate in the Australian Capital Territory. They have extremely close relations with the community at all levels. The new amalgamated Australian Federal Police has continued the tradition of the previous forces and has provided the community with an excellent service. To give one example, on 28 February this year officers of the police force in the Australian Capital Territory held a fete on be half of the Multiple Sclerosis Association. This fete had wide support from members of the Australian Federal Police. I think this demonstrates their commitment to work very closely with the community. I have noticed that over the last couple of weeks members of the Australian Fed eral Police have participated in the Canberra Week festivities. There is a regular community

broadcast program on our local television station, Channel 7. These are just examples which demon strate the involvement of the police force in the Australian Capital Territory.
One point I think needs to be emphasised. Sec tion 69 of the Australian Federal Police Act 1 979 provides for the establishment of a police liaison advisory committee for the Australian Capital Territory. That committee has not been set up, despite the fact that the legislation became law in June 1 979. In March 1 980 the Minister for the Capital Territory sent a message to the House of Assembly regarding the proposed committee, seeking the Assembly's advice on the proposal to establish such a committee. The House of Assem bly called for the early establishment of the police liaison advisory committee. The proposed com mittee is to be chaired by a commissioner and will have five members of the House of Assembly on it. Its functions are set out by regulation. They are to encourage community awareness and understanding of such functions of the Australian Fed eral Police as relate to the provision of police services in the Australian Capital Territory and to advise the Minister on those. I ask the Attorney General (Senator Durack) to give urgent consideration to the establishment of this advisory committee. The recommendation for its establish ment is set out clearly in legislation and does need to be activated.
I must also provide a cautionary note in relation to the police services in the Australian Capital Territory. When the Australian Federal Police was established, the Government gave a commitment that the police officers of the Australian Capital Territory and the community would not be disadvantaged by the establishment of the Australian Federal Police. The Australian Capital Territory was to be the responsibility of a separate deputy commissioner with certain auton omy. However I understand that lately the officers of that division have been used on national matters. For example, I have had information that about 200 officers from various parts of Australia are being sent to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, but the big ma jority of those are from the Australian Capital Territory. I hope that if officers from the Terri tory are being used for these national functions, the Australian Capital Territory force will get compensation.
I conclude by recommending to the Minister that the police liaison advisory committee be set up immediately and that the Federal Government continue to retain the identity of an Australian Capital Territory community police force.

Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Bill 24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 865

Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.
AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 1 2 March, on motion by Mr Viner:
That the Bill be now read asecond time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.
AUSTRALIAN TOURIST COMMISSION AMENDMENT BILL 1 981 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 5 March, on motion by Mr Hodgman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) ( l 0. 1 1 ) -The Opposition does not intend to oppose the Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Bill. However, it intends to take the opportunity to point out the Government's deficiencies in the whole tourist industry. No one, least of all a rational party such as the Australian Labor Party-which might be of some interest to some honourable members opposite-could argue against the need to increase the number of com missioners from nine to 1 0 or to increase the number of Territory representatives from two to three. I am pleased to see that the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) is sitting at the table, because we consider that Canberra is one of the very important tourist destinations of Australia for many reasons which I need not underline at the moment. In fact, my colleague, the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) would like to speak in a fuller fashion later in the debate about the charms and delights of Canberra. The Opposition is quite delighted that the number of commissioners is being increased to accommodate the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory. Of course, a good deal of their revenue comes from tourism. Such

moves are indeed sensible. So too is the third aim of the Bill to bring the financial provisions of the Act into line with legislation covering comparable statutory authorities.
I hope that this Government will be looking towards redressing the very sexist imbalance of the Australian Tourist Commission. Given the comments of the Minister for the Capital Terri tory over the last couple of days on sexism issues, I am sure he would back me up in that regard. At present there are nine commissioners of whom only one is a female. Does that reflect community participation in tourism? Of course it does not. The Commission will be the poorer while this state ofaffairs exists.
I would like to come directly to the question of the economics of tourism. The most recent and comprehensive report is that put out by the Bureau of Industry Economics. It is fairly old because the latest figures that are available are those for 1 973-74. I would like to refer to the fourth re search report entitled The Economic Significance of Tourism in Australia in 1 979'. There is very little doubt that tourism impacts dramatically on our economy. In 1 973-74 tourism contributed 2.6 per cent of gross domestic product. It employed 2.4 per cent of the work force and accounted for 3.2 per cent of indirect tax revenue. These figures, which have been referred to before by the Minister for industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) place tourism at just about the level of the motor manufacturing industry andjust behind the mining industry. Obviously it is a very significant industry.
The Bureau of Industrial Economics further predicts that by 1 98 5 overseas tourist spending in Australia will rise from 20 per cent to 40 per cent of total tourism spending. That is the amount con tributed by overseas visitors. By 1 985 employment in the tourist industry will increase from 2.4 per cent to about 8 per cent of the work force and will add 60,000 new jobs. Its contribution to the gross domestic product will rise by 80 per cent to about 4.5 per cent of our GDP. Obviously, as is shown by those bald figures, tourism is a very significant industry.
A great deal of informed and uninformed de bate has taken place on the possible tourist boom. One thing that is certain is that it is one of the prime growth industries and, as such, we in Australia ought to be capitalising on the expan sion. Mr Deputy Speaker, the fact is-you will excuse the tourist pun-we are missing the boat quite dramatically. Including the payment for fares, the amount spent in a year by the millions of

866 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981 Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Bill

international travellers on tourist related indus perhaps would suffer. I think there is a great im

tries is estimated to be the staggering figure of balance between the $ 1Om net for tourism and the

$325,000m, or more than six times the annual hundreds of millions of dollars expended in many

value of Australia's gross domestic product. The manufacturing industries.

sad fact is that Australia currently extracts much less than one per cent of all international tourist expenditures-in fact about 0.3 per cent, a very tiny proportion of the tourist dollar. That is some thing that the Opposition deplores.

This Government is neglecting to foster an important industry. It lacks the imagination and the foresight necessary to capitalise on this growing industry, not only an industry which is economi cally significant but also one which gives so much

Even in the Pacific area, where I would have pleasure to the community. The whole leisure in

thought just as a matter of fact that Australia dustry is crying out for the type of leadership that

would be the leader, our share of tourism is drop an entrepreneurial government could give it, such

ping. In 1 970 our share of tourism in this market as was given it by the Labor Government from

was 4.7 per cent. By 1 978 it had dropped to 3.8 1 972 to 1 975. 1 give credit to the present Minister

per cent, showing just how rapidly we were losing for Industry and Commerce. At least he has some

out to the other Asian Pacific countries who are so understanding of the tourist industry and has

much more aware of tourism as an industry than taken some positive steps in recent times. The Bill

we are. The honourable member for Bowman we are now debating is part of the new-found

(Mr Jull) is going to join in this debate. I am sure interest in the tourism business, but it might well

that he shares the views of the Opposition and the be a case of too little too late. I ask the Govern

optimism that it would like to express in tourism ment where it was in the tourism area from 1 975

as a growth industry in the future.

to 1 978. Perhaps it might say it was on holidays. If

Mr Hodgman-He is a very good man.

it was on a holiday it was doing a lot better than many other people who could not afford a

Mr JOHN BROWN-He is a very good holiday.

member; I agree with the Minister. I do not know According to figures from the Organisation for what he is doing on the other side of the House. As Economic Co-operation and Development, a result of our failure to exploit the Pacific area, a growth in tourism in Australia fell last year. The

great many off-shore venues for conventions, sem increase in the number of overseas visitors arriv inars, workshops and other events have become a ing in Australia was 1 5.9 per cent compared with

great deal more attractive than Australia. Local a growth rate of 25.9 per cent in 1 979. Revenue

tour operators, convention venue entrepreneurs, growth from those tourists fell also. In 1 979 the

tourism support industries and the airlines them figure was 27.4 per cent compared with 19. 1 per

selves face a great loss of business because of this. cent last year. In the same OECD report there is a

For instance, seven nights with all travel and ac note of optimism that as the world economy im commodation expenses from Sydney cost less proves so will interest in travel pick up and so will

than $360 in Fiji and less than $300 in New we see a stronger growth rate in the tourist indus

Zealand. But five nights all-in cost about $400 in try. This is in line with predictions previously

Hobart and more than $700 in Darwin; about 30 quoted from the BIE report that by 1 985!overseas

per cent higher than, for example, Singapore. In the last Budget the Fraser Government
allocated to tourism less than $20m. It is interest ing to note that the Government gets back $ l Om of that $20m every 1 2 months in gateway tax, the

tourist present

s2p0epnedrincgenint toA4u0stpraelriacewntilol frtisoetaflrtoOmUrI,tshme

expenditure. Will we be geared up fon this up

surge of interest in travel-not just travel but the

whole spectrum of the leisure industrJ'? I

$ 10 tax it collects from people leaving Australia. In 1 972 under the Whitlam Government, in

So the net contribution to tourism in the last those years of Camelot in Australia, the people of

Budget was around the $ 10m mark. I mentioned Australia saw the advent of the first Federal Min

previously that this industry contributes as much istry for Tourism and Recreation under the direc

as the motor industry. When we look at the hun tion of the late Frank Stewart and with it the rec

dreds ofmillions ofdollars expended in promoting ognition that there was a vital role for government

that industry I wonder just what the Government in this area, In that time the role of the Australian

is doing in failing to promote tourism as an indus Tourist Commission was expanded and with it

try. I know that the argument is quite reasonable went a brief to step up the promotion of Australia

that without manufacturing industries we would overseas and on the domestic market through the

not have as many people in work; we would not program 'Australia-Land of things to see and

have people wanting holidays; and that tourism do', By 1 975 some $2.34m had been provided in

Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Bill 24 March 198 1 REPRESENTAT IVES 867

grants and loans for the development of man made attractions such as Sovereign Hill, Old Sydney Town, Lachlan Vintage Village and Port Arthur.
To the purist, these man-made attractions might seem gauche and almost artificial, but they are essential ingredients in an overall tourism strategy. Our heritage, the colonial frontier people that we were, is encapsulated in places such as Sovereign Hill and Old Sydney Town. These places give Australians of today as well as overseas visitors a dioramic view of our past. Of course it is preferable to visit these man-made at tractions in conjunction with the real thing. I might say that that is nowhere more evident than in my home town of Parramatta. In Parramatta some of Australia's real antiquity reposes. Within a radius of less than half a mile exists a cottage that was built by John Macarthur back in I 79 1 -it is the oldest house in Australia; it is still standing--
Mr HODGMAN-A very good Liberal, too. Mr JOHN BROWN-I do not know whether he was a Liberal. He was sent back to England for terrible behaviour. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The Chair is reluctant to interrupt the honourable member in his oratorical safari, but the Chair would be derelict in its duty if it did not observe that even though we are debating the Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Bill and honourable members may distance themselves from relevance, the honourable member is requiredto address his remarks to the Bill. Mr JOHN BROWN-Mr Deputy Speaker, my argument might seem to you to be rather tenu ous but we are talking about the promotion of tourism in Australia, which is what the Australian Tourist Commission is all about. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member is addressing his attention to the Bill. He may proceed. The Chair will hear him. Mr JOHN BROWN-I suggest to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, that when I spoke about man made and artificial types of tourist attractions, I was suggesting that in Parramatta we have a mar vellous collection of real antiquity which is some thing to which overseas visitors should be attracted. The reason I mentioned it was that I was hoping that this Government might be prepared to consider subsidising the development of the tourism industry within this part of Sydney. The three cottages to which I wish to refer are: Elizabeth Farm, which was a house built by John Macarthur and where in fact the Australian wool

industry started; within 100 yards of that is a house called Experiment Farm Cottage, which was built by James Ruse-that is where the Australian wheat industry commenced-and within a range of a quarter of a mile is Hambledon Cot tage, which was built by John Macarthur for his daughter, Elizabeth, in 1 8 1 5. Sitting in one small area is a marvellous collection of Australia's real antiquity, looking for development, looking for the injection of government funds to bring this lit tle group of cottages up to something that is really significant. I suggest that to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, in passing.
I now return to the man-made tourist facilities. We may rave all we like about the grandeur and beauty of Australia's natural attractions, but the fact is that very few international tourists seek them out. I suspect that the cost of domestic air fares, despite the Minister's protestations to the contrary, are the prime re:1son for the neglect of our far-flung natural attractions. I am supporled in my claim that such places as Ayers Rock and the Great Barrier Reef are neglected by overseas visitors by a Qantas Airways Ltd survey con ducted on departing foreign tourists in 1 973. This survey revealed, quite disappointingly, that Ayers Rock was visited by a mere 2 per cent and the Great Barrier Reef, which is in your home State, Mr Deputy Speaker, by only 4 per cent of such visitors. That is rather depressing when we consider that the Great Barrier Reef-I know that the honourable member for Bowman has spoken very eloquently on this in the past-is one of the really great attractions of this world. It is one of the wonders of the world. It is a really magnificent attraction for tourists and yet only 4 per cent of our international visitors are going there. Of course, the two-airline agreement which is to be updated will entrench this position probably for another 1 0 years unless the Minister in charge of tourism is able to convince his colleagues to do otherwise.
Whilst it is true to say that this situation might have improved since 1 973, it is still evident that most foreign tourists spend their time and money in the capital cities, with Sydney being the most visited. I could not really blame them for that. We are talking about the great cosmopolitan cities of the world, and of course Sydney is just slightly ahead of Canberra. Really, it is one of the most beautiful cities of the world. It is no wonder that overseas visitors go there in droves.
I suggest that by investing money in the likes of Sovereign Hill and Old Sydney Town we ensure some diversification of the tourist dollars---a dis tribution to regional areas, if you like. I imagine that the coalition government would favour such

868 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981 Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Bill

a strategy. Yet we have seen little, if any, support for the continuatio!l of the former Labor Government's initiatives.
Who would deny the employment opportunities created by these man-made, operations; that is, regional job opportunities, which is giving employment to people in country areas where unemployment is worst? Also to be considered is the ac commodation which springs up around these attractions and with it even more employment opportunities. Tourism and leisure activities filter right through the economic system. The BIE report's conclusions stated:
. . . tourism is already of considerable significance to the Australian economy with direct or indirect effects on almost every industry.
It has been stated that tourism or leisure, or the two together, make a contribution to all 1 09 industry groups in Australia. Any Australian Government ignores tourism at its peril. Given the evidence of all the economic indicators which show the value of tourism to the national economy, I put it to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, that there is an overwhelming argument for the re instatement of the Department of Tourism and Recreation. Certainly, after 1 98 3 when Labour is in office, we will be looking to do just that. By that time, the leisure industry will have grown to such proportions that it will not be able to be ignored, as seems to be presently the case.
Let me list some of the reasons why I believe that nothing less than a fully operational Federal department is capable of effectively harnessing the exciting potentials of the leisure industry. Quite naturally, my top priority is employment opportunity. Here, in an area of our lives which affects so many other industries, a Federal government has a unique opportunity to stimulate the economy and create employment simply by investing in a man-made attractions and other types oftourist facilities.
Leisure is a very labour intensive area. The BIE report pointed this out. Areas such as restaurants, hotels and clubs are very labour intensive. I point out to anybody who is interested that the reason New South Wales has the lowest unemployment rate in Australia is to a great extent because of the leisure industry which has built up there. Presently there are 33,000 permanent jobs provided in registered clubs in New South Wales with some 1 00,000 more temporary jobs. It is. very un likely that anybody wjll ever create a machine that will make beds or serve meals. That is the beauty of the leisure industry. It is totally labour intensive. While I am on the subject of labour and the leisure industry, I mention the oft-quoted la ment that penalty rates inhibit the industry. A

very excellent report was produced by Roger Kirby who was then the boss of Travelodge Australia Ltd. He pointed out that it is a total furphy to suggest that penalty rates are holding back the accommodation industry in Australia. It is just wrong. No less a person than Professor Brian Johns, the Director of the BIE, stated:
The report showed that the prices of tourist services in Australia are not significantly higher than in other developed countries.
Again I quote from a Press release issued by the Minister last year when he visited Tokyo. He cited figures from a world survey conducted by the economic research department of the Union Bank of Switzerland. He stated:
Our tourist industry can compete favourably with other alternative tourist destinations around the world . . . The general level of prices in Sydney was ranked lower than those in 33 of the 45 cities (surveyed).
The important and most significant part of that is that we can provide such competitive prices within a framework of a high living standard. There is absolutely no reason why Australian workers ought to lower their living standards in order to attract the tourist dollar. Consequently there is no good reason why penalty rates should be abandoned. They were hard won.
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Community Health Services-'-Age Pensions-Service Pensions
Decentralisation-Disabled Persons: Standard of Living
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! It being 1 0.30 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) ( 1 0.30)-For some time now we have been considerably concerned at the cuts in expenditure to the States for community health services that have been implemented by this Federal Government. The facts are that nationally in 1 975 $59.5m was made available to the States for the community health service. In 1 980-8 1 the same figure-$59.5m was allocated. Of course, when one allows for inflation this means in real terms that there was a cut of some 39 per cent. In New South Wales the relevant figures were $25.8m in 1 975 and $24.9m in 1 980-8 1-a cut in real terms of 41 per cent. In addition to these cuts which in effect have a double-banked effect, in 1 97 5 the Federal Government provided 90 per cent of expenditure under the formula and the States 10 per cent. In 1 977 this Fraser Federal Government cut the Commonwealth contribution to this formula to 7 5 per cent with 25 per cent to be provided by the

Adjournment

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 869

States. In 1 978 this Government went even further and made it a 50-50 arrangement or a dol lar for dollar basis. The effect of this financially with regard to New South Wales is: In 1 980-8 1 the Federal Government made $24.9m available and the State matched it with $24.9m-that is almost $50m. But the State had to put in $25m. In 1 975 to get the same $50m the Federal Government would have put in $45m and the State only $5m. Little wonder that New South Wales and other States are having great difficulty in maintaining their community health centre services.
I am very concerned at the effect of this in my electorate of Cunningham in the lllawarra area in New South Wales where we have 29 community health centres. In 1 976 there was a staff of ap proximately 200. This has been broken down to 1 67 by 1981 . In this financial year New South Wales is experiencing a $ 1 .2m shortfall. The New South Wales Health Commission has been forced to implement a policy of no replacements of vacancies as they occur through resignations or even annual leave, accouchement leave and so on. If the present rate of decrease continues the ser vice will be down to a staff of 1 40 by 1 July this year. These cuts, of course, have been in direct care services. The Press release put out by the combined unions employed in the community health centres states:
Thismeansthat many areas may be without services such as nursing care for the sick and dying, support of the mentally ill, physically and mentally handicapped and in some cases school medical and baby health services. In addition preventive pro grammes such as pre-natal and parenting education, coronary screening, breast self-examination, health education to schools and community, anti-smoking, special playgroups, relaxation, diabetic counselling etc. will be severely curtailed . . .
I want to draw the attention of the House to an article in the IUawarra Mercury of last week which is headlined: 'Cost cutting could add to suffering-Dying cancer patient may lose her aide'. The article states:
Mrs Barbara Walsh cried yesterday when she got the news her Community Health nurse might not be calling again after tomorrow.
Mrs Walsh, of Harry Graham Drive, Mt Kembla, has terminal cancer. She has been bedridden for 1 2 months.
Her doctor calls three or four time.s a day to. ease her suffering.
Mrs Walsh's nurse is one of 1 4 Health Com. mission relief employees whose job is on the line because of these Federal Government cuts in this vital service. r want to condemn at this stage the mendacious role played by the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume). I quote what the honourable member said from the Illawarra Mercury of last week. The headline states: 'Govt couldn't run a hivatory, says Baume'.

The article went on to say of the honourable member:
He said the Federal Government has increased its contribution to community health services this year by 2l per cent, . . . to $24.9 million.
All I can say is that his figures are as shonky as his language is intemperate and his claimed facts are mendacious. I have put on the record what has ac tually occurred since 1 975 on this matter. In New South Wales the cuts have been of the nature of 40 per cent under the Fraser Government. We re alise that this is part of a wider attack on resource allocations for community health services, public housing and so on. As the Treasury said, if the resources boom continues with a tremendous de mand on private infrastructure capital finances and also with a demand on the States to provide the infrastructure for this development we.can see many more of these cuts coming up in the next Budget. I appeal to the House by asking: Do we really want to kill and to terminate the community health centres that have done so much to improve the health of our people? I look to the day when the community health centres in Australia as set up by the Whitlam Labor Government in 1 974 and 1 975 can not only provide these preventative health services and these home nursing care services that I have talked about but also can actually employ doctors and specialists in them so that they cn provide a real alternative to fee-for-service medicine in this country.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) ( 10.35)-Often in debates in this House the problems of the aged pensioners of our community are neglected. r take the opportunity tonight to describe the debilitat ing experiences of one of my constituents, Mr Albert Bruce, in his successful attempt to avoid losing the fringe benefits of his age pension. In May 1980 Mr Bruce and his wife received a com bined United Kingdom age pension of $69 a week which was $ 1 more than the $68 they were allowed to earn before they lost their fringe benefits. Acting on the advice of the Department of Social Security, Mr Bruce immediately wrote to the United Kingdom pension authorities requesting that his total benefit be reduced to $68 a week. This was done by the United Kingdom Department of Health and Social Security. Following this desperate measure Mr Bruce was most upset to find that the Department of Social Security im mediately invoked a provision of the Social Ser vices Act which states that when the Director General is of the opinion that a pensioner has

870 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Adjournment

directly or indirectly deprived himself of income in order to qualify for or obtain a pension at a higher rate he may deem the amount involved to be income for a period of 1 2 months of the deprivation.
Mr Bruce then wrote back to the Department pointing out that his United Kingdom pension had been reduced. Honourable member's should note that this was a reduction of only $ 1 a week. His pension had been reduced in order that he would not lose what were to him his essential fringe benefits. The Department then informed him that as a result of income received from in vestments plus exchange rate fluctuations relating to the United Kingdom pension the combined income of him and his wife meant that their Australian pensions must be substantially reduced and they would lose their fringe benefits. Mr Bruce, after some considerable correspondence, was able to prove to the Department that he no longer received investment income but the De partment stood firm on the exchange rate requirements. After months of wearying disputation Mr Bruce then sought the help of the Ombudsman and his Federal member. Finally, in August the Department of Social Security admitted its errors and Mr and Mrs Bruce's pensions and their fringe benefits were restored.
My main purpose in bringing up this matter to night is in order that Mr Bruce's battle with an un yielding legislative machine should not be in vain. His case is not an isolated one. I have had a con siderable number of my constituents complain to me about the penalty provisions. Whilst it is true that the Department does not stand in a good light in the case I have mentioned I do not wish to blame public servants for bad government. Many thousands of age pensioners are suffering re ductions in pensions and losing their fringe benefits as a result of these penny-pinching penal provisions. I call on the Government to revoke these savage and inhumane means test provisions of the Social Services Act and to restore some measure of dignity and security to many Australians in their retirement years.
Mr FALCONER (Casey) ( 10.40)-1 wish to raise a case concerning an application by a con stituent of mine for a Service pension. The con stituent is Mr B. R. Smyth of lot l 30B Chum Creek Road, Toolangi, Victoria. Mr Smyth recently was denied a Service pension after attain ing 60 years of age. The rejection of his appli cation was based on the contention that his service did not satisfy the theatre of war pro visions required to qualify for such a pension. However, I point out that Mr Smyth had pre viously been given written confirmation by the

Department of Veterans' Affairs that he had the required theatre of war service. The chronology of events is this: Mr Smyth originally submitted a let ter dated 2 July 1 980-in fact he was personally interviewed-in which he inquired about his eligi bility. Several weeks later, on 22 August, a letter from the Department of Veterans' Affairs was sent to him confirming that he had the required theatre of war service to apply for a Service pen sion. I seek leave of the House to incorporate in Hansard the brief letter that was received from the Department of Veterans' Affairs on this subject.
Leave granted. The document read as follows-
22nd August 1 980 Mr B. R. Smyth 8 Eagle Rise Lower Templestowe, Vic. 3 1 07 Dear Mr Smyth
It has now been confirmed that you have the required Theatre of War service to make application for a service pen sion on attaining sixty years of age.
The relevant forms are enclosed for your benefit.
Yours sincerely T. M. STEPHENS Deputy Commissioner
Mr FALCONER-T thank the House. The let ter to Mr Smyth quite clearly states:
It has now been confirmed that you have the required Theatre of War service to make application for a Service pen sion on attaining sixty years of age.
The letter attached relevant forms which he was invited to send in for his benefit. On the basis of that advice Mr Smyth made arrangements to re tire from his work. In fact, that is the basis of the problem he now faces. He submitted the relevant application forms and subsequently received a let ter from the Department of Veterans' Affairs, dated 3 December, in which he was advised that his service did not satisfy the theatre of war pro visions. Apparently, at the specific time he was in an area of active service or an area of war operations that area was not deemed to be a theatre of war. On that technicality he was denied a Service pension. The problem is that he earlier had received written confirmation from the Department that he had the required theatre of war ser vice. He received that confirmation six or seven weeks after originally making inquiries. One would have thought that it would be a reasonable expectation that appropriate checks of records would be made in that time.
My constituent finds himself in a difficult position. He retired from his work on the basis of what he thought to be his eligibility for a Service

Adjournment

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 871

pension. That has now been denied to him because of subsequent examinations by the Department of Veterans' Affairs. I appreciate that every one involved in this matter has acted in good faith but I think that the Department, having made a mistake in writing to my constituent and confirm ing that he had the relevant theatre of war service, should now bear the consequences. The Government should in some way seek to make up to Mr Smyth what he would otherwise have qualified for in the form of a Service pension. I believe that in justice some way around this problem ought to be found so that Mr Smyth can gain the benefits of what he thought he would receive.
Mr MILDREN (Ballarat) ( l0.44) -Firstly, I commend my colleague the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) for having drawn the attention of the House to a very fine es tablishment in my electorate of Ballarat. It is a flourishing industry which has received consider able government support through the years and which is providing considerable employment opportunities for a large number of Ballarat people. It is also providing considerable enjoy ment and edification for hundreds of thousands of tourists per annum. I refer of course to Sovereign Hill. It is one of the shining stars in the business firmament of my electorate.
Since arriving in this House I have heard honourable gentlemen opposite-there are not many of them here this evening-protest the Government's sincere concern for the develop ment of industry in this country. Even during this last couple of weeks, the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has claimed that industry in this country is recovering and that all is looking well again. He claims a new optimism in industry. I hope that he has some concrete proposals to put to the 270 Ballarat workers who recently have been told that their factory is to be closed down.
At 3 p.m. on Thursday, 1 2 March, Escor Ltd, the holding company of Franklin caravans, an nounced to the Stock Exchange that it was closing Franklins. I am sure that the star-gazers in the Government who are mesmerised by the prospects of Alcoa of Australia Ltd and others of its ilk supposedly mushrooming throughout the land will shed few tears for the misfortunes of Franklins and even less for the hardship about to befall the workers of Franklin caravans and their anxious wives and families. The closing of this fac tory, once one of the leading manufacturers of caravans in this country, is a tragic blow to the many skilled and semi-skilled workers who have served the firm so well for so long. They are the victims of this Government's policy of oil parity pricing. Like the blow from a blunt instrument,

the Government's policy has forced the closure of the firm.
I would have given the Government some credit had it shown concrete signs of concern for industries in rural and provincial Australia. But there are really no grounds for praise, Mr Deputy Speaker. As you would know, sir, since the Lib eral Party issued in 1 974 its lofty policy on decen tralisation, the story has since been one of miser able neglect. I quote from page 52 of the Liberal Party platform policy paper of 1 974.
Mr John Brown .. You wouldn't believe it, would you?
Mr MILDREN-J will read from this paper for the honourable member as it is late in the night and I suppose it is time for bedtime stories. The paper states:
The well-being of every individual and of the community is directly influenced by the quality of the environment. A better environment can be achieved by a properly organised pro gramme of urban improvement and regional development in accordance with the following principles-
1 . Recognition of the necessity to bring about a better bal ance of population throughout Australia and within each State through vigorous encouragement of decen tralisation of industry and administration by financial incentives and other means.
2. Urban and regional development is a task of national importance requiring full co-operation between Commonwealth, State and local governments to achieve communities which have a good living environment and are economically efficient.
The paper further states as one of the goals:
(b) regional development through the creation and expan sion of viable decentralised centres ofpopulation.
So the paper goes on. What does it really mean in substantive support for rural and provincial Australia? In 1 975-76, decentralisation assistance was $7 1 .8m or $62.2m deflated by the implicit gross national deflator at 1 974-75 prices. This figure included money allocated to growth centres. By 1 978-79, the aggregate figure for de centralisation and growthcentreswas $35.3m.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) ( 10.49)-Tonight I thank the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) for pointing out in his usual calm, quiet, polite way that I had mentioned in a release printed in the Illawarra Mercury that the New South Wales Government could not run a lava tory, let alone a health service. There are many swimmers in the State of New South Wales, par ticularly off Sydney beaches, who would attest to that as a result of having swum in the polluted waters of the ocean resulting from the incom petence and inability of the New South Wales

872 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Adjournment

Government even to run an effective lavatory system in that State.
Mr West-I like your choice of language. That is the sort oflanguageGovernmentmembers use.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar) Order! The honourable member for Cunningham will remain silent and conceal his reading material.
Mr BAUME-The honourable member for Cunningham has already spoken at length. It would have been courteous of him to have given me the right of response. I do not seek to mislead the people of Illawarra the way the honourable member did tonight. He denied a simple fact which I presented-that this year there was no cut whatsoever in community health funding. On the contrary, there was a 21 per cent increase in federal funding for community health services in New South Wales.
Mr West-Compare it with the figures over the last five years, you fool.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Cunningham will withdraw.
Mr BAUME-He is a lout. Mr West-In deference to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, I withdraw but I suggest that he moder ate his language. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The -honourable member will resume his seat and ob serve decorum or the Chair will be required to deal with him. Before proceeding the honourable member for Macarthur will withdraw the reflec tion on the honourable member for Cunningham. Mr BAUME-I withdraw the reflection on the honourable member for Cunningham. The deliberate obstruction that is going on at the moment, in trying to prevent me from making this very strong point, is particularly offensive to me. 1 stress that there has been no cut this year in community health funding. The honourable member for Cunningham claimed that federal cuts in funding were responsible for reductions in service this year. That allegation is clearly untrue and dis graceful. The cuts this year that the honourable member allegesjust do not exist. There has been a 2 1 per cent increase. According to the New South Wales Government, which is of the same political persuasion as the honourable member for Cun ningham, the funding was sufficient at least to maintain the community health service in New South Wales this year. That is what that Government said when the Commonwealth granted a 2 1 per cent increase, but now the honourable

member, by some magnificent intellectual capacity which he displays with such regularity to this House, says that because total funding this year is lower than it was in 1 976 the sackings in the Illawarra health region are directly the responsibility of the Federal Government. That is arrant nonsense and he knows it because there has been a 2 1 per cent increase in funding.
The simple fact is that the New South Wales Health Commission has overspent that increase in regions other than the Illawarra region. Overspending has not occurred in the Illawarra region. Because it is the whipping boy of the State Government it has to carry the overspending in the rest of New South Wales. It always comes last in health spending under the Labor Government of New South Wales. It has to carry the can for overspending in the rest of the State. For the honourable member for Cunningham to pretend that there has been a dark, mischievous plot in the Federal Government's making an alleged cut is arrant nonsense and deception. The honourable member is deliberately seeking to deceive the people of Illawarra about the fact that the New South Wales Government has proved itself in competent to handle a 21 per cent rise in funding this year for community health service. That kind of incompetence and deception are typical of the Labor Party, and certainly of the honourable member.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) ( 10.54) -1 would like to speak to the House tonight about two young men called Robert and Bill. Robert lost a leg when he was 14 years old. Since then he has had an artificial leg which he finds very difficult to wear because it gives him a very bad back, as do crutches also. After he lost his leg he could not settle back in school so, quite unqualified at 1 5 years, he took a job. The only one he could get was driving a fork lift machine, but when there was not enough work for the machine he had to go down into the store room and help out there. He could not cope with the lifting involved so he had to leave that position. As he could not get another job he applied for the dole. He got a job with a tow truck company. This involved long hours, poor pay and offered no overtime for weekend work. He stayed asJong as he could put up with it but then had to leave and go back on the dole again. He was on the dole for two years but not once during that time was a job offered to him by the Commonwealth Employment Service. His mother's mother took ill in Queanbeyan. The son drove her up to visit and then went back again. On the day he was away from home a field officer called to see him. The husband rang and explained where he was, what he was doing and

Adjournment

24 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 873

when he would be home but Robert was taken off the dole. It took a hell of a long fight to get him back on it again. He was taken off the dole because he was out of Victoria for whatever reason or however briefly. It took six weeks to get Robert back on the dole. Three years ago he applied for an invalid pension. He was knocked back. He has not worked now for over I 2 months. In the last seven years of misery and pain he has worked for about 1 2 months.
Every time he applied for a job he was told that they needed someone who was not handicapped. Robert is not handicapped; he is disabled by the loss of his leg. His handicap is given to him by us-by the society in which he lives. We applied for the pension for him again but he was knocked back again. As his mother points out: 'Because he has lost a leg he does not count as a human being any more'. She also said that Robert had reached the stage where he goes down with his dole form and feels as though he is a criminal. Robert is 2 1 . He probably has another 50-odd years in front of him. Is he supposed to live on the dole forever or are we prepared to train Robert and all the Roberts of this world in the work with which they can cope bearing in mind their disabilities? It makes a mockery of the words in the second reading speech earlier tonight by the Minister for Em ployment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner). The Minister brought out the fact that everyone no matter how disabled he is-physically or mentally-is entitled to a decent standard of living, to social security and to the right to live and not just to exist. Robert and all the other Roberts will be interested to hear the Minister's plans for their rights to become as self-reliant as possible. His plans are for them to have economic and social security and to have a chance for a decent level of living because they are certainly not get ting these things in today's climate. It is not enough for the Minister to prate about human rights. A government is supposed to do something concrete to help Robert.
I shall leave Robert for the moment. Let us have a look at the position of Bill who is 26. He has a long history of mental instability but in between being institutionalised has fought very hard to work. He is an intelligent man and has held sev eral responsible jobs. However, when the stress becomes heavy he loses his job, goes back on the dole and goes back into hospital. Some time ago he tried to commit suicide but simply succeeded in causing himself dreadful damage. It will be years before he is physically fit. Because he was on the dole at the time he gets the sickness benefit only at the rate of unemployment benefit. He needs complete care. He has to be lifted out of bed. He has to

be taken to the physiotherapist twice a week. He needs a bedroom, which he has not got. His pen sioner mother has a small one-bedroom cottage. Why cannot he go on to the invalid pension at least until he is fit? Why do we have to so humili ate and harass those who are least able to bear the burdens? What about Bill's future? What about his human rights? I challenge this Government to take up the responsibility of ensuring that those who are disabled have the right to live and not just to exist; make the Minister's words of today come true. The Government should give them the right to economic security and a decent standard of living. This Government is known for its great and humane rhetoric and is condemned for its failure to follow through with action.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (1 0.59) In the minute remaining in this adjournment debate I would like to underline the points I made in my speech earlier this evening by quoting from the Budget figures which dramatise the increase in spending on community health services this year. The table on page 90 of the Budget Speech sets out that the allocation for community health services this year is up $ 1 2. 1 m from $55.3m to $67.5m which is a rise of 22 per cent for Australia. For New South Wales there is an increase from $20Am to $24.9m, a rise of $4.5m on a matching grant basis which represents a 2 1 per cent increase. The new total of $24.9m, as I said earlier, was regarded by the New South Wales Government as sufficient at least to maintain the standard last year for community health services in that State. Any cuts in services that have taken place subsequently are entirely due to the inability of the New South Wales Government to keep within its 2 1 per cent higher budget.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar) Order! It being 1 1 p.m., the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 2. 1 5 p.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 1 1 p.m.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 24 March 198 1 , pursuant to statute:
Air Navigation Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 198 1 , No. 32.
Customs Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 198 1 , No. 29. Customs Act and Commerce (Trade Descriptions) ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 198 1 , No. 30. Defence Act-Determinations1981No. 3-Post Allowance. No. 4-Sea-going Allowance. No. 5-Flight Duties Allowance. No. 6-Outfit Allowance For Aide-de-Camp to the
Governor General. No. 7-High Electricity Charges Allowance.

874 REPRESENTATIVES 24 March 1981

Papers

No. 8-Airconditioning Allowance. Defence Amendment Act-Interim Determination
Statutory Rules 198 1 , No. 33. Postal Services Act-Australian Postal Commission-By
laws-Postal-I98 I-Amendment No. 2. Public Service Act-Appointment-Department of Social
Security-W. Fordham. Regulations-StatutoryRules 198 1 , No. 34, 35.
Public Service Arbitration ActAustralian Conciliation and Arbitration
Commission-Determinations-1980C. No. 482-Northern Territory Teachers' Federation
(decision and order). C. No. 849-Northern Territory Teachers' Fderation
(decision and order). C. Nos. 937 and 966-Northern Territory Teachers'
Federation and A.C.T. Teachers' Federation (decision and order). Public Service Arbitrator-Determinations accompanied by statements regarding possible inconsistency with the law1 98 1 No. 3 1-Australiim Workers' Union.t No. 32-Australian Government Lawyers Association. No. 33-Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association,
Commonwealth Public Service.t No. 34-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights
Union and others. No. 35-Electrical Trades Union of Australia. No. 36-Australian Public Service Artisans' Association
and others. Nos. 37 and 38-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Ship
wrights Union and others. No. 39-Association ofProfessional Engineers, Australia.t No. 40-Amalamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights
Union and others.t No. 4 1-Customs OfficersAssociation of Australia, Fourth
Division. No. 42-Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and Joiners
of Australia and another.t No. 43-Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of
Australasia. No. 44-Association of Professional Engineers, Australia. No. 45-Commonwealth Works Supervisors Association. No. 46-Association of Professional Engineers, Australia
and others. No. 47-Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of
Australasia. No. 48-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth
Division Officers). No. 49-Association of Architects, Engineers, Surveyors
and Draughtsmen of Australia and others.
No. 50-Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association Commonwealth Public Service and others.
No. 5 1-Australian Building Construction Employees' and Builders Labourers' Federation.t
No. 52-Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association, Commonwealth Public Service.t
No. 53-Association ofProfessional Engineers, Australia. No. 54-Federated Miscellaneous Workers Union of
Australia-t No. 55-Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of
Australasia.

No. 56-Professional Officers' Association, Australian Public Service.
No. 57-Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and Joiners
of Australia. No. 58-Australian Public Service Artisans' Association. No. 59-Association of Professional Engineers, Australia
and others.
No. 60-Australian Broadcasting Commission Senior Officers' Association and another.
No. 6 1-Australian Theatrical and Amusement Employees Association.
Nos. 62 to 64-Australian Journalists Association. No. 65-Professional Musicians Union of Australia. No. 66-Federated Liquor and Allied Industries Em
ployees Union of Australia.
No. 67-Australian Broadcasting Commission Staff Association.
No. 68-Transport Workers' Union of Australia.t No. 69-Printing and Kindred Industries Union.
No. 70-Transport Workers' Union of Australia.t No. 71-Actors' and Announcers' Equity Association of
Australia. No. 72-Royal Australian Nursing Federation.t No. 73-Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Tech
nical Employees. No. 74-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights
Union and others. No. 75-Australian Journalists Association.
No. 76-Australian Broadcasting Commission Staff Association.
No. 77-Federated Storemen and Packers Union of Australia.
No. 78-Federated Storemen and Packers Union of Australia and another.
No. 79-Federated Storemen and Packers Union of Australia.
No. 80-Shop Distributive and Allied Employees Association.
No. 8 1-Australian Public Service Artisans' Association. No. 82-Federated Miscellaneous Workers Union of
Australia.
No. 83-Merchant Service Guild of Australia. No. 84-Federated Iron workers' Association of Australia.
No. 85-Transport Workers' Union of Australia. No. 86-Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association,
Commonwealth Public Service. No. 87-TransportWorkers'Union of Australia. No. 88-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights
Union and others.t
No. 89-Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Tech nical Employees.
(t Not accompanied by statement) Remuneration Tribunals Act-Remuneration Tribunal Determination1 9 8 1 -82-Director of the Museum of Australia and holders ofpublic offices on other bodies.
Science and Industry Research Act-Regulation StatutoryRules 198 1 , No. 3!.
Seat of Government (Administration) Act Regulations-1 98 I-No. 6 (Medical Practitioners Regis tration Ordinance).
Superannuation Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 198 1 ,
No. 36, 37, 38.


