House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 170, 1989 Thursday, 30 November 1989
THIRTY-FIFTH PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-FIFTH PARLIAMENT
FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD
Governor General
His Excellency the Honourable William George Hayden, Companion of the Order of Australia, Governor General of the Commonwealth of Australia,
House of Representatives Officeholders (to 29 August 1989)
Speaker-The Honourable Joan Child Chairman of Committees-Mr Leo Boyce McLeay Deputy Chairmen of Committees-Mr John Neil Andrew, Mr Cecil Allen Blanchard, Mr David Bruce Cowan, Mrs Elaine Elizabeth Darling, Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Mr Ronald Frederick Edwards, Mr John Barry Mildren, Mr Percival Clarence Millar, Mr John Graham Mountford and Mr Allan Charles Rocher Leader of the House-The Honourable Kim Christian Beazley Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Manager of Opposition Business-The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
House of Representatives Party Leaders Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Robert James Lee Hawke, AC
Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The,Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
Leader of the National Party of Australia-Mr Charles William Blunt Deputy Leader of the National Party of Australia-Mr Bruce Lloyd

THIRTY-FIFTH PARLIAMENT
FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD
Governor General
His Excellency the Honourable William George Hayden, Companion of the Order of Australia, Governor General of the Commonwealth of Australia.
House of Representatives Officeholders (From 29 August 1989)
Speaker-The Honourable Leo Boyce McLeay Chairman of Committees-Mr Ronald Frederick Edwards Deputy Chairmen of Committees-Mr John Neil Andrew, Mr Cecil Allen Blanchard,
Mr David Bruce Cowan, Mrs Elaine Elizabeth Darling, Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie,
Mr Colin Hollis, Mr John Barry Mildren, Mr Percival Clarence Millar, Mr John Graham Mountford and Mr Allan Charles Rocher
Leader of the House-The Honourable Kim Chdstian Beazley Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Manager of Opposition Business-The Honourable Wll11ace Clyde Fife
House of Representatives Party Leaders Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Robert James Lee Hawke, AC
Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost B~wen ' Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable Wallace-Clyde Fife
Leader of the National Party of Australia-Mr Charles William Blunt Deputy Leader of the National Party of Australia-Mr Bruce Lloyd

Members of the House of Representatives

Member

Division

Party

Adermann, Hon. Albert Fairfax, Qld

NP

Evan

Aldred, Kenneth James Bruce, Vic.

LP

Anderson, John Duncan Gwydir, NSW NP

Andrew, John Neil

Wakefield, SA LI>

Baldwin, Peter Jeremy

Sydney, NSW ALP

Beale, Julian Howard

Deakin, Vic.

LP

Beazley, Hon. Kim

Swan, WA

ALP

Christian

Beddall, David Peter

Rankin, Qld

ALP

Bilney, Gordon Neil

Kingston, SA

ALP

Blanchard, Cecil Allen

Moore, WA

ALP

Blewett, Hon. Neal

Bonython, SA ALP

Blunt, Charles William

Richmond, NSW NP

Bowen, Hon. Lionel Frost Kingsford-Smith, ALP

NSW

Braithwaite, Raymond AllenDawson, Qld

NP

Brown, Hon. John Joseph Parramatta, NSW ALP

Brown, lion. Neil Anthony, Menzies, Vic.

LP

QC

Brown, Hon. Robert James Charlton, NSW

Brumby, John Mansfield Bendigo, Vic.

Burr, Maxwell Arthur

Lyons, Tas.

Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Mitchell, NSW

Cameron, Donald Milner Moreton, Qld

Cameron, Ewen ColinIndi, Vic.

Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Maranoa, Qld

Campbell, Graeme

Kalgoorlie, WA

Carlton, Hon. James Joseph Mackellar, NSW

Charles, David Ernest

Isaacs, Vic.

Charlesworth, Dr Richard Perth, WA

Ian, AM

Child, Hon. JOlin

Henty, Vic.

Chynoweth, Robert Leslie Dunkley, Vic.

Cleeland, Peter Robert

McEwen, Vic.

Cobb, Michael Roy

Parkes, NSW

Cohen, Hon. Barry

Robertson, NSW

Connolly, David Miles

Bradfield, NSW

Courtice, Brian William Hinkler, Qld

Cowan, David Bruce

Lyne, NSW

Crawford, Mary Catherine Forde, Qld

Cross, Manfred Douglas Brisbane, Qld

Cunningham, Barry Thomas McMillan, Vic.

Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Lilley, Qld

Dawkins, Hon. John Sydney Fremantle, WA

Dobie, Hon. James Donald Cook, NSW

Mathieson

Downer, Alexander John Mayo, SA

Gosse

Dubois, Stephen Cairfield St George, NSW

Duffy:Hon. Michael John Holt, Vic.

Duncan, Hon. Peter

Makin, SA

Edwards, Dr Harold

Berowra, NSW

Raymond

Edwards, Ronald Frederick Stirling, WA

Fatin, Wendy Frances

Brand, WA

Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Hume, NSW

Fischer, Timothy Andrew Farrer, NSW

Fisher, Peter Stanley

Mallee, Vic.

Fitzgibbon, Eric John

Hunter, NSW

ALP ALP LP LP LP LP NP ALP LP ALP ALP
ALP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP
ALP ALP ALP LP
ALP ALP LP NP NP ALP

Member

Division

Party

Free, Ross Vincent

Lindsay, NSW ALP

Gayler, John

Leichhardt, Qld ALP

Gear, George

Canning, WA

ALP

Good luck, Bruce John

Franklin,. Tas. LP

Gorman, Russell Neville . Greenway, NSW ALP

Joseph

Grace, Edward Laurence Fowler, NSW

ALP

Griffiths, Alan Gordon

Maribyrnong, Vic. ALP

Hall, Raymond Steele

Boothby, SA

LP

Halverson, Robert George, Casey, Vic.

LP

OBE

Hand, Hon. Gerard Leslie Melbourne, Vic. ALP

Harvey, Elizabeth Robyn Hawker, SA

ALP

Hawke, Hon. Robert James Wills, Vic.

ALP

Lee, AC

. Hawker, David Peter

Wannon, Vic. LP

Maxwell

Hewson, Dr John Robert Wentworth, NSW LP

Hicks, Noel Jeffrey

Riverina-Darling, NP

NSW

Holding, Hon. Allan Clyde Melbourne Ports, ALP

Vic.

Hollis, Colin

Throsby, NSW ALP

Howard, Hon. John

Bennelong, NSW LP

Winston

Howe, Hon. Brian Leslie . Batman, Vic.

ALP

Humphreys, Hon. Benjamin Griffith, Qld

ALP

Charles

Jakobsen, Carolyn Anne Cowan, WA

ALP

Jenkins, Henry Alfred

Scullin, Vic.

ALP

Johns, Gary Thomas

,Petrie, Qld

ALP

Jones, Hon. Barry Owen Lalor, Vic.

ALP

JUll' David Francis

Fadden, Qld

LP

Katter, Hon. Robert

Kennedy, Qld NP

Cummin

Keating, Hon. Paul John Blaxland, NSW ALP

Kelly, Hon. Roslyn Joan Canberra, ACT ALP

Kent, Lewis

Hotham, Vic.

ALP

Kerin, Hon. John Charles Werriwa, NSW ALP

Kerr, Duncan James

Denison, Tas. ALP

Klugman, Dr Richard

Prospect, NSW ALP

Emanuel

Lamb, Anthony Hamilton Streeton, Vic.

ALP

Langmore, John Vance Fraser, ACT

ALP

Lavarch, Michael Hugh Fisher, Qld

ALP

Lee, Michael John

Dobell, NSW

ALP

Lindsay, Eamon John, RFD Herbert, Qld

ALP

Lloyd, Bruce

Murray, Vic.

NP

McArthur, Fergus Stewart Corangamite, Vic. LP

McGauran, Peter John

Gippsland, Vic. NP

McHugh, Jeannette

Phillip, NSW

ALP

MacKellar, Hon. Michael Warringah, NSW LP

John Randal

McLeay, Hon. Leo Boyce Grayndler, NSW ALP

Macphee, Hon. Ian

Goldstein, Vic. LP

Malcolm

Martin, Stephen Paul

Macarthur, NSW ALP

Mildren, John Barry

Ballarat, Vic.

ALP

Miles, Christopher Gordon Braddon, Tas. LP

Millar, Percival Clarence Wide Bay, Qld NP

Members of the House of Representatives-continued

Member

Division

Party

Milton, Peter

La Trobe, Vic. ALP

Moore, Hon. John Colinton Ryan, Qld

LP

Morris, Allan Agapitos Newcastle, NSW ALP

Morris, Hon. Peter

Shortland, NSW ALP

Frederick

Mountford, John Graham Banks, NSW

ALP

Nehl, Garry Barr

Cowper, NSW NP

O'Keefe, Neil Patrick

Burke, Vic.

ALP

O'Neil, Lloyd Reginald Grey,SA

ALP

Terrence

Peacock, Hon. Andrew

Kooyong, Vic. LP

Sharp

Porter, James Robert

Barker, SA

LP

Pratt, Michael Philip

Adelaide, SA

LP

Price, Leo Roger Spurway Chifley, NSW ALP

Prosser, Geoffrey Daniel Forrest, WA

LP

Punch, Hon. Gary Francis Barton, NSW

ALP

Reith, Peter Keaston

Flinders, Vic.

LP

Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Page, NSW

NP

Rocher, Allan Charles

Curtin, WA

LP

Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Dundas, NSW LP

Saunderson, John

Aston, Vic.

ALP

Sawford, Rodney Weston Port Adelaide, SA ALP

Scholes, Hon. Gordon Glen Corio, Vic.

ALP

Denton

Sciacca, Con

Bowman, Qld ALP

Scott, John Lyden

Hindmarsh, SA ALP

Scott, Leslie James

Oxley, Qld

ALP

Shack, Peter Donald

Tangney, WA LP

Sharp, John Randall

Gilmore, NSW NP.

Member

Division

Party

Shipton, Roger Francis Higgins, Vic.

LP

Simmons, Hon. David

Calare, NSW

ALP

William

Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian

New England, NP

McCahon

NSW

Smith, Warwick Leslie

Bass, Tas.

LP

Snow, James Henry

Eden-Monaro, ALP

NSW

Snowdon, Warren Edward Northern Territory ALP

Spender, John Michael, QC North Sydney, LP

NSW

Staples, Hon. Peter Richard Jagajaga, Vic. . ALP

Sullivan, Kathryn Jean Moncrieff, Qld . LP

Taylor, William Leonar<i Groom, Qld

LP

Theophanous, Dr Andrew Calwell, Vic.

ALP

Charles

Tickner, Robert Edward Hughes, NSW ALP

Tuckey, Charles Wilson O'Connor, WA LP

Uren, Hon. Thomas

R\!id, NSW

ALP

Webster, Alasdair Pai.ne ~acquarie, NSW LP

West, Hon. Stewart John Cunningham, NSWALP

White, Peter Nicholson McPherson, Qld LP

Duckett, MC

Willis, Hon. Ralph

Gellibrand, Vic. ALP

Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Sturt, SA

LP

Cameron

Woods, Dr Robert Leslie Lowe, NSW

LP

Wooldridge, Dr Michael Chisholm, Vic. LP

Richard Lewis

Wright, Keith Webb

Capricomia,. Qld ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Third Hawke Ministry

*Prime Minister

The Honourable Robert James Lee Hawke, AC

*Deputy Prime Minister, Attorney-General The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

and Minister Assisting the Prime Minis-

ter for Commonwealth-State Relations

*Leader of the Government in the Senate Senator the Honourable John Norman Button

and Minister for Industry, Technology

and Commerce

*Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senator the Honourable Gareth John Evans,

Senate and Minister for Foreign Affairs

QC

and Trade

*Treasurer

The Honourable Paul John Keating

*Minister for Finance

Senator the Honourable Peter Alexander Walsh

*Minister for Transport and CommunicaThe Honourable Ralph Willis

tions

*Minister for Employment, Education and The Honourable John Sydney Dawkins

Training

*Minister for Defence, Vice-President of the The Honourable Kim Christian' Beazley

Executive Council and Leader of the

House

*Minister for Primary Industries and EnThe Honourable John Charles Kerin

ergy

*Minister for Social Security and Minister The Honourable Brian Leslie Howe

Assisting the Prime Minister for Social

Justice

*Minister for Administrative Services

The Honourable Stewart John West

*Minister for Community Services and The Honourable Neal Blewett

Health

*Minister for Trade Negotiations, Minister The Honourable Michael John Duffy

Assisting the Minister for Industry,

Technology and Commerce and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Primary In-

dustries and Energy

*Minister for .the Arts, Sport, the EnvironSenator the Honourable Graham Frederick

ment, Tourism and Territories

Richardson

*Minister for Industrial Relations, Minister The Honourable Peter Frederick Morris

Assisting the Prime Minister for Public

Service Matters and Minister Assisting

the Treasurer

*Minister for Immigration, Local GovernSenator the Honourable Robert Francis Ray

ment and Ethnic Affairs, Minister Assist-

ing the Prime Minister for Multicultural

Affairs and Manager of Government

Business in the Senate

Minister for the Arts, Tourism and TerriThe Honourable Allan Clyde Holding

tories, Minister Assisting the Prime Min-

ister and Minister Assisting the Minister

for Immigration, Local Government and

Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science, Customs and Small The Honourable Barry Owen Jones

Business and Minister Assisting the

Prime Minister for Science and Tech-

nology

Minister for Justice

Senator the Honourable Michael Carter Tate

Minister for Veterans' Affairs

The Honourable Benjamin Charles Hum-

phreys

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs

The Honourable Gerard Leslie Hand

Minister for Housing and Aged Care

The Honourable Peter Richard Staples

Minister for Employment and Education The Honourable Peter Duncan

Services

Minister for Telecommunications and The Honourable Roslyn Joan Kelly

Aviation Support

Minister for Local Government and MinSenator the Honourable Margaret Reynolds

ister Assisting the Prime Minister for the

Status of Women

Minister for Resources

Senator the Honourable Peter Francis Salmon

Cook

Minister for Consumer Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer for Prices
Minister for Land Transport and Shipping Support
Minister for Defence Science and Personnel
*Minister in the Cabinet

Senator the Honourable Nick Bolkus The Honourable Robert James Brown The Honourable David William Simmons

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION

FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD

STANDING COMMITTEES ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Snowdon (Chairman), Mr Blanchard, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Campbell (to
26 October 1989), Mr Cross, Mr Gayler, Mr Jenkins (from 26 October 1989), Mr Miles, Mr Smith, Mr Tickner, Mr Webster. COMMUNITY AFFAIRS-Mr O'Keefe (Chairman), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Cadman, Mr Connolly, Mr Dubois, Ms Fatin, Mrs Harvey, Mr Johns, Mr Katter, Ms McHugh, Mr Sciacca, Mr Wilson. EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION AND TRAINING-Mr Brumby (Chairman), Mr Cowan, Ms Fatin, Mr Gear, Mrs Jakobsen, Mr Johns, Mr Miles (from 24 October 1989), Mr Price, Mr Prosser, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Sawford, Mrs Sullivan (to 24 October 1989), Dr Woods. ENVIRONMENT, RECREATION AND THE ARTS-Mr Milton (Chairman), Mr Burr, Dr Charlesworth, Mr Chynoweth, Mr Dobie, Mr Ronald Edwards, Mr Peter Fisher, Mr Jenkins, Mr Lamb, Ms McHugh, Mr Sharp, Mr Webster. FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION-Mr Martin (Chairman), Mr Braithwaite, Dr Charlesworth, Mr Cobb, Mr Courtice, Mr Ronald Edwards, Mr Gear, Mr Jenkins, Mr McArthur, Mr Saunderson, Mr Shipton, Mr Wilson. HOUSE-The Speaker, Mr Dobie, Mr Good luck, Mr Hollis, Mr Katter, Mr Martin, Mr Price. INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY-Mr Beddall (Chairman), Mr Baldwin, Mr Cunningham, Mr Grace, Mr Hawker, Mr Lloyd, Mr McArthur, Mr Mildren, Mr Allan Morris, Mr Nehl, Dr Theophanous, Dr Wooldridge. LEGAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS-Mr Griffiths (Chairman), Mr Adermann (to 16 August 1989), Mr Anderson (from 16 August 1989), Mr Cadman, Mr Charles, Mr Cleeland, Mr Kerr, Mr McGauran, Mr Moore (to 17 August 1989), Mr Scholes, Mr Smith, Mr Spender (from 17 August 1989), Mr Tickner, Mr Wright. LIBRARY-The Speaker, Mr Campbell (from 27 November 1989), Mr Cross, Mrs Jakobsen (to 27 November 1989), Mr Pratt, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Smith, Mr Wright. MEMBERS' INTERESTS-Dr Klugman (Chairman), Mr Adermann, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Kent, Mr Lindsay, Mr Ruddock, Mr John Scott. PRIVILEGES-Mr Gear (Chairman), the Leader of the House or his nominee, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr N. A. Brown, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Campbell, Mr Cleeland, Mr Kerr, Mr Millar, Mr Reith, Mr Tickner. PROCEDURE-Mr Mountford (Chairman), Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Ronald Edwards, Mr Lamb, Mr Lindsay, Mr Millar, Mr Scholes. SELECTION COMMITTEE-Mr Leo McLeay (Chairman to 6 September 1989), Mr Ronald Edwards (Chairman from 6 September 1989), Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Downer, Mr Hicks, Mr Lamb, Mr MacKellar, Mr Millar, Mr Mountford, Mr Snowdon, Mr Tickner. TRANSPORT, COMMUNICATIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE-Mr Saunderson (Chairman), Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Downer, Mr Tim Fischer, Mr Gorman, Mr Hollis, Mr Jull, Mr Langmore, Mr O'Neil, Mr Price, Mr John Scott, Mr Sharp.

JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES AUSTRALIAN SECURITY INTELLIGENCE ORGANIZATION-Senator Morris (Presiding Member), Mr
Cross, Mr McGauran, Mr Milton, Mr Wright, Senator Durack, Senator Macklin. BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-The Speaker (Chairman), The President, Mr
Ronald Edwards, Mrs Harvey, Mr Hicks, Mr Jull, Mr John Scott, Senator Alston (from 30 October 1989), Senator Michael Baume (to 30 October 1989), Senator Childs. NATIONAL CRIME AUTHORITY-Mr Cleeland (Chairman), Mr Dubois, Mr McGauran, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Spender, Senator Alston, Senator Cooney, Senator Hill, Senator Jones, Senator Macklin. PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Tickner (Chairman), Mr Aldred, Mr Fitzgibbon, Mr Langmore, Mr Martin, Mr Nehl, Mr Prosser, Mr Scholes, Mr Les Scott, Dr Woods, Senator Bishop, Senator Giles, Senator McKiernan, Senator McMullan, Senator Watson. PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Hollis (Chairman), Mr Gear, Mr Halverson, Mr Millar, Mr Mountford, Mr Taylor, Senator Burns, Senator Devereux, Senator Sheil.
JOINT COMMITTEES AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Mr Langmore (Chairman), Mr Anderson, Mr Good luck, Mr
Scholes, Mr Uren, Senator Aulich, Senator Hill (to 6 September 1989), Senator Lewis (from 6 September 1989), Senator McMullan, Senator Reid, Senator Sanders. FOREIGN AFFAIRS, DEFENCE AND TRADE-Mr Bilney (Chairman), Mr Baldwin, Mr Campbell, Mr Charles, Mr Cross, Mr Halverson, Mr Hicks, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Langmore, Mr Lindsay, Mr MacKellar, Mr Nehl, Mr Ruddock, Mr John Scott, Mr Shipton, Dr Theophanous, Senator Childs, Senator Crichton-Browne, Senator Hill, Senator Jones, Senator MacGibbon, Senator McLean, Senator Maguire, Senator Morris, Senator Schacht, Senator Tambling, Senator Vallentine.

JOINT STANDING COMMITTEES

ELECTORAL MATTERS-Mr Lee (Chairman), Mr Cobb, Mrs Jakobsen (to 30 October 1989), Mr

Lavarch, Mr Snowdon (from 30 Octobe'r 1989), Dr Wooldridge, Senator Beahan, Senator Harradine,

Senator Jenkins, Senator Schacht, Senator Short. NEW PARLIAMENT HOUSE-The President and the Speaker

(Joint

Chairmen),

the

Minister

for

Admin-

istrative Services, Mr Dobie, Mr Dubois, Mr Tim Fischer, Mr Lee, Mr MacKellar, Senator Michael

Baume, Senator Colston, Senator Devlin, Senator MacGibbon (to 31 October 1989), Senator Reid,

Senator Schacht, Senator Vanstone (from 31 Oc r 1989).

X

JOINT SELECT COMMITTEES

CORPORATIONS LEGISLATION-Mr Ronald Edwards (Chairman), Mr Peter Fisher, Mr Kerr, Mr

Lindsay, Mr Smith, Senator Alston, Senator Cooney, Senator Macklin, Senator McMullan, Senator

Short. MIGRATION REGULATIONS-Dr Theophanous (Chairman), Dr Charlesworth, Mr Cobb, Mr Ruddock,

Mr Sciacca, Mrs Sullivan, Senator Collins, Senator Jenkins, Senator McKiernan, Senator Teague. TENURE OF ApPOINTEES TO COMMONWEALTH TRIBUNALS-Dr Klugman (Chairman), Mr Bitney,

Dr Harry Edwards, Mr Nehl, Mr John Scott; Senator Aulich, Senator Cooney, Senator Dunn,

Senator Durack.

.

VIDEO MATERIAL-Dr.Klugman (Chairman), Mr Adermann, Mr Charles, Ms Crawford, Mrs Jakobsen,

Mr Jull, Senator Collins, Senator Harradine, Senator Jenkins, Senator Walters, Senator Zakharov.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE Clerk of the Senate-H. Evans Deputy Clerk of the Senate-A. Lynch Clerk-Assistant (Table)-I. Vander Wyk Clerk-Assistant (Management)-C. J. C. Elliot Clerk-Assistant (Procedure)-P. O'Keeffe Clerk-Assistant (Committees)-M. Cornwell Usher of the Black Rod-R. Alison HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin First Clerk Assistant-I. C. Harris Clerk Assistant (Procedure)-B. C. Wright Clerk Assistant (Committees)-I. W. Pender Clerk Assistant (Table)-I. C. Cochran Clerk Assistant (Administration)-M. W. Salkeld Serjeant-at-Arms-B. L. Simons PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF Principal Parliamentary Reporter-I. M. Campbell Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-B. A. Harris Leader of Staff (Committees)-K. Shearwood Leader of Staff (House of Representatives)-M. A. R. McGregor Leader of Staff (Senate)-K. B. Ryder
LIBRARY Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE Secretary-M. W. Bolton

Petitions

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3195

Thursday, 30 NOl'ember 1989

Mr SPEAKER (Hon.Leo McLeay) took

the chair at 10 a.m., and read prayers.

"

,

, PETITIONS

The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:

One World Declaration
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled.
We, the undersigned citizens, wish to record our support for the One World Declaration:
to focus Australian aid, and policies at the World Bank, IMF and Asian Development Bank, on fighting poverty and protecting the environment;
to restore Australian aid to 0.5% of GNP, cut military spending' by I% and work for a fairer international economic system;
to promote human rights through aid and a code of conduct for companies.
Your petitioners humbly pray that the House of Representatives call upon the Government to implement the above.
by Mr Aldred (from 29 citizens), Mr N. A. Brown (from 21 citizens), Mr Chynoweth (from 28 citizens), Mrs Darling (from 26 citizens), Mr Duffy (from 137 citizens), Dr Harry Edwards (from 166 citizens), Mr Gorman (from 203 citizens), Mrs Harvey (from 559 citizens), Mr Hawker (from 127 citizens), Dr Hewson (from 383 citizens), Mr Holding (from 44 citizens), Mr Jull (from 10 citizens), Mr Kent (from 147 citizens), Mr McGauran (from eight citizens), Mr MacKellar (from 350 citizens), Mr Macphee (from 85 citizens), Mr Porter (from 29 citizens), Mr Pratt (from 354 citizens), Mr Shack (from 53 citizens) and Mr Sharp (from 125 citizens).

Medicare: Abortions
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That every abortion kills an unborn human baby.
That the right to life of all humans is' the most fundamental and essential of all human rights.
That the Government's first duty is to protect this right to life.,

That the most defenceless and threatened lives are those of unborn babies for whom the Government is duty bound to take extra steps to protect.
That in 1987/88 taxpayers funds through Medicare provided medical benefits for 61,879 abortions totalling $6.4 million.
That in the same year Commonwealth grants to the States indirectly financed the deliberate killing of thousands of other unborn babies in State public hospitals.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Parliament will carry out its duty to protect the right to life of Australian babies by ceasing to fund abortions through Medicare, restricting grants to the States and by all other means at its disposal.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Anderson (from 12 citizens), Mr Robert Brown (from 22 citizens), Mr Cadman (from 109 citizens), Mr Cunningham (from 23 citizens), Mrs Darling (from 16 citizens), Mr Dobie (from 25 citizens), Mr Fife (from 44 citizens), Mr Kerr (from 23 citizens), Ms McHugh (from 607 citizens), Mr Porter (from 24 citizens), Mr Shack (from 44 citizens), Mr Spender (from 51 citizens) and Mr Webster (from 256 citizens).
Community Pharmacists
To the Honourable the Speaker and tnembers of the House of Representatives in Parliament.
The petition of certain citizens of Australia draws to the attention of the House:
That the proposed reduction in pharmacists' remuneration under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme will be such as to produce severe cutbacks in the provision of services by community pharmacy in this country and will therefore cause unnecessary hardship and anguish to the sick and aged of this country.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House
takes all action within its power to bring about significant and decisive consultation between the Government and the pharmacists of Australia so as to produce a resolution of the matter which maintains both high quality health care for the country and equity for the community pharmacists of Australia.
by Mr Anderson (from 85 citizens), Mr Beddall (from 141 citizens), Mr Donald Cameron (from 321 citizens), Mr Cross (from 137 citizens), Mrs Darling (from 20 citizens), Mr Jull (from 20 citizens), Mr Katter (from 267 citizens) and Mr Ian Robinson (from 56 citizens).

3196 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Petitions

International Earth Repair Action Decade
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled; this petition of concerned Australian citizens respectfully points ou t that:
our total global environment is rapidly deteriorating and important natural resources vital to human life and livelihood such as ozone, trees, soil and the purity of air and water are being depleted at an increasing and alarming rate;
there is an urgent need to educate all people in conservation skills and the responsible use and maintenance of natural resources;
the United Nations Association of Australia (the people's arm of the UN), has proclaimed an Australian ERA (Earth Repair Action) Decade from 1988;
Earth Repair Action will unite people, communities, religions and nations in the productive and peaceful purpose of greening and repairing our Earth for a healthier and safer future. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Parliament will:
Propose that a world-wide ERA (Earth Repair Action) Decade begin on World Environment Day, 5 June 1990 with FIERY, the First International Earth Repair Year, and that this be proclaimed by the United Nations General Assembly. This ten-year plan will ignite the spirit of local and global unification and cooperation to stop the current destruction and start repairing our Earth by:
growing billions of trees to replace forests lost and to replenish the atmosphere;
hygienic composting of all presently wasted organic materials into humus to revitalise soils;
establishing globally, permanent, self-sustaining, organic agriculture to end world hunger;
reallocating annually 10 per cent of all military budgets, personnel and resources, within each nation, to fund and support the ERA Decade. (See overleaf for Draft Resolution to the United Nations) And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Blanchard (from 12 citizens), Mr Duffy (from 12 citizens), Mr Kerr (from 12 citizens), Mr Millar (from 44 citizens), Mr Nehl (from 48 citizens), Mr Pratt (from 23 citizens), Mr Snowdon (from 186 citizens) and Mr Wilson (from 22 citizens).
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament:
The petition of citizens of Australia draws to the attention of the .House that they:

1. Deplore the changes to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme 'Authority only' drug list and the delisting of frequently prescribed drugs without ensuring that alternative products are readily available.
2. Deplore the proposed restructuring of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme which will reduce both remuneration to pharmacists and the standard of professional service and counselling provided by pharmacists to ensure that patients follow appropriate medication usage regimes.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the House do everything in its power to call on the Minister for Housing and Aged Care and the Minister for Community Services and Health to reconsider the restructuring of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.
by Mr Cadman (from 195 citizens), Mr Cross (from 200 citizens), Dr Harry Edwards (from 98 citizens), Mr Steele Hall (from 45 citizens), Mr Nehl (from 50 citizens), Dr Woods (from 5,065 citizens) and Mr Webster (from 22 citizens).
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament.
The petition of citizens of Australia draws to the attention of the House that they:
Deplore the proposed changes to the method of pharmaceutical benefits remuneration which will affect the quality of service and counselling the pharmacist will be abk to provide to the public and which could force the closure of up to 30 per cent of Australia's pharmacies. Your petitioners therefore pray that the House do everything in its power to call on the Minister for Housing and Aged Care and the Minister for Community Services and Health to reconsider these proposed changes to the method of pharmaceutical benefits remuneration.
by Mr Anderson (from 668 citizens).
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
To the honourable the speaker and the members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament:
The petition of citizens of Australia draws to the attention of the House that they:
1. Deplore the changes to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme 'Authority only' drug list and the delisting of frequently prescribed drugs without ensuring that alternative products are readily available and suitable.
2. Deplore the proposed restructuring of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme which will reduce the remuneration to pharmacists resulting in the closing of approximately 1,000 pharmacies and jeopardising the jobs of 35,000 staff and thereby reducing the standard of professional

Petitions

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3197

service and counselling provided by pharmacists.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the House do everything in its power to call on the Minister for Housing and Aged Care and the Minister for Community Services and Health to reconsider the restructuring of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.
by Mr Cadman (from 60 citizens) and Dr Woods (from 113 citizens).
National Flag
To the honourable the speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth that whereas:
I. They are completely satisfied with the design of the existing Australian National Flag.
2. They are aware it properly reflects the immutable characteristics of Australia, namely:
(a) The Union Jack, itself the creation of three Christian Crosses, represents the Nation's historical origin and the source of its language and law;
(b) The Southern Cross on an azure blue background signifying its geographical location on this planet Earth;
(c) The large star depicting the advent of Federation in 190 I.
3. They know the Flag has been a source of inspiration to generations of Australians in peace and war.
4. They recall that millions of native-born Australians and newcomers to these shores from other parts of the world have become united under its proud symbolism.
5. They are certain that any change to the Flag will produce division in the Australian community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that your honourable House will:
Propose and pass a motion that "the existing Australian National Flag be changed only with the approval of the Nation as expressed in a Referendum".
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr N. A. Brown (from 25 citizens), Mrs Child (from /59 citizens), Mr Halverson (from 21 citizens), Mr Peacock (from 101 citizens), Mr Reith (from 22 citizens) and Mr Shipton (from 43 citizens).
Capital Gains Tax
To the honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament.
The petition of certain citizens of Australia, draws to the attention of the House the proposal of the Opposition Parties to remove the tax on capital gains

which has operated in Australia since September 1985, and points out to the House that such a proposal would:
l. mean a windfall gain of billions of dollars to Australia's richest people
2. disadvantage the 99.2 per cent of Australians who pay no capital gains tax
3. be in complete disregard of the desires of the people of Australia that capital gains be subject to tax
4. restore the tax avoidance industry to the prominence it enjoyed under the former Liberal/ National Party government
5. severely harm productive investment in Australia.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the House maintain its support for the Government's capital gains tax.
by Mr Robert Brown (from 673 citizens), Mr Gear (from 550 citizens), Mr Humphreys (from 22 citizens) and Mr Johns (from 189 citizens).
Abortion Funding Abolition Bill
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled.
The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That every abortion kills an unborn human baby.
That the right to life of all humans is the most fundamental and essential of all human rights.
That in 1988/89 the Federal Government paid $6.9 million from taxpayers' funds for 64,788 abortions under Medicare Items 6469 and 274/275 alone.
That in the same year Federal Government grants to the States indirectly financed the deliberate killing of thousands of other unborn babies in State Public Hospitals.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Parliament will carry out its duty to protect the right to life of Australian babies by supporting the Abortion Funding Abolition Bill 1989 and by all other means at its disposal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Ewen Cameron (from 83 citizens), Mr Kent (from 389 citizens) and Mr Peacock (from 164 citizens).
Forests of South-Eastern Australia
To the Honourable Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament.
The petition of certain citizens of Australia draws to the attention of this House that we are concerned at the threats caused by logging to the integrity and

3198 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Petitions

continued existence of what remains of the forests

of south eastern Australia.

.

Your petitioners therefore request the House to direct the Prime Minister and his government

(I) to phase out woodchipping for export;

(2) not to renew a long-term export licence to Harris Daishowa;

(3) to ensure that sensitive environmental areas, and specifically the proposed national park and wilderness areas of Coolangubra, Cathcart, Egan Peaks and the Tantawangalo catchment, are protected and excluded from the proposed woodchip export licence; and

(4) to promote ecologically sound and sustainable forestry practices including:

re-afforestation and plantation of native hardwoods on already cleared land to reduce pressure on native forests; and

minimisation of wasteful uses of forest products.

by Mr Duffy (from 156 citizens), Mr Holding (from 11 citizens). and Ms McHugh (from 7,434 citizens).

Companies: Taxable Income To the Honourable Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament.
The petition of certain citizens of Australia draws to the attention of the House that the changes to Company Tax Collection requiring companies to assess their taxable income within 15 days of the end of a financial year are impracticable, punitive and will lead to increased debt in many cases.
Your petitioners therefore request that this legislation is not passed, or if passed is not given Royal assent.
by Mr Beale (from 168 citizens) and Mr Lamb (from three citizens).

Medicare Abortions
The Honourable Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament. This petition of the below citizens of Australia draws to the attention of the House of Representatives that we support the continued cover for all abortions on the Medicare schedule. We oppose any attempt to restrict access to the rebate under Medicare.
Medicare cannot pretend to be a universal health care system without providing a rebate for a termination of pregnancy. Those who will be hardest hit by proposals to restrict access to items 6469, 274 and 275 on the Meilicare schedule are poorer and disadvantaged women who will not be able to meet the cost of a non-subsidised abortion.

Your petitioners humbly pray and request that the House will vote against any attempt to restrict access to abortion or any abortion-related items on the Medicare schedule.
by Mrs Darling (from 20 citizens) and Ms McHugh (from 420 citizens).
Monetary Policy
Petition to the Honourable Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament:
The petition of certain citizens of Australia points out to the House the dramatic effect high interest rates are having on homebuyers, farmers and other small businesses.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the House will move that the Federal Government, in implementing its economic policies, will change its current emphasis on monetary policy, with its resulting high interest rates, in favour of a balanced approach which includes:
(i) lower Federal Government expenditure,
(ii) micro-economic restructuring, and
(iii) reform of the taxation system away from its dependence on income tax receipts, as recommended by the NSW Farmers' Association and the National Farmers' Federation.
by Mr Tim Fischer (from six citizens) and Dr Hewson (from 42,546 citizens) ..
Road Funding
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament.
The Petition of certain Citizens of Australia draws to the attention of the House, the inability of State and Local Government, to meet satisfactory road maintenance and construction programmes due to chronically inadequate Federal Government Funding.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the House direct the Federal Government of Australia to increase the allocation of Federal Fuel Excise to roads by 10 cents per litre, from existing taxes. Further that the allocation be adjusted proportionally, to the rise and fall of fuel prices, and that the increased allocation continue from the year 1990 to 2000 inclusive.
by Mr Anderson (from 73 citizens).
EI Salvador To the Honourable the Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament:
The petition of certain citizens of Australia, draws attention of the House to the worsening situation in the civil war in El Salvador. The murder of six leading Jesuit priests on 15 November and the death of many hundreds of civilians through aerial bombardments highlight a situation

Petitions

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3199

in which the Government is carrying out and encouraging'terror tactics to suppress opposition.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the House will call on the Australian Government to:
(1) Issue a public statement condemning the atrocities committed by the Arena Government of El Salvador and the death squads associated with the Salvadoran army.
(2) Convey a message of condemnation directly to the Arena Government and break diplomatic ties until meaningful negotiations commence to end the civil war in EI Salvador.
(3) Call on the US Government to end its massive aid to the Arena Government until meaningful negotiations are held.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Baldwin (from 600 citizens).
Austudy Grants
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled in the Parliament.
The petition of certain citizens of Australia draws to the attention of the House that students of nongovernment funded training establishments are ineligible for Austudy grants in spite of the service provided to improve the skills and employment opportunities for young people.
Your petitioners therefore request the House to pass legislation to approve Austudy payments to students of establishments that are registered with the State Training Board.
by Mr Beale (from 570 citizens).
Child Pornography: X-Rated Videos
The Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of Australia assembled. We, the undersigned, being appalled that the Government has set no penalty for importing unclassified child pornography, do ask that Parliament urgently legislate to:
make the importation of child pornography, and the possession of child pornography, and all tapes and goods banned by Customs, to be a criminal offence, with deterrent penalties, and
close the Customs barriers to pornography in the ACT, in respect of X-rated videos (and ER), and end the shameful Canberra trade, and the Mafia connections.
Because 98 per cent of Australians in other States have banned X-rated videos.
Because the trade is still flourishing, and its availability escalates sexual crime.
Because importers of child pornography face only a fine for lying.

Because child pornography peddlers are safe if they cross a border, and cannot be extradited for a summary offence.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you will give this matter earnest consideration.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Beale (from two citizens).
Disposable Nappies
To the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
This petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully draws the House's attention to the presence of the cancer-causing waste product, Dioxin, in babies' disposable nappies which can be in direct skin contact for 2 years.
Your petitioners respectfully request the House to urge the Government to
(I) initiate independent research into the precise levels of Dioxin in disposable nappies.
(2) Legislate to force nappy manufacturers to remove Dioxin from these products.
(3) Place pressure on nappy manufacturers to produce these products from unbleached paper, therefore eliminating a significant cause of the presence of Dioxin.
(4) Place pressure on nappy manufacturers to produce bio-degradable disposable nappies which will be less harmful to the environment.
by Mr Blanchard (from 281 citizens).
Breast Cancer Screening
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament:
The petition of certain citizens of Australia draws to the attention of the House that-
about I in 16 Australian women develop breast cancer,' that 1 in 45 risk dying from it, and that about 2,200 actually die from it each year;
while diagnostic mammograms requiring a doctor's referral are covered by Medicare, breast scanning mammograms for women who have no symptoms, or who are in a low risk category, are not.
Your petitioners therefore ask the House to request the Government to implement a breast cancer screening program which is covered by Medicare, and whi~h enables all women throughout Australia to readily access facilities for routine and expert mammographic examinations, in conjunction with a suitable education program offering specialist professional information and advice in regard to this important women's health issue.
by Dr Blewett (from 21 citizens).

3200 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Petitions

Breast Cancer Screening
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament, this petition of certain citizens of Australia draws to the attention of the House that:
about I in 16 Australian women develop breast cancer, that I in 45 risk dying from it, and that about 2200 actually die from it each year;
while diagnostic mammograms requiring a doctor's referral are covered by Medicare, breast scanning mammograms for women who have no symptoms, or who are in a low risk category, are not.
Your petitioners therefore ask that the House require the Government to:
implement a breast cancer screening program which is covered by Medicare;
make such a programme for routine and expert mammographic examination readily accessible to all women throughout Australia; and
ensure that a suitable education 'program offering specialist professional information and advice in regard to this important women's health issue is conducted in conjunction with the screening programme.
by Mr Halverson (from 22 citizens).
Albanians in Yugoslavia
To the Honourable Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens showeth:
Based on Australia's record and influence in the international arena in reference to human rights, we hereby plead with the Australian Parliament to take into consideration the following points, which are vital for democracy, freedom, equality and justice.
(i) That the Australian Parliament forms a committee and in cooperation with other Western democracies and international human rights groups, creates an international committee which will urgently visit the Albanian political prisoners in Yugoslavia and evaluate their physical, psychological and medical state and conditions in which they live in prisons.
(ii) That the Australian Parliament and the Government request from the Yugoslav and the Serbian Governments that all military and special police units be withdrawn from Kosova and the persecution and killing of Albanians in Yugoslavia be stopped immediately.
(iii) That the Australian Parliament and the Government request from the Serbian Government the release of all political prisoners and declares their imprisonment illegal and unconstitutional.
(iv) That the Australian Parliament and the Government request the Yugoslav rather than the
. Serbian Government to bring to an end the trial of Azem Vilasi, the former President of Kosova and the other 14 members of the Parliament of

Kosova who opposed the changes to. the 1974 Constitution.
(v) That the Australian Government raise the question of Kosova through the Australian United Nation representation and request a popular referendum under the auspices of the UN be held in that province to determine its future status.
And your petitioners shall, as in duty bound, forever pray.
by Mr N. A. Brown (from 176 citizens).
Health Funds
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled.
We, the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Australia's population is ageing and most people require more health services as they grow older.
If open not-for-profit health fundsare to be able to meet the costs of providing benefits to their older members at affordable rates, those costs need to be shared equitably.
Some health insurance organisations are being allowed to avoid meeting the health costs of sick and elderly people.
Your petitioners humbly pray that the House of Representa~ives, in Parliament assembled. urge the Government to:
take the necessary action to reverse rising cost trends and provide positive incentives to encourage all health funds to share the cost of health care for sick and elderly Australians.
An<:i your petitioners. as in duty bound. will ever pray.
by Mr Cadman (from 48 citizens).
Credit Referencing
To the Honourable the Speaker, and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The petition of certain citizens of Australia draws attention to the House that they deplore the proposed changes to th~ laws governing Credit Reporting.
The suggested reforms will:
prohibit the legitimate use of credit checks by businesses seeking to protect their investments.
The reforms will prevent landlords from knowing, the credit histories of prospective clients and will place the landlord at financial risk.
Add to the costs of business. when creditors are denied the right to legitimate credit reporting. they will err on the side of denying credit.

Petitions

30November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3201

Your petitioners therefore pray that the House of Representatives will call on the Government to abandon any proposals restricting Real Estate agents and other creditors from carrying out legitimate credit referencing.
by Mr Cadman (from 12 citizens).
Antarctica
Petition to the Honourable Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament:
The petition of certain citizens of Australia draws to the attention of this House that we are concerned at the threats caused by proposed mining activity to the ecological integrity and wilderness values of the Antarctic continent.
Your petitioners therefore request the House to direct the Prime Minister and his Government to:
withdraw from the signing of the Convention for the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activity (CRAMRA) and extend the moratorium on mining;
take a leading role in preparing a Conservation Convention that will preserve Antarctica as a World Park and the last wilderness continent on Earth untouched by human exploitative activities;
continue its high emphasis on environmental protection for the Australian AntarcticTerritory.
by Mr Chynoweth (from 36,438 citizens).
Antarctica
Petition to the Honourable Speaker and members of the HO,use of Representatives assembled in Parliament:
The petition of certain citizens of Australia and stewards of the earth draws to the attention of this House that we are concerned at the threats caused by proposed mining activity to the ecological integrity and wilderness values of the Antarctic continent.
Your petitioners therefore request the House to:
congratulate the Prime Minister and his Government for their decision to withdraw from the signing of the Convention for the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activity (CRAMRA) and request that they extend the present moratorium on mining;
take a leading role in preparing a Conservation Convention that will preserve Antarctica as a World Park and the last wilderness continent on Earth untouched by human exploitative activities;
direct the Prime Minister and his Government to pass legislation banning the involvement of Aus- 'tralian corporations in any mining activities in Antarctica;
continue its high emphasis on environmental protection for the Australian Antarctic Territory.
by Mr Chynoweth (from 114 citizens).

Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament:
The petition of certain citizens of Australia draws to the attention of the House:
the damaging effects to community pharmacy which will be caused by the most recent decision of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal. We believe that if the decision stands, the entire Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme will collapse. This will result in the loss of pharmaceutical benefits to all Australians and will hurt the aged and the chronically ill to the greatest extent.
Your petitioners therefore ask the House to
set aside the Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal's decision and ensure pharmacists receive an adequate and fair payment for dispensing medication and provision of health care advice.
by Mr Gorman (from 255 citizens).
Emergency Telephone Number Service: Mount Isa, Queensland
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament:
The petition of certain residents of Australia draws to the attention of the House that since the closure of the Mount Isa Telephone Exchange numerous difficulties have been encountered by people trying to contact emergency ambulance, fire brigade and police services on the "000" telephone number.
Your petitioners request the House to restore the trouble free "000" service Mount Isa had prior to the closure of the exchange immediately.
by Mr Katter (from 2,372 citizens).
Medicare: Abortions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That every abortion kills an unborn human baby.
That the right to life of all humans is the most fundamental and essential of all human rights.
That in 1987/88 the Federal Government paid $6.4 million from taxpayers funds for 61,879 abortions under Medicare Items 6469 and 274/275 alone.
That in the same year Federal Government grants to the States indirectly financed the deliberate killing of thousands of other unborn babies in State Public Hospitals.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Parliament will carry out its duty to protect the right to life of Australian babies and abolish Government funding of abortion.
And your Petitioners as in duty bound, will ever pray.

3202 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Petitions

by Mr Kerr (from 842 citizens).
Road Funding
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The Petition of certain citizens of Australia draws to the attention of the House:
The residents of Northern Victoria are appalled by the deteriorating state of roads in Northern Victoria, and generally throughout rural and regional Australia.
They believe the Federal Government must give the highest budgetary priority for adequate road finance to correct this situation.
The need to act as a "watch dog" on State Governments to ensure that Federal money originally allocated for rural highways and local roads is not directed to metropolitan roads.
Your Petitioners therefore request the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled to call on the Government to give rural Austra,lia a "fair deal" with road finance.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Lloyd (from 677 citizens).
Dr Kim Jin-Yeop
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled.
We the undersigned citizens, wish to call upon the Australian Government to:
protest in the strongest possible way to the government of the Republic of Korea against the arrest and subsequent detention of Australian missionary and dentist Dr. Kim Jin-Yeop.
demand his immediate release by the South Korean authorities.
Your petitioners humbly pray that the House of Representatives call upon the Government to implement the above.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Ms McHugh (from 525 citizens).
Telegraph Point Post Office
To the Honourable Speaker and all Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Telegraph Point respectfully draws to the attention of the House proposals by Australia Post to change the time of sorting of mail from this office.
Under the new time change our mail will leave Kempsey DPO early every morning travel past our post office to Port Macquarie then onto Wauchope before finally arriving back at Telegraph Point for sorting.

This will delay delivery of mail until late morning or possibly after lunch 2 p.m.

Petitioners therefore ask that any restructuring be

cancelled.

.

by Mr Nehl (from 240 citizens).

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled.
The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
the high level of services currently offered by my pharmacist, a frontline provider of medicine, would be threatened if the Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS) is cut back.
the PBS is one of the most essential and enduring elements of our health care system and its future must not, and should not, be sacrificed by the Government's failure to recognise the extent to which it has placed the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PSB) in jeopardy..
Now, therefore, your petitioners request that the Members of the House of Representatives asselTlbled undertake an urgent reconsideration of efforts to cut expenditure on the PBS by means of reducing pharmacists' remuneration.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Pratt (from 720 citizens).

Foreign Investment in Australia
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament:
The petition of certain residents of Australia, draws to the attention of the House that there is increasing levels of foreign investment in Australia.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the House will limit foreign investment in Australian homes, business enterprises, resorts, farms and basic resources to 45% of each purchase.
by Mr Pratt (from 24 citizens).

Ukrainian Welfare Association
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament:
We, the undersigned, support the resolution regarding the continuation of funds allocated by the Department of Immigration, Local Government and. Ethnic Affairs to the Ukrainian Welfare Association Inc., which was passed at the Annual General Meeting, of the above mentioned Association on 20th August, 1989.
The petition of certain citizens of Australia of Ukrainian origin resident of the State of New South Wales draws to the attention of the House that the present guidelines laid down by the Department of Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs

Petitions

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3203

concerning the Grant-in-Aid Scheme will severely prejudice the Ukrainian community of Sydney, Newcastle, Wollongong and the State of New South Wales generally, by removing the only form of service available to the aged and needy members of the Ukrainian community once the current grant ceases.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the House take into account the fact that the Ukrainian Community in Australia has for the last forty years contributed extensively towards the well-being of this country by meeting its tax commitments and placing no demands on government during that period and for those reasons your petitioners pray that the House requests the Honourable Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs, to consider favourably the application before him, for the Grantin-Aid to enable it, to continue to provide the welfare services to the aged and needy members of the Ukrainian Community.
by Mr Price (from 1,057 citizens).
United Nations Convention on the Rights - of the Child
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in the Federal Parliament assembled:
The Humble Petition of the Citizens of Australia, respectfully showeth:
That we protest the signing of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child until all Australians have had the opportunity to read and discuss all aspects of this Convention.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable House will not sign the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and that a Referendum be held to ask all Australians if they want this Convention signed or rejected.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Ian Robinson (from 22 citizens).
EI Salvador
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens and residents of Australia humbly pray that:
1. The Parliament heeds our profound concern regarding the Penal Code Reforms of the Arena Government in EI Salvador.
2. We request that as these reforms breach the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and in consideration of the escalation of human rights violations by EI Salvadoran Armed forces, the Australian Government convey to the United States that all forms of military aid to the Salvadoran Government should be suspended.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Saunderson (from 431 citizens).
Deregulation of Television Content
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of these residents of the Commonwealth of Australia respectfully showeth:
that the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal continues to regulate Australian content on television
that it increases the quota of first release primetime drama to 365 hours a year per station, over the next three years
that it ensures the TV networks provide Australians with a variety of Australian television drama including serials, series and plays
that it increases the quota of children's programmes
that it encourages regional TV production.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Honourable Members will oppose any deregulation of television content.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Saunderson (from 17 citizens).
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
This Petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully draws the attention of the House to the Governments actions in relation to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme which has severely affected the viability of our community pharmacies and their ability to provide the quality and quantity of service to which we as Australians have a right.
Your petitioners respectfully request the House to urge the Government to guarantee an adequately funded Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme, so as to guarantee the continued viability of neighbourhood pharmaceutical services through our local community pharmacies.
by Mr Shack (from 6,356 citizens).
Ch'ina: Domestic Cats
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament:
The petition of certain citizens of Australia, draws to the attention of the House-The inhumane practice employed by street butchers in China, of boiling alive domestic cats for human consumption.
Your petitioners therefore request the house to register its disapproval of this practice carried out by some citizens of the Peoples Republic of China and to do all in its power to persuade the authorities in the Peoples Republic of China to discourage this. practice, through its Embassy in Canberra.
by Mr Shack (from 204 citizens).

3204 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Petitions

Pornography in Videos, Films and Television
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament.
The petition of citizens of Australia points out that the community deplores the persistent refusal to ban pornography in X and NVE Videos, Films and Publications, and deplores the resulting escalation of crime and sexual crime in the Australian community.
Because Parliament has a direct and heavy obligation to ensure the safety of women and childvictims, your petitioners therefore request the House:
to ban the importation, and availability of pornography in Videos, Films and Publications,
to prevent black-market trading by banning the possession of X and NVE material,
vote against any recommendation to extend Video and Theatre Film Classifications and Guidelines into television standards,
ensure that Pay Television does not exceed the programme limits of television standards,
control all censorship criteria and guidelines by sl!bstantive legislation,
gi ve earnest consideration to these matters, in order that no Attorney-General shall ever again have the power to change our social and home environment for generations to come, without thorough and full debate in both Houses of Parliament.
by Mr Shack (from 86 citizens).

Air Services between Alice Springs and Ayers Rock

To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled-
The humble petition of certain residents of Yulara being electors of the division of the Northern Territory respectfully showeth:
their concern for the catastrophic effect that the ongoing Pilots' Dispute is causing to the economic viability of this resort, whereby the subsequent effect has caused loss of jobs, the breakdown of family structure and the imminent termination of chosen career paths
their concern at the loss of regular daily air services between Alice Springs and Ayers Rock in conjunction with the disruption of air services to Central Australia from all other gateway ports

their belief that, should the current monopoly

licensee over the Alice Springs-Ayers Rock route

not be able to fulfil his moral obligations in pro-

viding this daily service, the route licence should

be renegotiated with other interested operators

~d

.

their fear that the historical downturn of visitors numbers during the summer season will be exacerbated by this current situation.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the elected members of the House of Representatives will with urgency seek the resumption of guaranteed regular daily air services between Alice Springs and Ayers Rock in conjunction with the prompt reintroduction of full air services to Central Australia from all other gateway ports.
by Mr Snowdon (from 244 citizens).

Northern Territory: Aboriginal Sacred Sites
To the Honourable Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled.

We, the undersigned citizens of the Northern Ter-

ritory do humbly petition you to:

..

I. Act immediately to return the area known as Kakadu Stage 3, including the conservation zone, to its rightful owners under the Land Rights (N.T.) Act (Claim Registration No 111).

2. Oppose the proclamation of the Northern Territory Aboriginal Sacred Sites Protection Act 1989 as we believe that powers under this Act vested in the N.T. Minister for Lands may be used to allow exploration or mining to proceed on sacred sites without the permission of the custodians of those sites.

And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.

by Mr Snowdon (from 95 citizens).

Community Pharmacists
To the Honourable the Speaker and the members of the House of Representatives assembled in Parliament:
The petition of citizens of Australia draws to the attention of the House that they:
(I) Deplore the changes to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme drug list and the delisting of frequently prescribed drugs without ensuring that alternative drugs are readily available.
(2) Deplore the proposed restructuring of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme which will jeopardise the health care of Australians and force many pharmacies out of business.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the House do everything in its power to call on the Minister for Housing and Aged Care and the Minister for Community Services and Health to ensure that the viability'of community pharmacists is maintained and that people continue to have ready access to the supply of pharmaceuticals and the professional services provided by pharmacists.
by Dr Woods (from 40 citizens).
Petitions received.

Standing Committee on Procedure 30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3205

COMMITTEE OF MEMBERS' INTERESTS
Mr LINDSAY (Herbert)-As required by the resolutions of the House, I table copies of notifications of alterations of interests received during the period 1 June to 29 November 1989.
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PROCEDURE
Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (l0.l1)-On behalf of the Standing Committee on Procedure, I present the Committee's report entitled Standing orders governing the conduct of committees of the House, together with the minutes of proceedings.
Ordered that the report be printed. Mr MOUNTFORD-In this, its sixth report for the Thirty-fifth Parliament, the Standing Committee on Procedure proposes that the House adopt a whole new set of Standing Orders to govern the conduct of committees of the House. The Committee has undertaken a comprehensive review of the current Standing Orders, which represents the first such review since that of the Standing Orders Committee in 1962. In the Westminster tradition the Standing Orders are a fundamental source of procedural authority, and in the House of Representatives the Standing Orders, together with the Constitution and established practice, govern the conduct of the proceedings. In embarking on this review, the Committee set out to assess the current Standing Orders and the Sessional Orders, with a view to presenting the House with a set of Standing Orders which meet the needs of the House and reflect its current practice. The House of Representatives has had a set of Standing Orders since 1901, when it adopted temporary Standing Orders based on those of the colonial legislative assemblies. The Standing Orders were amended from time to time and it was not until 1950 that the House put in place a permanent set of Standing Orders. The current Standing Orders are based on the major revisions of the 1962 review. But since that time a number of changes have taken place and amendments to various Standing Orders have been incorporated. The House, in this Parliament, has adopted Sessional Orders which has en-

abled new arrangements to be trialled in several important areas. The Standing Orders provide rules for all aspects of the House's operations, from rules of debate and privilege to details on the routine of business. Early in its review the Committee agreed to consider the Standing Orders in sections and to report to the House on each section in turn as it concludes its consideration. This is the first such report, the subject of which is the Standing Orders which govern the functions and operations of committees of the House.
The Committee, having considered all aspects of the operation of committees, has proposed changes that would affect current practice. Those Standing Orders the Committee considers should be retained have been updated, obsolete provisions have been removed and the Sessional Orders that have operated successfully have been incorporated. Bearing in mind the needs of users of the Standing Orders, the Committee has also reordered the Standing Orders and modernised the language in an attempt to make them easier to use. The House of Representatives committee system was restructured at the beginning of the Thirty-fifth Parliament with eight new general purpose standing committees being appointed, covering between them major areas of Federal Government activities. There are also several joint committees, both statutory and select, operating. The Committee is not recommending any changes to the actual structure of the committee system. The general purpose standing committees have been in operation since 1987 and are continuing to develop their role. Observations, drawn from a number of sources, have described the expansion of the committee system as very successful and as an enormous advance for the Parliament as a whole.
I will now outline the major changes of substance recommended in the report. The Committee sees a specific role for the Chairman of Committees to oversee the functions and operations of the committees. It is recommended that the House establish an Appropriations and Staffing Committee and that the Procedure Committee replace the Standing Orders Committee. More flexible provisions are proposed for the size and composition of each committee and the quo-

3206 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989 Standing Committee on Procedure

rum provisions have been revised. The Committee has recommended changes in the method of appointment of members to committees and the procedure for the election of chairmen. The mandate of committees has been extended to include the automatic referral of annual reports of departments and statutory authorities to appropriate general purpose committees for any inquiry they may wish .to make.
The Committee believes that all committees should have certain basic powers such as the power to authorise the publication of evidence and the power to send for persons and documents and has recommended that the Standing Orders include these provisions. Following on from its earlier report on the procedure to be followed by committees in their dealings with witnesses in which the Committee looked at matters concerning in camera evidence, the Committee now recommends that a prohibition be placed on the disclosure in dissenting reports or protests of in camera evidence and evidence received in confidence unless the committee involved so authorises. As the House has not established a secret committee since Federation and as there are other mechanisms for maintaining confidentiality, the Committee has recommended that the 'standing order be omitted as it is out of date. With a general provision being recommended which enables committees to confer with similar committees of the Senate, the provisions relating to conferences have been deleted. The Committee considered the standing orders relating to the examination of witnesses and has proposed that the provisioQ whereby the witness withdraws, if objecting to a question, whilst the matter is under discussion has also been omitted. To implement this standing order in the House or Committee of the Whole would be almost impossible.
The standing order which prohibits a member sitting on a committee if that member is personally interested in the inquiry was considered by the Committee. The Committee maintains that the needs of the House are met by the requirement that members register their interests and the fact that the register is tabled and available for inspection and recommends that this provision be deleted.

Mr Speaker, the matters 1 have mentioned represent the major changes of substance recommended by the Committee. The Committee has worked very hard, seeking the views of those actively involved in the operation of the committees and considering options for change. The Committee believes that the Standing Orders proposed in the report will set in place the current system of committees and through the changes recommended provide for their effective operation within the wider institutional framework of the House.
Owing to my intention not to seek re-election to this House when an election is called, this will most probably be my last report submitted on behalf of the Committee. It has been my privilege to have been Chairman of the Procedure Committee and 1 thank members for their personal support and their dedication to the task of reforming parliamentary procedures so that members of parliament can perform their duties in a more satisfactory manner. 1 wish the Committee continued success in future parliaments. To the Clerk of the House 1 express our appreciation for his guidance and professional assistance. 1 would also like to thank particularly Mr Mark McRae, Secretary to the Committee since its inception, for his advice and commitment to the work of the Committee. He has recently left, having worked 15 years for the Department of the House of Representatives, and 1 know 1 speak for the rest of the Committee in wishing him well in his new position as Clerk of the Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly. To the other two members of the secretariat, Julia Flynn, the Acting Secretary, and Sue, Cardell, 1 extend our thanks and appreciation for their dedicated assistance. 1 commend the report to the House.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (10.18)-1 would like to add a few remarks to those of the Chairman, and in doing so 1 thank him, 1 believe on behalf of the House, for the work that he has done as Chairman of the Standing Committee on Procedure. To review procedures and practices that have been in place for nearly 90 years is a major task. The committee system that has evolved in the Parliament is one of the major changes that have occurred here during that period. Committees have been tried under the terms of

Standing Committee on Procedure 30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3207

sessional orders and established largely on an ad hoc basis. I believe the experience of the Parliament is that that committee system has added materially to the functions, operations and scope of the House of Representatives.
For the best part of 20 years the House has found that the volume of business which accrues to the Federal Parliament, and has been accruing since around the mid-1960s when changes took place in the various roles of the States and the Commonwealth throughout the nation, has crowded the parliamentary program to the extent that very few opportunities exist for the House as a whole to debate the major issues of the day. There was a time-and I span that time, as do one or two other members of the Housewhen major debates on foreign affairs, economics and other matters of national importance were a regular occurrence in this chamber and a major feature of its operations. To a large extent that has disappeared because of the pressure of business and the time constraints, artificial though they may be, but very real in the minds of every member of the chamber, on the time which is and can reasonably be expected to be spent in Canberra, away from homes and electorates.
The committee system provides scope for members of all parties, not only government, to participate in consideration, examination and recommendation on a vast range of matters, with the assistance of staff, which is probably not adequate but what is reasonably able to be provided within the financial constraints the Parliament has imposed on it. Similar constraints have been faced by all other sections of the Australian community. I think the reports of those committees that have come to us during this Parliament are evidence that the chamber cannot be and is not the only point of contact or even the major focal point where members have the opportunity to participate in the day-to-day affairs of. the Commonwealth; to examine, report and determine those things which are of importance to our nation of Australia and in our external relationships. The chamber tends to be a cut and thrust debating chamber where political names are made and broken. The committees are places where people can in fact participate in detailed and practical examination.

This report sets in the Standing Orders the arrangements for the standing committee system. It sets in the Standing Orders procedures which will ensure that in future parliaments there will be no doubt about where and how the committee system will operate and the range of matters which should be covered by those committees. I hope that the review of the Standing Orders which is, as I say, a very large task and which will not be done in five minutes, will continue and will further expand the opportunities for members to participate in the business of running the country, of examining the issues which are important to Australians and in all ways playing their role as members of the national Parliament on behalf of the people they represent and the people of Australia. That will involve some changes in the way we do business in this chamber. I have raised this on many occasions and I believe that ultimately, as a parliament, we will adopt procedures which will allow plenary and committee sessions of the House. This will be done in order to expand the time available, and therefore the opportunities available for members to participate in the enormous range that now is part of this chamber and of this Parliament's responsibility.
As I have said, 20 years ago a major Bill could be expected to be in this chamber in its second reading and committee stages possibly for several days. Fifty years ago one Bill which I could name was before this chamber for nearly a month. One cannot imagine that occurring today. The time is not available and the pressure of business is such that that sort of consideration is no longer available. The business and the requirements for the House to deal with legislation will not reduce, and therefore the House must modify its procedures to deal with its responsibilities in the best possible manner. Obviously that means changing the existing system. This report is part of that change and I congratulate the Chairman, the honourable member for Banks (Mr Mountford), on his efforts to get this -report completed and into this Parliament. It was a very difficult task and everyone who worked on it worked with dedication and commitment to complete thattask so that this matter could be considered iIi this Parliament.

3208 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989 Standing Committee on Transport

Mr LINDSAY (Herbert) (10.25)-1 wish to add my thanks to the staff and everyone involved in the preparation of this report. 1 particularly single out the Clerk of the House, Mr Alan Browning, for the contribution that he has made in providing enormous assistance and guidance to the Committee in the formation of its recommendations contained in this report. I want to mention a few things in this report which I believe are of importance. The first proposal deals with the prohibition to be placed on the disclosure in dissenting reports or protests of in camera evidence and evidence received in confidence, unless the committee involved so authorises. This is an important proposal to the House, which I would enjoin the House to adopt. It is clearly unacceptable conduct for any person of a committee to have access to in camera evidence and, without the committee authorising that procedure to be followed, disclose it in a dissenting report, thereby tarnishing the integrity and confidentiality with which that information was given.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The time allotted for the discussion of this report has expired.
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, COMMUNICATIONS
AND INFRASTRUCTURE Mr SAUNDERSON (Aston) (1O.27)-On behalf of the Standing Committee on Transport, Communications and Infrastructure, 1 present the Committee's report entitled To payor not to pay? Pay television and other new broadcasting-related services, together with the minutes of proceedings. Ordered that the report be printed. Mr SAUNDERSON-This report, which deals primarily but not exclusively with pay television, is the third of its kind in seven years. I trust that it is the last. There is now a mountain of information on the subject. What is required now is not further inquiries and more mountains of information but decisions-decisions on the introduction of pay television, decisions on its market structure and decisions on the extent of regulation and the regulatory framework. The Committee report has blazed a trail for making and taking such decisions. The report offers the Government a model for the successful implementation of pay televi-

sion in Australia. This model has the following five major features:
I. Cable-multipoint distribution system and later cable as the primary delivery mechanism for pay television;
2. Multi-channel systems operating in a large number of markets with exclusive franchises for each pay television operator;
3. Legislative requirement for each operator to provide one channel initially, for local and community programming;
4. Licences awarded to the highest bidder with renewal virtually automatic; and
5. Minimal regulation because of the value for money characteristics and direct subscriber-operator relationship of pay television.
This inquiry has been a complex one, not helped at all by confusing terminology such as 'natural monopoly', 'complementary' and so forth. If there is one issue that can be called 'threshold' in this inquiry it is the pay television issue. A bewildering array of argument has been put to the Committee and reasons advanced for not having or for delaying the consideration of pay television. Some want consideration delayed until studies are completed. Others want consideration delayed because of completed studies. After a very thorough examination of these issues, the majority of the Committee supports the introduction of pay television. This conclusion was reached after the application of two approaches: the net social value approach; and the market why-not-pay television approach. The report says that, if properly managed, pay television provides net social benefits by: increasing diversity, not only through market driven programming, but also by local and community programming; and promoting the plurality of views in Australian society through diversity of ownership and non-commercial programming. In other words, although pay television is a commercial product and will live or die by its commercialism, this is a once in a lifetime opportunity to achieve non-commercial objectives.
These twin goals dominate the Committee model. The latter flow into choice of delivery systems. Obviously, the market cannot make

Standing Committee on Transport 30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3209

such decisions and there is therefore a role for government. Such objectives become criteria in the selection, and the table on comparative advantages of delivery systems applies these and other criteria. Application of such selection criteria has led the Committee to recommend the cable-multipoint distribution system, with conversion to full cable when it becomes available, as the primary method of delivery of pay television.
Direct broadcasting by satellite has been rejected as a delivery mechanism, because it cannot satisfy several selection criteria. It can provide little diversity of ownership because it serves the national market, and therefore there are no opportunities for local and community programming. It cannot provide for advanced television capacity, but perhaps the biggest disadvantage is the cost to subscribers-the cost of earthstations outside the 52 DBW contour. Aussat sees pay television being delivered only by community ownership arrangements. This could affect adversely market penetration of pay television in these areas. Further, there is the investment loss for metropolitan subscribers who switch to the bigger capacity cable technology when it becomes available.
The Committee does not support the satellite-MDS options proposed by Aussat and Independent Television Newcastle Pty Ltd. It is clear from the table on comparative advantages of delivery systems that cable should be the pay television delivery system in the long term. The superiority of cable is recognised by almost everyone. Care should be taken not to put in place short term measures which inhibit the introduction of cable. The. use of indirect broadcasting by satellite with MDS as the primary method of delivery pay television, particularly with soft entry pricing and long term contracts for satellite delivery, would inhibit the introduction of cable. The attempt to cater for local and community programming by having a satellite-MDS delivery system in markets which can support commercially such programming is unrealistic. It is very unlikely that the option will be taken up. Such non-commercial programming needs to be subsidised or cross-subsidised and is unlikely to survive otherwise. The experience of public radio and concern about public television underline this need. Thus market driven 10-

calism and community programming are selfdefeating.
The establishment of a particular market structure lies at the heart of policy development for pay television and the desirable amount of regulation for that structure. The Committee's approach to market structure was influenced by three factors: increasing diversity of programming, both commercial and non-commercial; promoting diversity of ownership; and ensuring the commercial viability of pay television. In view of these factors the Committee has recommended that the market structure for pay television in Australia contain the following three elements: multi-channel systems; a large number of markets based on present broadcasting areas with more than one market for each capital city; and exclusive franchises for each market. It could be said that these recommendations will create local monopolies. The monopoly argument is exaggerated. If introduced, pay television would be in competition with broadcast television and the video cassette recorder (VCR). The substitutes are not perfect but, particularly with the VCR and the pay television movie channel, are sufficiently close to restrain the abuse of alleged monopoly power.
Interestingly; the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in the United States of America uses the existence of broadcast television in its equation of effective competition. The FCC has decreed that where there is such competition there is no need for rate regulation of pay television. There is also the public benefit test of exclusivity. Given the characteristics of Australian industry-competition among the few, the view that the small size of the Australian market may not support more than two operators, the increase in program diversity and the existence of substitutes for pay television-the Committee concluded that there is net public benefit from exclusive franchises. I will leave it to my c~lleaguesto discuss other aspects of the report, such as ownership and control and regulatory issues.
Thanks are due to many. First, I would like to thank those who made submissions to the inquiry. Some of these were very substantial and the effort put into preparing them is much appreciated. Secondly, I would like to thank my colleagues, particularly the

3210 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989 Standing Committee on Transport

other two members of the subcommittee, the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Jull) and the honourable member for Fraser (Mr Langmore), who were responsible largely for the collection of evidence arid participated keenly in the preparation of the subcommittee's report to the Committee. The report itself has been produced in-house. Its quality is excellent. For this thanks are due to Di Morrison and Michelle Ricketts of the Senate Publications Unit, who typeset the report, and the printing staff of the Department of the House of Representatives, who did the printing and binding of close to 400 copies. Finally, thanks are due to our secretariat: to John Coleman, our adviser, who made a good and quick input; to the keyboard and organisational skills of June Murphy; and to the Committee Secretary, Malcolm Aldons. I commend the report to the House.
Mr JULL (Fadden) (10.32)-1 also would like to speak briefly to the report from the Standing Committee on Transport, Communications and Infrastructure. Firstly, I agree with the Chairman of the Committee, the honourable member for Aston (Mr Saunderson), and express my thanks to the very many people who have been involved in the preparation of this report, which is a most significant report. A4stralia is one of the very few countries, if not the only country, in the Western world that have not the advantage of cable television and all that that can bring. When we speak about cable television, far too often we look at it as an entertainment mode. It is, in fact, very much an entertainment mode, but it has the capacity to provide a great diversity of information and a great diversity of programs and, in the situation that we have in Australia at the moment, will be able to produce local content that should be acceptable by all.
When I talk about local content, in Australia in recent years we have seen networking introduced by the four principal networks and the Special Broadcasting Service, as well as aggregation in the rural areas. A desperate situation is being faced in radio, where about 50 per cent of the AM stations are now in a loss situation and are looking more and more towards networking. One of the very great problems we will have is that there will be a lack of local information through our elec-

tronic media. If this report and its recommendations are followed, we will have some very real opportunities to provide more and more local information, not only through the local commercial operators but through the advent of public television. I think that is one of the very significant points that should be brought out in this report.
The Opposition sees this as a tremendous opportunity to provide a great diversity of ownership of Australia's electronic media. There are cross-media. ownership provisions recommended in the report. It will be an opportunity for a whole new. industry to develop, with new players, new operators, new information and new programs. While one of the arguments that has been put is that the major networks will suffer to a degree and we might see a drop in the standard of programs on our regular television stations, I do not think this is necessarily correct. One of the other criticisms that was put time and again to this Committee was simply that the operations would be so tight that the pay television system would be full of pap. I do not believe that.
The great thing about cable television is simply this: the success of a cable television operation will be determined very much on the standard of programs provided. If people are not getting value for money out of those programs they will not subscribe and that operation will go broke. I think, too, in the long term for Australian production there will be some opportunities for expansion. The most popular television programs in Australia at the moment are Australian and the public demand will be there for that Australian content. The Opposition has had for a number of years on its policy documents the fact that we will be heading immediately into pay television. We must catch up with world technology. The advance in cable technology is such that it will be able to provide great information systems. The technology is now being put in place. We should take the best advantage we possibly can. If this report is followed I believe that those advantages will be. very great for the major proportion of the Australian population. I certainly commend the report.
Mr LANGMORE (Fraser) (l0.36)-The inquiry culminating in the report from the Standing Committee on Transport, Commu-

Standing Committee on Transport 30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 32ll

nications and Infrastructure was very complex. The threshold issue is whether there are net advantages in the introduction of pay television. The Committee concluded that there are because of the increased competition and diversity that are likely to follow, the reduction in the concentration of media ownership which the introduction of pay television would create, and the increased information and ideas that are likely to flow through the distribution of pay television. Of course, the fact that cable links would be in place within a few years so that there would not be any substantial net opportunity cost from investment in the transmission mechanism for pay television was also regarded as being important.
There is a question whether the introduction of pay television will lead to increased diversity of programming. Certainly there are those who believe that the costs of reduced revenue and reduced finance for Australian drama production through free-to-air channels will undermine free-to-air quality. However, the Committee concluded that the net increase of outlets through a minimum of five additional pay television networks is likely to have net benefits. The Committee has made specific recommendations which will increase the diversity of ownership. They would lead to a minimum of five additional channels. They are very important recommendations. The report also contains firm recommendations about cross-media ownership control and stropg limitations on foreign ownership.
Pay television channels will be required to contribute 2-!- per cent of gross revenue to community programming, which will ensure that some local and community programming is part of the system. Siphoning is to be regulated; that is, the movement from free-to-air television to pay television in a way that might damage the interests of people who can receive only pay television. There is to be regulation of consumer interests. Pay television licence holders will be required to establish a consumer complaint mechanism and advertising is to be strictly limited. I think one of the most important recommendations is that advertising on pay television will be permitted only before the commencement and at the conclusion of programs. This is a complex report. It has been very

seriously considered by members. I support the conclusions that have been reached.
Mr JOHN SCOTT (Hindmarsh) (10.40)-1 find it almost impossible to give any attention to this report from the Standing Committee on Transport, Communications and Infrastructure in the less than three minutes allocated for a dissenting view. I think that the dissenting view is being suppressed. But now that the report is before the Parliament we may see the beginning of some public discussion as to whether pay television should be introduced into Australia.
The Committee's inquiry had very little input from the consumer groups or from the public generally. The Australi,an Consumers Association made a submission, but only after I pressed the Committee to write to that association specifically requesting a submission. As a matter of fact, the ACA submission was extremely helpful in revealing that a market research survey was being conducted for Telecom in Melbourne, Sydney, Hobart, Parkes and Kalgoorlie. Questions in the survey examined just what the market would bear; in other words, how much the consumer could be fleeced. Connection fees of $250 to $400 were canvassed, plus basic rentals of $15 to $40 per month, plus for premium channels $10 to $20 per month. Another option canvassed was the pay-asyou-view system, the cost of which ranged from $3 to $10 per program. One of the questions of relaxing censorship laws was also canvassed. This would no doubt be required so that the Playboy channel could be broadcast on pay television.
Australia's current free-to-air television is possibly the best in the world. The introduction of pay television will result in lower standards and a reduction in the quality of programs-programs such as the Olympic Games, the Melbourne Cup, the Victorian Football League Grand Final, and many more which are currently free-to-air. Are we to pay for them now? Can we believe in the siphoning provisions? Australia currently has one of the highest video recorder penetration rates in the world at 60 percent. The video recorder can do everything that pay television can offer and do it cheaper and with more flexibility.

3212 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Parliamentary Conference

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-Order! The time allotted for statements on this report has expired.
Mr John Scott-I want to again register my protest at the suppression of the dissenting view. .
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The time has expired.
INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION CONFERENCE,LONDON
Mr UREN (Reid) (10.42)-1 present the report of the Australian parliamentary delegation to the Eighty-second Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) Conference held in London in September 1989. I led the Australian delegation, comprising the honourable members for Higgins (Mr Shipton), Greenway (Mr Gorman), Streeton (Mr Lamb) and Berowra (Dr Harry Edwards) and Senators Brian Harradine and Janet Powell. The IPU conference in London represented the centenary of the co-founding of the IPU by British and French parliamentarians. The first conference, in 1889, was attended by nine countries; the centenary conference was attended by representatives of 112 countries. Some 1,500 delegates, including 40 Speakers of parliaments, attended.
It was significant that the centenary conference was held under the auspices of the British parliamentary delegation. For over 100 years the British Parliament, the mother of parliaments, has guarded the traditions of parliamentary democracy and the rule of law, which are ideals that are central to the philosophy of the IPU in its attempts to strengthen representative political institutions. But the IPU' does much more than seek to strengthen representative institutions. It also serves to promote international understanding and the avoidance of world conflict. It complemerits the work of diplomats and the United Nations and often succeeds in achieving things that diplomats cannot attempt because they are restricted by formal positions.
It was significant, for example, that the Argentinean parliamentary delegation to the London conference was led by the brother of the President of the Argentine and informal discussions were held between the British representatives and the Argentineans.

Similarly, Britain's Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, saw significance in the strong development of Anglo-Soviet ties, resulting from her initial meeting in 1984 when the then leader of the Soviet Inter-Parliamentary Union delegation was Mikhail Gorbachev. Since then, relations between the Soviet Union and Britain have progressed and warmed.
The IPU is a great bridge builder. It broadens horizons. It is a good starting point for solving disputes. The IPU does not represent governments; it represents individual parliamentarians who mayor may not agree with the views of their government and, therefore, have greater freedom than government spokespersons or representatives to make contacts .and explore new approaches from government to government, parliament to parliament and parliamentarian to parliamentarian. What happens in the corridors of the IPU conference when parliamentarians meet informally is sometimes as important as the resolutions being carried at the conference.
Honourable members will be aware of my long admiration for the work done by the IPU in its Committee for Human Rights of Parliamentarians. Once again I commend to all members the section of the report which deals with this matter. Within our own region it is gratifying that Mrs Sundari of Indonesia, who had been given a life imprisonment sentence in 1968 for her allegedand I stress 'alleged'- role in the 1965 abortive coup in Indonesia, was released in August 1989. In Malaysia, restriction orders against seven opposition parliamentarians were revoked in April 1989. In both of these cases the efforts of the IPU Committee to publicise the injustices of the internments and the pressure it was able to exert on the Malaysian and Indonesian delegations and governments were, in my view, instrumental in securing their release.
Honourable members will be interested to note that the most controversial item introduced at the London conference was an Australian item calling on parliamentarians of all member countries to establish within their parliaments groups for the promotion and protection of human rights. This is a very appropriate proposal to come forward at this time in history. I instanced our own adoption

Parliamentary Conference

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3213

of a parliamentary group of Amnesty International and told delegates that our initiative was based on goodwill and was not directed against any particular country or region but was designed to support and strengthen individual human rights everywhere. When a number of delegates indicated their difficulty in supporting our proposal because we included Amnesty International, we amended our resolution to its present form. Once again I believe that it was significant that both the Hungarian and Polish delegates supported our resolution. It was significant that Australia's reputation as a staunch advocate for the protection of human rights came to the fore.
In highlighting the success of our initiative, I wish to place on record the key role played by the honourable member for Hughes (Mr Tickner) initially in the Australian IPU group in formulating the resolution. His commitment in the field of human rights, particularly in his role as Chairman of the Australian Parliamentary Group of Amnesty International, helped ensure that we spoke from a position of strength, authority and commitment when I introduced the resolution in the IPU conference. I am pleased and I am proud that Robert Tickner's work has continued to further enhance the reputation of our Parliament and of Australia within an important international forum.
In London I attended my last meeting as Chairman of the Asia-Pacific Group of the IPU. I believe that Australia's standing and the status of the Asia-Pacific group within the IPU have been enhanced during our period of chairmanship. We have given notice of the requirement for the IPU to focus more clearly on issues of importance to the Asia-Pacific region and to reflect within its executive a greater representation of the group that speaks for over half of the world's population. There are now good prospects that an IPU-sponsored conference will be held in our region. Clearly, the Australian Parliament will come under increasing pressure to hold an IPU conference in our new Parliament House. This is something which all honourable members should encourage our Government to do.
I indicated in London, speaking as chairperson of the Asian-Pacific group, that,. depending on the date of the next Federal

election, it could well be my last IPU conference. I told the meeting that in April 1965 I attended my first IPU conference as a young idealist and an optimist, and I remain so today. I am proud to say that I have been able to see many changes of freedom and progress made in my period of service.
As I said in my address to the IPU plenary, our destiny, our legacy, to the future lies in our own hands. Humankind has to have greater faith in itself. We live in times of great change but also of great optimism. I commend the efforts of Mikhail Gorbachev in particular. He is a great citizen of not only the Soviet Union but also the world. His efforts for a new humanist communism and a more equitable system of economic and social justice for all Soviet citizens must be encouraged. The superpowers' acknowledgment of their duties to nuclear and conventional disarmament and their collective responsibility to humankind must be encouraged. We applaud the progress that is being made by the United States on the one hand and the Soviet Union on the other. Sharing of wealth with the less fortunate and emerging nations must be encouraged. If these things happen in our lifetime, peoples and nations in the next century can feel secure and we can truly 'turn our .swords into ploughshares' .
In closing, on behalf of the delegation I would like to thank the Australian High Commissioner in London, our old colleague and comrade Doug McClelland, and his wonderful wife, Lorna, for their great hospitality and personal warmth in co-hosting with me the luncheon held for the AsianPacific group and for the generous courtesy they gave to all members of the delegation and their spouses.
I would also like to thank the visits section at the High Commission, particularly Morris Hill and Liz Lindores whose long hours in meeting and greeting parliamentarians and catering to their needs should be recorded. In case I do not lead the delegation to the next IPU conference, I would like to record my thanks to my deputy leader, Roger Shipton, and his wife Suzie, for their assistance to me. Thanks also go to the delegation secretary, Bob Diamond. I make particular mention of the adviser from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Fred Peppinck.

3214 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Parliamentary Conference

Fred has accompanied delegations during most of my chairmanship. His advice and experience in foreign affairs have been of enormous assistance to me. He has always been there to advise me about the personal and political background of delegations from other countries. Fred is a great credit to our foreign service.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-Order! The time has expired for statements on this report.
COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY CONFERENCE, BARBADOS
Mr MILDREN (Ballarat) (10.53)-1 present the report of the Commonwealth of Australia branch delegation to the Thirtyfifth Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference held in Barbados in October 1989 and seek leave to make a statement.
Leave granted. Mr MILDREN-I thank all members of the delegation. They carried out their tasks with diligence, enthusiasm and a due sense of responsibility-not just to their own nation but to the concept of the Commonwealth of Nations. Members' contributions to debate in the plenary sessions and the panel discussions in the General Assembly were noted by other members of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA). 1 am sure that their contributions will have a lasting effect. The members of the delegation are indebted to the tireless assistance given to us all by the Deputy Clerk of the House of Representatives, Mr Lyn Barlin, who not only was of great assistance but also, 1 might add, was a great friend to us. As the leader of the delegation 1 know just how much careful effort Lyn expended in ensuring that every detail of organisation was covered. 1 would like Lyn to pass on our thanks to his wife, Beryl, who was also of great assistance to us at the conference. The delegation was impressed by the warmth of the greeting by the Barbados Branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. We congratulate the Speaker of the House of Assembly, the Hon. Lawson Weekes. We congratulate Mr George Brancker, the Clerk of the Parliament, on his organisational work, and we congratulate his extensive list of helpers. As the Confer-

ence coincided with the celebration of the 350th anniversary of the founding of the Barbados Parliament, the event was of special significance. The scope of the Conference was topical and began with a plenary session devoted to the continuing problem of apartheid in South Africa, racism and foreign occupation of nations, and the contribution that Commonwealth nations might make towards the decolonisation and elimination of those above evils.
Further issues, such as the greenhouse effect, drug problems, the prospects for Commonwealth countries of the single European Market following 1992, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Uruguay Round, the arms race, the sharing of scientific knowledge, the promotion of the rights of children and the ramifications of the continuing cycle of poverty for democracy, were debated with great feeling and fervour by delegates from approximately 99 Commonwealth parliaments.
Concurrent with the meeting of the CPA was the meeting of the Society of Clerks at the Table at which Lyn represented his Parliament particularly well. Prior to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association's meeting there was the usual small countries conference represented by 29 countries. Of interest to members of the CPA was the approval of the application for membership of the Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly. Honourable members will be more than interested to note that, on the recommendation of the executive committee, the General Assembly agreed to the appointment of a patron of the Association and the news that Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II had agreed to become patron was greeted with unanimous acclamation.
As evidence of the growing role of women in the parliaments of the Commonwealth of Nations, it was announced that a women's caucus had been formed to promote the consideration of women's issues. 1 congratulate Mrs Archer, the spouse of Senator Archer, who spoke in the closing ceremony of the conference on behalf of the spouses of all the delegates. She acquitted our members particularly well. Once again 1 thank my colleagues for the proud representation of their nation at the conference. 1 offer my personal thanks to them for the tremendous

Urban Environment

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3215

cooperation they gave me as the leader of the delegation. I do not think that I have ever been so proud to be with such a fine group of people. The way in which they cooperated with each other and recognised the significance of the role that they were occupying is something that I will carry with me for a long time. I believe that the standing of this Parliament was enhanced by their attitude both in the more formal and the very important informal aspects of the proceedings. I commend the report to the House.
Mr COWAN (Lyne) (10.58)-1 support what the honourable member for Ballarat (Mr Mildren) has said and thank him for the leadership that he gave to the delegation to the Thirty-fifth Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference held in Barbados in October 1989. I enjoyed being part of the delegation. I also thank Mr Lyn Barlin, the Deputy Clerk of the House, for the way he performed his duties. It was very satisfying to the delegation. The issues that were discussed were paramount for Commonwealth Parliamentary Association members. It goes to show that it does pay to get our British Commonwealth countries together, at least once a year, to discuss our common problems. I was particularly delighted by the loyalty to the throne by the people of the West Indies, especially those from Barbados. They are very loyal to the system and cherish the Crown very much. We were pleased to see the Queen made the patron of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association.
The issues we discussed were very important to the smaller nations. I was happy to see that some very intelligent and able people represented some of the African countries and that the South East Asian and Pacific regions put their cases very clearly. We stressed that Australia wanted to help the rest of the world. We impressed upon the conference how important it is to safeguard what we have within the Constitution and this British Commonwealth of ours. Some countries which attended the conference do not hold general elections as we do in Australia, but I am sure the time will come when they will do so.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (HOD. J. D. M. Dobie}-Order! It being 11 a.m., the time allotted for statements has expired.

URBAN ENVIRONMENT Mr TICKNER (Hughes) (11.00)-1 move:
That this House deplores the deterioration of the urb~n environment in Australian cities and urges !1~tlonal, State and local governments to initiate polICies to protect and enhance the urban environment and the quality of life in Australian cities and towns.
I initiated this motion today in order to encourage greater parliamentary and community debate on urban environmental issues and to promote new and innovative policies by State, Federal and local governments to improve the quality of life of people living in the urban environment. There is an enormous groundswell of public concern about the non-urban environment and governments are increasingly paying attention to those concerns, but I believe that we must now, as a nation, focus our attention again on the urban environment and the quality of life of people in cities and towns.
We sometimes forget what a highly urbanised nation we are, with 70 per cent of the Australian population living in cities with a population of greater than 100,000 people. Of course, millions more live in major country towns. In comparative global terms, Australia is the fourth most urbanised nation in the world, after Singapore, Israel and the .United Arab Emirates. These stark facts present inescapable challenges for governments at all levels if they are committed, as our Government is, to meeting the needs of the people and producing a more just, democratic and ecologically sustainable society.
As honourable members would know, I am not one to initiate debates in this House in order to promote needless sectarian or party division. My agenda is very much one of cooperation and consensus within an ideology of reform and social justice. However, I make the threshold point that the problems of the urban environment to which I refer can never be addressed by the Opposition parties as long as they remain chained to a political platform and philosophy that seeks to outlaw or prohibit any government policy which would moderate or channel the unaccountable effect of market forces. That philosophy of the Opposition as it is currently manifest is clearly at odds with environmental protection and the improvement of the quality of life of people in our cities and

3216 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Urban Environment

towns that I am promoting in the course of this debate.
However, I stress again that I am not in the business of promoting needless party division. My agenda is to bring people together on this question and to advocate policy responses to what I see as the looming crisis of the cities. It is perhaps somewhat ironic that I am debating this matter in the House today. I notice that the honourable member for Parkes (Mr Cobb) is to follow me in this debate. I am fond of saying in my more relaxed moments that I think of myself as a country boy, because I am. I lived most of . my life in a small New South Wales country town but, like many of my generation who grew up in the town of Forster, both boys and girls, I moved to Sydney. We had to move to Sydney for education and employment. It is that centralisation of our population that forms a part of the subject. I want to speak about in the House today.
Either by fate or by grand design, I ended up living in the inner city community of
Woolloomooloo and, as a: student, became
deeply involved with that community in the struggle, as it was, of the people to defend their community against the imposition of high rise residential and office blocks. It is true to say that the tenacity of those residents and the environmentally conscious green bans imposed by the New South Wales branch of the Builders Labourers Federation, as it then was, inspired many people to take the view that governments ought to take a far stronger stand to protect the urban environment, and in those times they were powerful forces for social change. They were issues which I think are still very relevant. They involve issues of accountability of government departments and government bureaucracies for planning decisions: issues of social responsibility of developers and unionists; and the rights of local residents to have some say in the determination of the future of their urban environment and those fundamental questions about the future of our cities.
It seems to me that the threshold question is: Do we plan our cities and our urban environment purely on the basis of the profit motive, or do we as a nation intervene in the marketplace so as to produce a more just and environmentally sound result for the

people of the cities? My own view, of course, is very much in support of appropriate government intervention, as I will proceed to outline. I also place on record that my own views on cities were profoundly influenced by the privilege of serving as a Labor alderman on the Sydney City Council for six years and being deeply involved with a number of my colleagues in promoting environmental initiatives and other urban reforms within the city of Sydney.
With that background, I turn to focus on what I see as a number of crucial issues for our cities and the urban environment which, I stress, must be met by the three levels of government working in a cooperative manner in the interests of the people. These issues are raised in no particular order, but include the following concerns: there are hundreds of kilometres of sewerage and water pipes in Sydney and Melbourne which are now almost 100 years old. They are an example of the massive infrastructure expenditure that is going to be necessary in this country in the imminent future. Our major cities are increasingly associated with overcrowded city streets and pollution, often caused by the unrestrained use of private motor vehicles. There is a scarcity of affordable land for housing close to centres of work. I once had my attention drawn to the register of members' interests and noticed that only three members of the House of Representatives did not own their own homes a little over a year ago. The Prime Minister (Mr Hawke), the Minister for Science, Customs and Small Business (Mr Barry Jones)- and I think they were otherwise well provided for-and I were the three people who did not own their own homes. As a new home buyer living in Sydney, more than anything else it is the high cost of land and housing that prevents people from entering the home ownership race-much more so, in my view, than high interest rates, although I stress that that is also an important issue.
A further cause for concern is the deterioration of the National Estate in the cities. Further it is deplorable that there is little or no coordinating machinery for intergovernmental relations as it relates to urban affairs. A further issue of concern is that State government momentum on decentralisation has just about r stopped. More has to be done

Urban Environment

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3217

than simply decentralising public servants. Governments, and I believe our own Government, have to address the question of immigration and where migrants to this country settle. I think we need to provide some form .of incentive or program that will encourage new citizens to Australia to live not just in a number of specific municipalities in cities.
A further issue is the lack of purity of water supply, which is of tremendous concern. A study prepared by the State Water Resources Department in Victoria in 1985, believe it or not, found that fewer than half of all the samples taken in a survey from Melbourne met the World Health Organisation's standards. That is a pretty deplorable statistic. But the problem is not just confined to cities. A major study has been undertaken in urban country towns. That survey on the north coast of New South Wales, involving five shires, found that 29 of the water samples taken contained high trace levels of dieldrin. I expect that the honourable member for Parkes, who has special expertise in this area, will elaborate on this matter, given his past acknowledged drinking habits, which I am sure he will elaborate on-as they relate to chemicals, I might add.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Ronal~ Edwards)-I am glad that the honourable member clarified that comment.
Mr TICKNER-The honourable member for Parkes will understand that the comment was meant with goodwill. In addition to the sewerage and water pipes infrastructure issue there are other vital questions involving replacement of infrastructure, which includes roads, bridges, railway signals and, of course, public transport generally. The issue of sewage treatment looms large for Australia's cities and major coastal towns which are confronted with the imminent imposition of ocean outfall sewage disposal. I will seek to refer to many other things in the course of this debate and on subsequent occasions. My time has run out on this occasion but I indicate to the House that I will be seeking to continue my remarks on these important issues in the grievance debate later today. I thank the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?

Mr Johns-I second the motion and reserve my right to speak.
Mr COBB (Parkes) (l1.12)-We are debating the deterioration of the urban environment in the cities and towns of Australia. 'Urban environment' broadly defined includes all the things around us that go to make up the quality of life that we enjoy. This concerns not only clean air, clean streets, clean beaches and the like, but all aspects touching on our lifestyles. Consideration of such matters raises certain questions. How far do we go in policing these matters? Where should the balance be struck?-because a cost is involved. Who should make the decisions and what is the best political system under which to attain these goals?
I believe that, as one looks around the world, it is obvious that the best towns and cities in the world, the cleanest and those with the highest quality of life, are-not always but increasingly, as we become more and more environmentally conscious-located in the democratic, free enterprise, high technology capitalist countries. For example, we compare the disorder and lack of services in, say, communist Addis Ababa with the cleanliness and vibrance of Tokyo; the filth and deterioration of the infrastructure in Dar es Salaam in Tanzania with, say, :Brisbane, the city that hosted the last World Expo; or the squalor, poverty and decay in Maputo in Mozambique with the revitalisation and energy that exist in Sydney. I put to honourable members that there is no comparison. If a country or state is well governed and the local economy is in relatively good shape the cities and towns are usually in good shape too. However, if bureaucracy and/or the totalitarianism is of a high order the cities and towns are invariably polluted and the standard of living and quality of life of people who reside there are low.
One only has to compare India and Bangladesh with the United States of America, North Korea with South Korea, mainland China with Taiwan, or East Germany with West Germany. We have all seen on our television screens recently graphic pictures comparing East Berlin with West Berlin, and we have watched people in that part of the world voting with their. feet. Even in Ausc tralia one can notice the differences that come about in cities upon changes of govern-

3218 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Urban Environment

ment. One can look at the mess our premier city, Sydney, was getting into when the WranUnsworth Government was turfed out of office. The roads were increasingly congested because of the wind-back of the freeway system and there was a rundown in the rail system. Beaches were appallingly polluted with sewage. It is a relief to witness the Greiner-Murray Government attempting to clean up these things. I emphasise that it is a long, hard haul. Governments of all colours make wrong decisions from time to time, but it is very costly to rectify years of neglect.
I was interested to see a list of a few of the things that are being done in Sydney. The efficiency of Sydney's planning system is being improved. Responsibility for local planning is being handed back to local government. A thorough review of the State's environmental planning policies is being undertaken. A coastal committee is being set up to re-establish and advise the relevant Minister on coastal planning issues, and the Government has released a set of coastal development guidelines, which was previously lacking. The Government is also pursuing increased opportunities for medium density housing development. Under an urban development program 12,500 new residentiallots were developed in 1988-89, which was 67 per cent higher than the number developed in the previous year. The South Creek Valley project is quite exciting. This large area between Camden and Penrith has recently been added to the urban development program and will result in potential for 60,000 new home sites.
Democracy has been returned to the city of Sydney. I am sure that the honourable member for Hughes (Mr Tickner) would be delighted to hear that. The City of Sydney Act 1988 established a new Sydney City Council and South Sydney City Council. Both councils have since been elected and are now functioning as autonomous and democratic local councils. A more equitable system of local government rating has been introduced, and a review of the local government Act is taking place. The Building Code of Australia, which will standardise building regulations across Australia, is to be adopted in New South Wales later this year. In addition, guidelines have been provided for councils to

implement corporate management strategies and improve financial management practices. There is even a main street program under way which will provide assistance to local communities in terms of economic and visual improvement of main streets in country towns and suburban centres.
Our national capital, Canberra, has soaked up hundred of millions of dollars over the years to become in many ways the jewelled city of Australia. Even though we all knock Canberra from time to time, we are all very proud of it. But since it has been given self government-which I hasten to add was, I believe, a stupid mistake and against the wishes of the local people-there has been a marked deterioration in the beauty of the city's environment. One only has to drive around the city to see it. We will all have done so this week.
It may sound trivial to raise the following issue, but it is symptomatic of the malaise that afflicts socialist governments. Compare the state of the lawns with how they used to be. They are either unmown or half mown. In several places I have seen grass a metre high. Can honourable members believe it? Little edging seems to have been done. Even when the lawns are mown, the grass is not picked up in many areas. Canberra is becoming a scruffy place. This even applies to the entrances to Canberra, such as Northbourne Avenue. The Australian Capital Territory Minister for Housing and Urban Services, ElInor Grassby, is in charge of this. She seems to be obsessed with socialist ideology. Because of her prejudice against free enterprise she has taken lawn mowing away from private contractors in the belief that the Department of Parks and Gardens can do it. It obviously cannot. Canberra is becoming an unkempt mess. There are fire' hazards in many places. People are complaining about snakes. In many ways Canberra is getting a Third WorId look about it. All ElInor Grassby can do is blame the rain. I put to her that this problem existed before the rain came down in quantity.
One has only to look at a simple thing like setting up a bushfire council in Canberra. The term of the council that was in place expired in October. Even though grass fires have broken out from time to time since, it was not until adverse publicity forced her to

Urban Environment

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3219

take some action that ElInor Grassby, only a couple of days ago, finally elected a bushfire council. She had not put one in place because she was driven by this ideological nonsense that 50 per cent of the members of the bushfire council had to be women. Because she could not 'get enough female nominations or Australian Labor Party cronies such as the Trades and Labour Council representatives, she delayed announcing a council. 1 was disappointed to see that she excluded from that council traditional representatives such as the Australian Federal Police and the Australian Capital Territory Emergency Services, which have brought a lotof expertise to the council in years past. Rural landowners on both sides of the border, including the New South Wales Farmers Association, which has represented that council for the last 50 years, were not even allowed to nominate. It is sad to see that happening.
Because time is short, 1 will just make this central point: improving the urban environment of towns and cities around Australia is not just a matter of more control, more money, more rules and regulations and the like. If we concentrate on the main gamethat is, getting a strong economy, putting a modern and advanced technology in place, encouraging an economic climate in which profits are not only made but also allowed to be made, lowering the level of ideological nonsense in setting up larger and larger governing authorities and keeping the level of government interference to a minimal level and instead heighten private ownership so that assets are put in the hands of the people rather than in the hands of the bureaucrats-whichever government rules those towns and cities, that government and the people themselves can afford to keep pollution down, to beautify areas and, most importantly, to maintain the parks and gardens, streets and other areas. If we do that we will have the most aesthetic and attractive urban areas with the highest standards of living possible for the people who live there.
Mr JOHNS (Petrie) (11.22)-1 have a strong sense of deja vu in this entire debate. It was with us in the early 1970s. 1 want to get the basis of the debate correct l.est we go through all, the nonsense that we went through in the 1970s. 1 do not mean to decry

the good efforts paraded at that time, but this notion of an urban crisis in our cities is being raised agail1. It is as though the cities are the very basis of all evil and that we yearn for a virtuous rural life. The moment we conceptualise this debate in those terms we are lost. 1 will tell honourable members the way we should conceptualise this debate. What contribution can urban planning and urban growth make to sustainable economic development? That is the way 1 want to conceptualise it. The urban form, the built form, our cities, in a sense, are nothing more nor less than the concrete form of our economic and social system. We will not change them overnight. The cities are museums of what has gone before. We are not about to change overnight what has gone before.
1 want to raise three illustrations of this connection between how we plan our cities or .let them grow and the notion of sustainable development; that is, doing things that do not cost a great deal in terms of energy, doing things that do not ruin the environment and doing things. that provide for a greater quality of life for individuals. Take for instance the Gold Coast strip in my State of Queensland. The moment one lets that first high-rise construction near the shore, one is gone. It is the same situation as the bloke in the front seat of a theatre standing up because he really wants to get an extra good view of what is going on on the stage. The moment he stands, everyone else has to stand. The net result is that everyone gets the same view as they had before, but they all get tired of standing up. We make the same mistake in planning. We make the initial blue and then use up a lot of energy trying to fix it.
1 was lucky enough to be in Noosa recently~ We have allowed planning almost to where the breakers roll in. The fact that the first motel was built so close to the beach means that there would have been an economic disadvantage if the others were not also allowed to build in a similar position. Of course, it is normal that the sands are washed away from time to time by king tides. But the beaches are renewed by natural processes in time. Now that does not happen. Why? Because we have built almost up to the waterline. So to protect the investment of mainly private developments we have

3220 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Urban Environment

to build huge rock walls. The process of sand building can no longer take place in that area. Every December, when all the suckers from Victoria and New South Wales come up to Noosa, Queensland has to spend millions of dollars pouring sand in front of the rocks.
We have ruined the environment's ability to renew the beach at Noosa. This has happened because of some greedy characters who wanted to build right on the beach. If we had got it right early enough everybody could have built 800 metres back or a little further and no-one would have been disadvantaged. We would have had a nice walk through the dunes down to the beach. The beaches would have been able to renew themselves. The message is: do not make those critical mistakes; we do not have to build on the waterline. Provided the rules are the same for everyone, the free market economy can work; people can still make a quid. The environment does not have to be ruined and, in a sense, increase everyone's costs. The very fast train is a second example. There is a notion that there should be a high speed train zooming between Sydney and Melbourne.
Dr Hewson-An excellent idea. Mr JOHNS-I agree; it is an excellent idea. People are starting to concentrate on the minutiae of the environmental questions such as whether kangaroos will be able to jump the line. How many trees will be cleared either side? Who will make a quid out of the land development on either side? Let us ask some fundamental questions first. People are hung up about the shape of cities. They say that big fat cities are evil. I do not know whether they are. They mayor may not be. We can answer that question by asking: Can we have a more energy efficient city? Is it better to build a thin strip of cities and towns between Sydney and Melbourne and connect them up with a high speed low energy using train? If that is the way to go, we ought to do it. The particular route should be determined on local environmental questions. But there is no doubt that the net result could be an enormous saving of energy. We will not be flying as many people between Sydney and Melbourne. People will not commute along

10 different corridors; they can pick up the very fast train and move from an idyllic country town into the city. It is not a problem provided we conceptualise it right; provided we say to ourselves, 'Let's map it out, build it in our minds and measure the energy we save'.
This is not about public or private investment or who makes a quid out of it. There is no way that one can actually measure the profit that Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd (BHP) and other developers can make out of this-it is just too immense. BHP wants to know only whether it can use its capital reasonably over a very lengthy period and whether it can get itself enough income to keep the works going. If it can make a quid and if it is viable only by developing land either side of the track, fine, as long as costs are not added to the general society. It has potential to significantly lower costs for the new cities that will be built on either side.
In the last couple of years we have finally woken up to the fact that it is possible to over invest in housing. It is just possible that each of us can build too much and over invest in what we live in. It seems to me that if one over invests in housing one does not leave enough money-a pool of investment-for other more important matters such as earning a quid by exporting. We are just starting to get over that. We are not saying, 'You're not allowed your quarter acre block'; we are saying, 'Let's have a look at building some alternatives such as medium density housing that will lower the costs to the individual and to the soc~ety'. We do not need as much infrastructure-roads, buses, public transport, sewerage lines and all the rest of it-if we just pack it in a little.
We can build significant and beautiful environments and house people-not for the whole of their lives but for a part-in medium density housing. They should be given some choice. They can live in medium density housing for a year or so and then move on.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Ronald Edwards)-The time allotted for this debate has expired. The debate is adjourned and the resumption of the debat~' will be made an order of the day for the next sitting Thursday. The honourable member for Petrie will

Human Rights in Romania

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3221

have leave to continue his speech when the debate is resumed.
HUMAN RIGHTS IN ROMANIA
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah) (11.30)- I move:
That this House:
(I) condemns the persistent pattern of human rights violations in the Socialist Republic of Romania and notes that these violations are contrary to the Helsinki Accords and other international agreements to which Romania is a party;
(2) calls on the Romanian Government to allow the right of free emigration;
(3) calls on the President and Government of Romania to respect the basic right of ethnic minorities, among them 2.5 million Hungarians, Germans, Serbians, Croatians and Ukrainians, to allow their children to be educated in their native language;
(4) calls on the Romanian Government to cease immediately the intimidation of those who seek to exercise freedom of religion;
(5) strongly protests at the destruction of 7000 traditional villages to make way for an agricultural collectivisation program, the implementation of which has already resulted in gross abuses of human rights; and
(6) urges the Romanian Government to institute meaningful reforms that comply with obligations under international agreements and to observe immediately the rights of national minorities, the right of emigration, freedom of religion and all human rights.
At the very time when the Berlin Wall has been opened and some sections are being removed to become mantelpiece souvenirs of a major turning point in the history of Europe, Romania has almost completed the erection of a barbwire 'wall' along its border with Hungary, and is installing a similar wall along parts of its border with Yugoslavia. The direct catalyst for the Romanian action is the thousands of Romanians of Hungarian descent who are fleeing across the border to escape oppressive policies which are suppressing their Hungarian culture.
The backgrourid to this situation begins with Transylvania, an area enclosed in the Carpathian Mountains and belonging to Hungary for 1,000 years before being handed to Romania in 1918, following the end of World War I. It was briefly returned to Hungary from 1940 to 1944 by Nazi Germany and Italy, but restored to Romania in

1945. It is still home to about 2.5 million ethnic Hungarians, and it is these people who are now being persecuted by the Romanian authorities. Some reports suggest that the genesis of this persecution began in 1980 when Romania had a $10 billion national debt and President Ceausescu committed himself to paying that off by the year 2000. It seems that President Ceausescu will meet his target, but largely through the export of desperately needed foodstuffs, and all the hardship this implies for the ordinary people of Romania.
Agricultural reform is at the heart of President Ceausescu's plan to meet that commitment, and the scattered farms and villages are seen as a major obstacle. Substantially increased agricultural production and productivity are wanted by the Romanian Government, and to achieve this giant agroindustrial complexes or state collectives are being built to replace traditional villages. President Ceausescu refers to his policies as economic rationalisation, but they are also known as systemisation. They are aimed at creating a society of 'new socialist men' by eliminating variations between people; assimilating the life of the villages to the life of the town; and homogenising every aspect of social and mental life.
Although it is intended that the policies apply to all Romanians, and probably they do in practice, ethnic Hungarians and other minorities are especially endangered because not only will the policies impact severely on their distinctively different way of life and their Hungarian language; the Romanian Government is also using collectivisation as an excuse to carry out a program of enforced assimilation of the minority peoples. Piecing together reports coming from refugees, it seems likely that up to 7,000 villages may already have been razed and the people resettled onto state farming projects, often in substandard, multistorey complexes which are totally alien to farmers and villagers alike. But most disturbing are the consistent reports of the cruel suppression of the Hungarian and other minority customs and language. In Transylvania the Hungarian language is forbidden, and elsewhere its use is actively discouraged. Hungarian weddings must contain a certain percentage of Romanian music and the church has been ordered

3222 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Human Rights in Romania

to praise the merits of President Ceausescu and his Government. Where a refugee leaves behind a spouse, the Government forces that person to file for divorce and many of those who have escaped across the border have done so under fire from border patrols.
The evidence of suppression is overwhelming, but if further proof is needed of the dramatic and unpopular changes taking place in Romania, it comes from the thousands of ethnic Hungarians who are prepared to forsake their homeland and families, to flee in their thousands into neighbouring Hungary. An estimated 30,000 Romanians, most of them ethnic Hungarians, have fled to Hungary over recent years. About 20,000 are registered as refugees in Budapest, and several thousand are accommodated in refugee camps, one near Budapest and another in eastern Hungary. A recent report suggested that about 65 new arrivals were reaching Budapest each day.
The plight of the Hungarian minority in Romania emerged into the international arena in 1986 when the Hungarian Academy of Science issued a three-volume report on the history of Transylvania. This was about the time when the agro-industrial complexes were just being developed in Romania, and the Romanians replied with their own history of the region. Since then relations between Hungary and Romania have steadily deteriorated. In August 1988 an attempt to patch up differences between President Ceausescu and the Hungarian Party Leader Mr Karoly Grosz failed, and in November 1988 both countries expelled the other's diplomats.
In 1987, Amnesty International issued a report detailing the harassment, imprisonment and other human rights violations of Hungarian minorities by the Romanian authorities. In that same year the World Human Rights Guide rated Romania below Chile and South Africa in its observance of human rights. In January 1989 Romania signed a Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) document at a meeting of European countries in Vienna. However, within days it issued a statement saying it would not be bound by the human rights provisions contained in that document.
At the United Nations Commission on Human Rights meeting in Geneva in Febru-

ary 1989, Sweden asked that a special envoy be appointed by the United Nations to investigate the allegations of abuse. The Commission voted 21 to seven in favour of the investigation, with the Soviet Union abstaining-an action seen by many as Moscow's most public condemnation up to that time of President Ceausescu'sregime. Romania attempted to counter Sweden's action by directly inviting the Human Rights Commission to investigate the allegations, but it withdrew the invitation after only one day, on the grounds that the conditions. attached to such a visit by Western countries had been unacceptable. On 1 March 1989 the United Nations Human Rights Commission met again in Vienna to consider the appointment of a special investigator. At that meeting the Hungarian Deputy Foreign Minister is quoted as having said:
Human rights and fundamental freedoms are, in our judgment, gravely violated in Romania . . . not only civil and political rights but also the social, economic, and cultural rights of individuals and nationalities.
Two weeks later, on 16 March 1989, the European Community decided to suspend trade talks with Romania because of its human rights record. French President Francois Mitterrand also recalled his ambassador to Bucharest and urged an international campaign against a government which he called 'anachronistic and wounding to the human conscience'.
However, the most telling indictment of Romania's deteriorating human rights reputation came from a 35-nation East-West conference on human rights. held in Paris over four weeks of May and June 1989. A telling indictment because the conference was held under the framework of the 1975 Helsinki Accords and because Romania was strongly and directly criticised by delegate after delegate. At the opening session Romania's human rights record received savage criticism from Canada, France, Switzerland, Spain and Iceland. United States delegate, Ambassador Morris Abram, described Romania as 'the most flagrant violator' of CSCE human rights pledges, while the Canadian Foreign Minister, Joe Clark, said Romania had 'openly and. conspicuously' violated important elements of the CSCE agreement. The Dutch delegate said that 'The Government of this

Human Rights in Romania

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3223

country is running against the tide of history.' Even Romania's Soviet ally at the conference publicly criticised Romania for its decision to build a barbwire wall along its borders with Hungary and Yugoslavia.
The period of debate in this Parliament will show that the Opposition has persistently criticised the human rights record of Romania and of the Ceausescu plan of enforced collectivisation. On the other hand, unfortunately, we see a disturbing reluctance by the Hawke Government to join the international community in condemning the policies of and actions by the Ceausescu regime. It was an unfortunate fact that President Ceausescu visited Australia in 1988 and that our only diplomatic action appears to have been an instruction to the Australian Ambassador in Belgrade to express Australia's concern to the Romanian Government over its proposed assimilation policies. We need far greater action on behalf of the government and people of this country in opposition to this appalling regime in Romania. I hope that the Government picks up this motion.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Mountford)-Is the motion seconded?
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (11.4l)~1t is with pleasure that I second the motion. I pick up the last few words of the honourable member for Warringah (Mr MacKellar) and echo his thoughts. I trust the Government will move a little quicker and a little more strongly in its condemnation of the Romanian Government, particularly President Ceausescu and his family, who have perpetrated the very sorry situation in Romania today-it has been like that for quite some time. However, the Hawke Government has made several moves. Under the auspices of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade (Senator Gareth Evans), the Government is moving to condemn Romania, which is quite easy to do. What is happening there is in contrast to the events in the rest of eastern Europe. As I knew that I was to speak to this motion this morning, when flicking through today's Melbourne Age I was interested to see a small article about the famous Romanian gymnast, Nadia Comaneci, who at the age of 16 won numerous gold medals at the 1976 Olympic Games. At 29 years of age, she and half a dozen other Romanians

fled across the border into Hungary. The article uses the words 'last night', so I assume that that occurred a couple of days ago.
I am sure everyone on both sides of the Parliament would agree that the situation in Romania is disgraceful. The country is headed by President Ceausescu and his family. I understand around 50 members of the clan are in prominent positions in the Government: nepotism is rife in Romania. The family.has been in power for quite some time now and, indeed, the feudal-like repression and force that have been exerted on the Romanian people are things that one really has to see to believe. I visited eastern Europe in June and July. I did not go to Romania, but I spent some time in neighbouring Hungary. One readily gets the view that is expressed in the third point of the motion, which relates to ethnic minorities not only in Romania but also in Hungary and most of the other countries in central and eastern Europe. Indeed, there are nearly as many ethnic Hungarians outside of Hungary as there are inside its borders. As the motion says, there are 2.5 million Hungarians, Germans, Serbs, Croatians and Ukrainians. Transylvania carries most of that problem. The repression of those minority peoples has already been mentioned by the honourable member for Warringah in his excellent speech, in which he pointed out very succinctly all the facts of this sorry situation. The downgrading, the slaughter and the destruction of 7,000 villages for other development of a questionable nature is something we all should abhor.
When I was in Budapest I was approached by an ethnic Hungarian and his wife, a Romanian girl. They and their young child, I think, had escaped illegally across the border from Romania. They had been in Budapest for only a short time and were trying to get to Australia. In the last couple of weeks, since I returned, I have received a couple of letters from them. At this stage we are hopeful of speeding up that process of migration for them. It is, as I said, a very sorry situation. One really has to speak to these people to understand the repression and the circumstances in which they are asked to live. It is . something that we in this House should speak out against much more readily. There should be more occasions like this when we are

3224 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Human Rights in Romania

given the right to speak up on behalf of the people of Romania.
In eastern Europe, by contrast, in Czechoslovakia, Hungary, East Germany and Poland, great strides are being made towards democratisation in one form or another. Of course, each of those countries will end up being a little different. I think Poland and Hungary will finish up a little different from East Germany and Czechoslovakia. On page 7 of the Melbourne Age, an article sourced to the Guardian talks about the hard line the opposition is taking in its thrust for reform. The article states:
Increasingly, it looks as though Czechoslovakia, almost last out of the starting blocks in the peoples' revolutions in Eastern Europe this year, may nevertheless cross the finishing line first.
Indeed, when I came from Prague, that was my impression. I felt that if they ever got it together-I thought they would in the next few years, but they have done it a little quicker-they would move much quicker than the others. They are a different people with a different historical background from the Hungarians and the Poles in particular. I think Czechoslovakia and, to a lesser extent, East Germany will see tremendous reforms very quickly and the final make-up of those countries will.be substantially different. Czechoslovakia will finish up substantially different from Hungary and Poland, which have all sorts of problems. To start with, they are different peoples, and they have different economic problems. Hungary and Poland are economic basket cases to some extent. They really have long term problems. Czechoslovakia and East Germany are in fact quite sound economically. One has only to go back in history to the time before the last World War to see that Czechoslovakia, for example, had one of the best economies in Europe. I do not think it will be too long before that occurs again.
That is in contrast to Romania. I had discussions with Hungarian officials who had just come back from a meeting of Warsaw Pact officials in Romania, where they had discussions with Ceausescu and other Romanian officials. At that stage very high sources in the Hungarian Parliament said, 'Look, they are useless. We just can't talk to them'. When the officials were asked how the meeting went, they said, 'It just finished

up in a total mess. We didn't get anywhere'. Even though Hungary was moving very quickly in the opposite direction to Ceausescu, one would think that the comrades in the Warsaw Pact would be able to have some communication, but the Hungarians stated quite bluntly that talking to the Romanians was useless. They did not want to talk to the Romanians any more because they did not get anywhere with them. As far as the Hungarians were concerned, the Romanians could all go to hell, so to speak.
It is a pity that that is still the case in Romania. As I have said before, I hate to go over the same point, but it is worth making it again. The honourable member for Warringah went through it very succinctly. He laid out the history of the last 20years in particular. It is an abominable regime of repression, particularly of the minorities, and we in the West should be putting more and more effort into pressuring the Romanians towards some sort of democratisation and change in line with other eastern European countries.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Menzies) (11.50)- By this motion, the Australian Parliament condemns human rights violations in Romania, contrary to the Helsinki Accords; calls on Romania to allow free emigration; calls on the President and Government of Romania to respect the basic right of ethnic minorities, among them 2.5 million Hungarians, Germans, Serbians, Croatians and Ukrainians, to allow their children to be educated in their native language; calls on the Romanian Government to allow freedom of religion; protests at the destruction of 7,000 traditional villages to make way for an agricultural collectivisation program resulting in gross abuses of human rights; and urges the Romanian Government to institute meaningful reforms that comply with obligations under international agreements and to observe immediately the rights of national minorities, the right of emigration, freedom of religion and all human rights.
Romania stands in very stark contrast to virtually all countries of eastern Europe. Most of them, like East Germany and Hungary, have virtually thrown off at least some of the shackles of oppression and have taken the first tentative steps towards basic human rights and democracy. Others of those coun-

Human Rights in Romania

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3225

tries, like Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia, have seen popular pressure force their dictators to resign from office. But Romania stands in contrast. Romania is still ruled by a ruthless communist dictatorship. In Romania, the most flagrant abuses of human rights are still being inflicted on the people, and the response of its rulers to the rising tide of liberty in eastern Europe is to be even more oppressive and repressive. Their response is to oppose any reform at all and, additionally, to impose an even more purist communist dictatorship on Romania. That is why it is so important that we put the spotlight on this repressive regime and make it listen to the demands of the Australian Parliament for basic civil liberties and freedoms in Romania.
Contrary to the Romanian Government's official report to the United Nations Human Rights Committee, submitted in January 1988, the Romanian Government continues to violate the basic human rights of its citizens: the right to leave is not safeguarded in Romanian law, in fact thousands of Romanians wishing to leave that country are not permitted to do so; the right of freedom of thought, conscience and religion is daily violated; the persecution and forced Romanisation of some minority groups in Romania have intensified; free expression is not tolerated at all; independent labour unions are prohibited; and the Government has engaged in systematic cultural genocide in Transylvania.
In 1988, President Ceausescu restarted a rural resettlement program, meant to serve as a model for the eventual social engineering of the entire nation. This obscene program is to see 7,000 of the country's 13,000 villages destroyed by 1995. The victims of this policy are the Hungarians and German ethnic minoritiesas well as gypsies, the Ukrainians, Serbs and Turks, whose families have lived for centuries in Transylvania and other parts of Romania. This forced assimilation constitutes a violation of the International Covenants on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on Civil and Political Rights, in particular those articles which guarantee ethnic and linguistic minorities, the continuation of their own. cultural life, and the right to a free choice of residence. Furthermore, it is in breach of Romania's obli-

gations under the Helsinki Final Act which states in principle 7 in respect of human rights:
The participating States on whose territory national minorities exist will respect the rights of persons belonging to such minorities to equality before the law and will afford them the full opportunity for the actual enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms and wilI in this manner, protect their legitimate interests in this sphere.
Instead, and in contrast to that, the Government of Romania flagrantly ignores these obligations and commitments, and continues to do so as a matter of deliberate and sustained government policy. Indeed, there is one law of Romania, Decree 408, which states that all conversations with foreigners must be reported to the authorities within 24 hours. One could not imagine a government decree more in conflict with basic civil liberties and human rights than that one.
Amnesty International and the United States Department of State report on human rights all too graphically list the disappearances, maltreatments and tortures endemic to life in Romania. Indeed, a case has been brought to our notice of the young gymnast, Nadia Comaneci, as recently as today. It is a state where persons accused of acting against the socialist order can still be committed to psychiatric institutions as a method of punishment.
Romania remains a highly-centralised communist state where the Communist Party seeks to intrude and control every significant aspect of the country's life. It is a country where Mr Ceausescu is not only the President of the Republic, but also Secretary General of the Communist Party, Chairman of the Council of State and Chairman of the Romanian Defence Council. As a consequence his tentacles, and those of his notorious family, are everywhere. His declared policy of destroying villages and herding people into what are termed agro-industrial complexes is barbaric and deserves international censure. I recently read a quote attributed to the First Secretary of the Ilfou party committee, which is the region being resettled outside Bucharest, who said that the program of resettlement is designed to, as he described it, 'mould the new Communist man' by changing his present way of thinking, behaviour, customs, practices and habits.

3226 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Abortion Funding Abolition Bill

Well, the new Communist man has shown what he thinks of communism almost everywhere else in eastern Europe, except in Romania. We believe the tide of history has turned and Ceausescu's authoritarianism must surely be next to feel the brunt of the people's power.
With the debate. on this motion todayand I am sure that no member of this House would vote against this resolution-we as a Parliament both send and lend our support to the long-suffering people of Romania. We hope and pray that it is acted upon.
Debate adjourned.
ABORTION FUNDING ABOLITION BILL 1989
Second Reading Debate resumed from 2 November, on motion by Mr Webster:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr STEELE HALL (Boothby) (11.58)- I rise to speak for the few moments allotted to me to oppose this Abortion Funding Abolition Bill 1989. It is a very public topic indeed and it is about a process that is widely supported throughout the Australian community. Perhaps not enough polls are taken about this issue, but I understand that in July of this year in Western Australia the question was put on a number of bases to a selected number of people in Western Australia which resulted in an overall support of 63 per cent for the question of abortion on demand.
The Australian National University conducted a survey in January of this year of 3,000 respondents and the response was 68 per cent approval. From my own assessment of the community over the years, I would say that those figures would have to be around about the mark in relation to the public's attitude to abortion. Personally, I accept the situation as it is presented in South Australia which has been in existence since 1969 and which has proved to be as satisfactory a public resolution of this intensely debated question as has been instituted in Australia.
During this debate I have listened with interest to the attitudes of the honourable member for Macquarie (Mr Webster), who introduced this Abortion Funding Abolition

Bill and who, of course, genuinely and sincerely believes that life begins at conception and that not even for proven deformity of the foetus would he approve abortion. The honourable member for Perth (Dr Charlesworth) reiterated another side of the argument-that no definition is accepted in medical circles of when life begins. The honourable member for Maribyrnong (Mr Griffiths) mentioned the societies, the organisations in the community which are concerned-he named quite a number of themthat this Bill will cause great difficulties if it should be passed. I noted the remarks of the honourable member for Gippsland (Mr McGauran) that too often as politicians we duck for cover on this issue. Let me inform the honourable member that we have not ducked for cover in the State I come from. This has been a high profile debate since 1969, when legislation was introduced and passed in the South Australian Parliament. I have never run from having an opinion on this question. I have always clearly put it out to anyone who has asked for my views.
In referring to this Bill, I would like to say firstly that in' a way it is defective. It is certainly defective in relation to my State, which has been a legislative leader in this matter, because abortions which are carried out on public patients in public hospitals are subject to payment in the block arrangements which are made between State and Commonwealth governments. They are not subject to an individual Medicare reimbursement. This Bill will not affect that. In South Australia abortions have to be carried out in a prescribed hospital. Another of the major advances in my State is that there is not a so-called ridiculed industry. The fact that abortions can be carried out without reference to the Medicare rebate will, if this Bill is passed, concentrate all abortions in South Australia in public hospitals. Therefore the Bill is very defective as far as South Australia is concerned.
I want to mention briefly in the couple of minutes left to me the question of politics in this matter. The authority for the question of abortion lies with the States. Yet those who propose this Bill are trying to override the authority of the States. Would they be so keen to override the authority of the States if the question related to rainforests

Abortion Funding Abolition Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3227

in Tasmania or Queensland? Have those ernment viewpoint, the only avenue open to

honourable members abrogated their ideas us is through denial of Medicare benefits for

about States rights, because this Bill aims abortions.

totally to subvert them? We have a House which is in place to do a number of things. It is above all here to express the will of the majority. Whilst we would fight to the death to preserve the rights of minorities, in this Bill we are not proposing the view of the majority of Australians. We have a minority of the people represented, through this Bill, trying to overcome the overwhelming view of the majority in the community.

I understand the argument: we are trying to ban something that is legal. However, that does not make it right. I also understand that there are quite a number of medical procedures that do not receive Medicare benefits, so it would not be extraordinary if this legislation were passed and benefits were denied for abortions on demand. If one looks at the broader question, one must be disturbed at the figures that have been put out

Whose does this Bill affect most in the by pro-life people and have not been dis-

community? Let me say the obvious: it afputed. The total number of abortions funded

fects the women of Australia. How many by the Commonwealth through Medicare in-

women in this House will make a decision creased by 5 per cent from 61,922 in 1987-

about women? Of course, in the Catholic 88 to 64,788 in 1988-89. When one considers

church, whose view I respect on this matter, that figure of 65,000 abortions in a year, if

the decisions are made by men and this that rate of increase is continuing it is rather

decision is to be made largely by men in this disturbing from my viewpoint.

House. Of the 148 members, 139 are mennearly 95 per cent-and they will make a decision that will affect the lives of so many Australian women. I find that odd and as old as history itself. It is time we took more of a view of women's rights in this question.

I was in Hong Kong recently and picked up a copy of the China Post of 18 October this year. It was interesting to note a very sad article that I thought really brought home the question about what we are aborting. Is it a human or not? Maybe this article will

I propose to oppose this Bill on the basis provide the answer. The article, entitled

that to do so will maintain an existing evo- 'Aborted foetus found alive in mortuary',

lutionary situation in regard to the community's attitude to abortion. Refusal to pass the Bill will maintain the majority Australian view overwhelmingly expressed in polls. It

said:

Moscow, Oct. 16

-An aborted foetus

dumped in a Soviet hospital mortuary was found to

be alive after an orderly heard crying, Moscow radio

will maintain, too, I say to those who will said on Monday.

lose this vote, their right as a minority to do The foetus was assumed to be dead by doctors

as they wish, unoppressed by others.

who carried out a 'complicated operation' on the

Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (12.04)-The Abortion Funding Abolition Bill before the

mother and sent it to the mortuary of the hospital . . .

House is a very important piece of legisla-

tion. I say at the outset that I support the' An orderly tidying up the room heard crying and legislation, but I find that it is not as black went to fetch colleagues, the radio added.

and white or as easy as some people from 'They were completely taken aback when on the

both sides make out. I think there are flaws ice-cold concrete floor, wrapped in a hospital cloth, in it, as the previous speaker, the honourable they discovered a new-born baby' . . .

member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall), has One does not know the full circumstances of

said. In a perfect world, as I have suggested that situation. However, it brings home very

to many in the pro-life groups, we should be vividly to my mind that abortion is the ter-

concentrating our efforts on the State govmination of life. I will not go into the his-

ernments. It is the State governments that trionics that some people do when they talk

control the issue of abortion. However, I about murder and so forth. I think that is

understand the frustration of the honourable wrong. Some people, very clear of consci-

member for Macquarie (Mr Webster) and ence, make a decision to abort a child. That

others who have brought this legislation into is their decision. I disagree with it. Quite

the House for debate. From a Federal govclearly, whether it be at the moment of

3228 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Abortion Funding Abolition Bill

conception or very soon after-lam not a scientist but obviously if it is not at conception it is very soon after-that foetus is a human being. As we have seen in this article, a foetus was aborted, obviously at several months, and found alive.
About 12 years ago the people who lived opposite me in a suburb of Melbourne had a two-year-old son who had been born prematurely at five months. The suggestion that an abortion cannot be performed after three months, four months or five months is just nonsense. Do we say that because the arms of the foetus have not been properly formed, it is not a human being? That is total nonsense.
The honourable member for Boothby referrred to a woman's right. No-one inside this House or outside it has the right to do as he likes with his body. Laws in our society ban all sorts of things so that we have an ordered society and not the law of the jungle. There are certain things that a person cannot do. A person cannot say that he has the right to do whatever he wants to do. If he shoots someone, he will be put in gaol. He cannot kick someone to death or otherwise abuse somebody else's body, or he will put in gaol. I do not agree with the statement that the woman has the right. When that statement is made, no-one says, 'What about the child? Has the child a right to live, too?'. Of course the child has that right.
Recently, I was supplied with a letter from the Women's Electoral Lobby. It was written by Valda Byth. Obviously I do not agree with what was put to me in the letter but I do agree with one statement; it is something that I have said on numerous occasions over the years. It is somewhat similar to the divorce situation. We spend too much time on divorce and not enough time on the period before people get married. In her letter, Miss Byth said:
WEL has always believed that the incidence of abortion is a tragedy. However, to reduce this substantially it is vital that family planning information be widely available . . .
I agree with that. I have no argument with that at all. That is really where we should be heading because too many children fall pregnant because they are not properly counselled. We should be looking at educa-

tion at school and so on. Miss Byth also wrote:
The incidence of teen-age pregnancy is far higher in Queensland, where no such courses are given.
We cannot turn a blind eye to these problems. We must educate children so they know what it is all about.
I refer also to a letter from Margaret Tighe of Right to Life Australia. I agree with her general principles but I think that Margaret has gone off the deep end somewhat over the last few years. Indeed, she was nearly served with a few writs from very strong pro life honourable members on this side of the House following the last election. In her letter, after calling for a full debate and vote, she wrote-and this indicates how the matter has become political and stupid:
The only justification for refusing this time is that the government is committed to a strong pro-abortion position . . .
That is wrong. She also wrote:
. . . Members are bound to vote with the proabortion Hawke Government . . .
As I pointed out at the beginning of my speech, the abortion issue is basically a State issue. Queensland has been governed by the National Party for the past 30 years; New South Wales is now governed by the Liberal Party but it has had Labor and Liberal governments over the last 30 years; and Victoria now has a Labor government but, until relatively recently, was governed by the Liberal Party for a quarter of a century. Those three major States have been historically governed by a spread of representation, although more so on the conservative side, yet the problem remains with the States. So Margaret Tighe should not write that sort of rubbish to me. I .do not need anybody to convince me that the abortion issue is very important.
As I said earlier, this issue should be the subject of a full debate at some stage. I assume that this Parliament has only a few days to run, depending on when the election is called-and who knows when that will be? So, if we are unable to have this matter fully debated before the election, the genuine people, among whom I include the honourable member for Macquarie (Mr Webster), will no doubt seek to have this matter fully debated following the election. Usually, in the first six months of any parliament, the

Philatelic Material

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3229

legislation load is light; so that would be an ideal time to have a very full and frank debate on this issue, when we are not in a heated political situation. If that occurred, the vote would be very interesting. If it were passed, it may apply pressure on the States to review their abortion laws.
I do not agree with the abortion laws. One has to be concerned when between 65,000 and 70,000 abortions were performed last year. That is 'ari"'enormous number of unborn children to be killed. I cannot think of another word. Perhaps I could say that they were not allowed to enter this life. I do not see how that can be allowed to continue. Abortion is used as a form of contraception. Again we get back to education, a matter raised in the letter from the Women's Electoral Lobby. I totally agree with that aspect of the letter. Our children-indeed all people-need education on contraception. As a practising Catholic, while obviously I am putting the views of the Catholic Church in this matter, I disagree with the Catholic Church in the general area of contraception. There has to be some contraception so that Australia does not become over-populated as is the case in some overseas countries. It is all right to mouth wonderful words but it is ridiculous when some South American countries cannot feed their people.
I have some reservations about the Bill because I think it contains some flaws. If this issue went to a vote at some stage and I was still a member of this Parliament, I would support this legislation, although I would much rather see the States take a firm view because that is where the issue really lies.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Mountford)-Order! The time allotted for this debate has expired. The debate is adjourned and the resumption of the debate will be made an order of the day for the next sitting Thursday. The member will have leave to continue his speech when the debate is resumed.
DISPLAY AND SALE OF PHILATELIC MATERIAL IN PARLIAMENT HOUSE
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (12.19)-1 move:
(I) That his House: (a) condemns the action of Australia Post in re-
moving from Parliament House all facilities for the display and sale of philatelic material

of the postal agencies of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands and Christmas Island, both of which have representation in each House of the Australian Parliament and whose residents are Australian citizens, and of Norfolk Island, an external Australian territory;
(b) considers that Australia Post has acted improperly and has displayed significant greed by removing the display and sales of Australian territories philatelic material in order to remove competition from the excessive amount of material being produced by Australia Post; and
(c) calls on Australia Post to reverse immediately its decision; and
(2) That a message be sent to the Senate acquainting it of this resolution and requesting that it concur.
Usually I would not raise a matter of this nature but Australia Post has made a decision, on its own initiative, to exclude from the Australian Parliament House the sales of philatelic material from Australian Territories, particularly Cocos (Keeling) Islands and Christmas Island, which are represented in this Parliament by one honourable member and two honourable senators; Norfolk Island, also an Australian Territory, is similarly excluded. The decision was taken as part of a review of philatelic services without any real consultation with the Territories concerned and has been excused as a commercial decision to change the arrangements and, put rather simply, to remove competition from the already excessive amount of philatelic material with which, in recent years, Australia Post has flooded the market.
For most postal agencies philatelic material is a source of revenue which does not require the delivery of a service, which is what a postage stamp is-a pre-paid label for a service to be provided at a future time. The Australian Territories derive some revenue, although the amount has declined in recent times because of the decline in the current issues philatelic market throughout the world. That is largely the responsibility of stamp agencies, particularly in the United States, which have manipulated small countries for their own quick profits. Some of the Pacific Islands have paid a very high price in the loss of foreign currency revenue because there were conned, particularly by American agencies, into the 'quick quid and forget about tomorrow' syndrome.

3230 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Philatelic Material

Regrettably, in the mid-1970s Australia Post joined the same queue and has issued more philatelic material in the last three years than was issued in the first 50 years of Federation. It is designed for quick turnover-definitive stamps, for instance, have sets of 20 and 25 stamps and are changed on a very regular basis-adding to fairly substantial costs for a person wishing to maintain an Australian collection. One almost cannot go and buy the first items in a set of definitives which used to have a currency of three to four years before the last ones are issued.
In respect of the Australian Territories, the subject of this motion, for many years there has been a practice of displaying and selling the stamps of the Australian Territories at the post office in Parliament House. Australia Post charges a fee of 35 per cent for that service and, like all other services in that area, the returns have declined. Australia Post must bear much of the responsibility for those declines. It has issued material in a manner which it could be said has been designed only to rip off those people who collect current issue stamps of Australia. I belong to a philatelic club and I do not know whether any members of that club take current issues nowadays. Current issues have declined because of the policies and attitudes of Australia Post.
The Cocos (Keeling) Islands philatelic agency is run by the local council. It makes a small amount of money-it has declinedwhich is available for use by the council of the Islands for activities for the local community. One of the few places where exposure to that material is available in Australia is Parliament House. Visitors in their normal tour of Parliament House go to the post office, look through' the new issues and, on occasions, purchase souvenirs. Some people will go on to collect a particular set of philatelic items. Similarly, Christmas Island has displayed and has put forward some very attractive stamps, particularly of the Christmas variety, and would benefit by the exposure to the large number of visitors who go through this building.
Initially, Australia Post informed the agencies that from 1 November this year it was withdrawing the display and sale of philatelic materials and that persons in Canberra who

wished to obtain or see that material would have to go to the main Canberra Post Office. As a result of representations from myself, the honourable member for the Northern Territory (Mr Snowdon) and Senator Collins, it has modified that stance marginally. It will now display the stamps for a limited period, but one has to go to the Canberra Post Office to buy them. Quite honestly, I think that is unacceptable.
These are Australian Territories, and Norfolk Island is part of them. They issue separate philatelic material as a historic fact. That material should be available in Australia's Parliament House and it should be available for sale. I do not think that we are treating the Territories fairly. We are not doing what I would expect of a country the size of Australia when we take away from some 400 permanent residents, say, of Cocos (Keeling) Islands, a small amount of revenue to provide amenities in that area through their council purely to provide Australia Post with a competition-free environment in Parliament House, which is the largest tourist centre at which postage stamps and philatelic material is on display. That is what it is all about-removing competition from Australia Post in an effort to allow it to recover some of the lost ground that bad management has created. It is as simple as that.
Since 1977 Australia Post has issued philatelic material in a manner which is comparable to some of the worst countries around the world in terms of philatelics. It has destroyed Australia's reputation which was once very strong in this area. It has turned off almost all serious collectors of Australian stamps. I repeat that a check of the philatelic clubs around Australia would disclose that, as a result of the policies of Australia Post, and its stamp issue policies, a very small percentage now collect Australian new issues.
For young people commencing to collect stamps the cost of Australia Post's issues are so exorbitant over a period for a comprehensive collection of new issues that most parents could not afford to have their children collect Australian stamps. In some instances they collect stamps from one or other of the Territories, all of which have better stamp issue policies than Australia Post. It is a

Grievance Debate

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3231

matter of regret that Australians coming from parts of Australia which historically have their own stamp issue are no longer able to obtain that material in the Australian Parliament-not because it is difficult or costly for Australia Post to do so but because Australian Post has made such a mess of its own stamp issue policy that it has to squeeze others out in order to make room for its own sales. It is excluding competition by this decision and it is doing it within the Australian Parliament House. I think that it is highly improper.
I do not know whether arrangements would allow us to deal with this matter by other means but, if it were possible, I would suggest that the Presiding Officers might examine whether Territories issues might be included in the souvenirs that are sold through the shop in Parliament House. I believe people would take up these souvenirs packs rather than purchase the endless supply of paper that is churned out by Australia Post in a desperate effort to recover the ground that it lost through its own incompetence and greed.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Mountford)-Is the motion seconded?
Mr Lamb-I second the motion and reserve my right to speak.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Mountford)-Order! It being 12.30 p.m., the debate is interrupted in accordance with sessional order 104A. The resumption of the debate will be made an order of the day for the next sitting Thursday.
GRIEVANCE DEBATE Disability Services-Parliamentary Labor Party-Economy-Urban Environment-
Tasmanian Government: Employment Summit-Australian Export IndustryHealth Survey-Member for Hotham Question proposed:
That grievances be noted.
Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson) (12.30)- Today I shall ask leave of the House to table a draft Bill and its explanatory memorandum to amend the Disability Services Act 1986. The. genesis of the Bill lies in the genuine concerns of carers in disability services, clients of these services-the disabled themselv~s and a growing fear of parents, relatives and

guardians of the disabled for the future of their children. The concerns have been aggravated by the way in which the Minister for Community Services and Health (Dr Blewett) and the bureaucrats in his Department are implementing the Disability Services Act, indicating an ideology which is directed towards a high risk, high cost philosophy which is not sanctioned in terms of the Act nor in terms of the bipartisan support for the Act as shown in 1986.
Our motivation in doing this is not partypolitical; we are motivated entirely by a desire to help those people with disabilities. Our purpose is to ensure that the disability services program is conducted in a non-partisan manner, because the quality of people's lives is far too important to be put at risk by party-political rivalries. Our aim is for cooperation and conciliation rather than confusion, confrontation and conflict.
The coalition is not alone in its concern. Many Labor members are dismayed at the way in which their Government is proceeding with its own guidelines~not this Parliament's-in the implementation of the Act. During the second reading debate on the Bill back in 1986, Senator Don Grimes said:
I do not believe, and have never claimed, that we have come down with a perfect bit of legislation. We would certainly make a great mistake if we believe that this legislation was something like the Ten Commandments which would be set in stone, never to be changed. It will need to be changed as we develop experience in the area. It will need to be changed as conditions change. It will need to be changed over the years as we develop new ideas and techniques to deal with problems of disability.
Since then, the Opposition has made two referrals in the Senate to look specifically at employment and accommodation aspects of the implementation which concern carers, the disabled, their families and parliamentarians. There is a mistaken belief on the part of those implementing the Act that theserv~ ice providers have not changed and are not prepared to change. The reverse is the case. There has been a vast improvement to and an extension of the number of services available to those people with disabilities in Australia. One comment made to me was that in many respects Australian research and development of programs for the disabled leads the world. Many of the inspections of services I have made over the past 12 months

3232 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Grievance Debate

and discussions I have had with leading researchers and consultants confirm that view.
Many providers have done their utmost to conform to departmental guidelines, only to find the guidelines continually changing and approvals from the State department being overturned from Canberra. Even if matters are successfully negotiated, sometimes funding is not available, or continuity of funding is not certain, even though pilot programs have proved that the costs of the departmental changes would be astronomical. Changes that are required in the implementation of the Acts have left many people with disabilities confused and uncertain, and long-established, experienced organisations providing services to people with disabilities are facing unnecessary financial and mental hardship. Many would want to conform, but departmental appreciation of their organisations' position is lacking.
We table this draft Bill with the sincere intention of providing motivation and assistance to our disabled and out of concern for their parents and, of course, the concern of the carers, many of whom are acting in a voluntary capacity. In fact, we believe it to be our duty as parliamentarians to initiate this review. The Bill proposes amendments to the Disability Services Act, but it is not intended to be definitive. By tabling it and distributing it widely throughout the industry, we hope that it will provoke discussion and comment and suggestions as to further .amendments.
Recently, at the Australian Council for Rehabilitation of Disabled annual convention, I devoted my address to the changes we would seek to make to the Act. This draft Bill addresses matters which were referred to in that speech although, as I have said, by no means is it all-inclusive and, in the final analysis, our present assumptions may require review and modification. In tabling the proposed Bill, the Opposition invites comments and suggestions from all those people with disabilities, the providers, the parents, the Commonwealth itself and other authorities. The main purpose of the Bill is to provide for increased flexibility in delivering financial and allied assistance to persons with disabilities.

The Bill does not seek to alter in any way the main thrust of the Act. Section 3, objects, would remain unaltered. However, the Bill recognises that experience has proved that the administration of the Act is not providing sufficient flexibility and certainty to persons with disabilities, nor to providers of services to them, and it seeks to remedy this deficiency. Proposed section 3A recognises the need for distinctions to be made as to the needs, aspirations and potentials of persons with differing types and degrees of disabilities, and it would make special provision for persons whose disabilities result from, or are attributable to, or primarily attributable to, an intellectual impairment, thus increasing choices available to them and preserving them from unwanted or unwarranted external arbitrary decisions. It seeks to ensure that their needs and aspirations are ascertained solely by reference to them, to their parents, relatives, guardians or advocate, or to a medical practitioner. Proposed section 3A is very important, and again I invite comments and suggestions to ensure its practicality and fairness so that it is not used just as an escape from providing for a person's natural fulfilment under the Act.
We realise that, through this amendment, we have looked at just one group of disabled people. There are others that have been mentioned to us: the psychiatrically disabled, people with degenerative dis.eases and the physically disabled. We would welcome comment on how the Act might be amended to better serve the needs of all disabled people. The application of principles, objectives and guidelines has been of great concern and, unfortunately, these are not subject to parliamentary scrutiny. We propose that these principles, objectives or guidelines be laid before each House of the Parliament for debate, amendment if necessary, and approval. This will provide for genuine public consultation and parliamentary approval of those vital principles.
Because of the Government's refusal to accept certain services under the general provisions of section 9 of the Act, two additional services would be added-staff training services and vocational training services. The security of attendant care services is also guaranteed by our amendment. Again, comment is invited. There are other models of

Grievance Debate

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3233

service currently being sought but refused by the Department that could be added to the eligible service types. The Opposition supports the proposal of service providers that the so-called factory model-a service akin to the best of current sheltered workshops producing productivity-based wages, normal industrial working conditions and a high community profile-be included as a supported employment service type under the Act, and we would so amend the service type guidelines.
The Bill also contains measures to provide some degree of predictability in financial assistance, and some degree of restriction as to terms and conditions which may be imposed by the Minister in approving a grant of financial assistance. These measures have a direct link with the terms and conditions which may be included in agreements required to be signed by recipients under section 15 of the principal Act, since section 15 requires contracts to contain the same terms and conditions as those on which financial assistance was granted.
Extension of the transition date of 1992 has obviously become necessary, especially as the Department appears to be admitting that that deadline of 1992 cannot be met. We propose to extend the deadline to 1995 with the intention that we would still keep pressure on those who can change to their total fulfilment under the Act and we would encourage them to do so. We would not want there to be an escape clause to enable those people to rest on theirlaurels. The current Act does not include an appeals mechanism. Our amendments would provide for appeals mechanisms under the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and other authorities.
As I said earlier, we table this draft Bill with the sincere intention of providing motivation and assistance to our disabled and out of concern for their parents and, of course, the concern of the carers, many acting in a voluntary capacity. The conCern of those parents has been indicated over the last 12 months by the formation by people with children with intellectual disabilities of parent groups. The concern of the carers themselves, many acting in a voluntary capacity, would want to be considered in these amendments. We ask for their com-

ment. We hope that it will provoke discussion and comment from all those who are disabled, and from the providers, the parents, the Commonwealth itself, this Parliament and all other authorities interested in the welfare of those people. I now seek leave to table the draft Bill and its explanatory memorandum.
Leave granted. Mrs CHILD (Henty) (12.40)-Many things distinguish the Australian Labor Party from not only our political opponents here in Australia but all other political parties in the world. One of the most important of these is our special sense of our own history, that sense that we are part of a continuing movement in the working out of Australia's destiny, that sense of continuity and affinity with the men and women who have built up our Party and movement for over a century. Today I wish to deal with one of the most important aspects of Labor's continuing strength. It is the key to our continuing relevance and our central importance to the history and growth of this Australian nation. I refer to the role of the Australian Labor Party as, first and last, a parliamentary party. I put forward three propositions. First, there can be no true understanding of the nature, meaning or history of Labor except by understanding its central role as a parliamentary party. Secondly, there can be no true understanding of the Parliament of Australia except by understanding the critical role of Labor in shaping the Australian Parliament. Just as the work of Labor for the past century has uniquely shaped the Australian nation, so its work in the Parliament has uniquely shaped our Parliament into a uniquely Australian one. I make a third assertion: that it is the House of Representatives through which this great national work has been done, and it is through that House alone that Labor can continue its central task of shaping the destinies of our people and our nation. Our present ascendancy in the Parliament of our nation has been won only by years of immense effort and dedication, often in the face of seemingly insuperable odds. Our continued success depends upon maintaining that effort and dedication. The continuing struggle has always had two aspects: first, the

3234 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Grievance Debate

resistance of the conservative Right, the men born to rule, against accepting Labor's legit~ imacy within the parliamentary system; and second, the historic divisions of opinion within the Labor movement itself about the effectiveness of Parliament as the instrument for the advancement of our cause. This has always been one of the most fundamental questions for the Australian Labor movement.

The greatest challenge-though certainly not the first-to Labor's faith in the parliamentary system came in 1975. At the height of the crisis of 1975 Gough Whitlam summed up two aspects of Labor's struggle to establish itself as the pre-eminent party of parliamentary democracy. In his Curtin Memorial Lecture at the Australian National University he said:

I would not wish to any future leader of the Austra-

lian Labor Party the task of having to harness the

radical forces to the restraints and constraints of the

parliamentary system if I were now to succumb in

the presen t crisis.

.

It is clear that the basic attack which has been mounted against the Labor Government . . . was not an attack on its competence or its effectiveness but on its very legitimacy-the legitimacy of any reformist government now or in the future.

It is a remarkable testimony to the strength of the Labor Party as a parliamentary party that, despite all that happened in 1975, we stand where we do today. In the final analysis, it occurred because the Labor Party itself-the membership, the rank and filesustained faith in the parliamentary system despite all that had happened. to threaten that faith. But sustaining this faith has to be a two-way process. The' faith and loyalty shown by the rank and file deserve and demand a matching response from Labor governments which owe their election to that faith and loyalty. That means that Labor governments have a responsibility to show that their faith in the parliamentary system is justified, to show that Labor's cause of reform, progress and equality can be truly advanced within the parliamentary system, and I deeply believe that all our Labor governments are striving to do just that, despite the great difficulties and challenges of the times through which we are passing.

I come now to my second point-the impact of the Australian Labor Party upon the

parliamentary system itself. Australian Labor's unique contribution to parliamentary democracy has been the development of the caucus system. In the past, our conservative opponents have violently attacked this approach from the beginning. But, in the end they have virtually adopted it. The heart of the Labor system at every level is the principle of majority rule. With the coming of the pledged Labor parliamentarians, party politics took on an altogether new meaning. The sentiment behind the pledge was, in fact, a logical extension of the basic ideas of ~he Labor movement on political questions generally. It merely applied to parliamentary practice two fundamental doctrines-majority rule and solidarity. This meant that parliamentary government and parliamentary action, wherever Labor members sat in a parliament, would never be quite the same as it had been before their arrival.
Labor's caucus system has had three results of immense importance and value. First, it ensures that the executive government is answerable to the whole parliamentary pl!-rty. Second, it strengthens the control of the elected government over the bureaucracy. But, above all, the discipline of the caucus system has given Australia a strong, effective, two-party system-the indispensable position for stable government in a modern parliamentary democracy.
I come now to my third and most important point. The House of Representatives is the key to parliamentary democracy in Australia and the whole future of the Australian Labor Party is centred upon the dominant role of the House of Representatives if the effective two-party system is to survive in our nation. I will give three illustrations, from Chifley to Hawke.
In the first place, we must never forget that Chifley, in his great partnership with John Curtin, came to power through the lIouse of Representatives and the House of Representatives alone. Australia's greatest Government at the time of Australia's greatest danger depended wholly and solely upon the House of Representatives. Curtin did not come to power in 1941 by an election. He came to power to win the war because two members of the House of Representatives changed their votes to defeat the Fadden Government and install the Curtin-Chifley

Grievance Debate

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3235

Government. In the most terrible period in Australia's history the Curtin Government was sustained by a razor-thin majority in the House of Representatives and throughout that period until the general election in 1943 the Curtin Government never had a majority in the Senate. That is, the Curtin-Chifley partnership relied entirely on the confidence of the members of the House of Representatives. That is how Australia survived the worst crisis in our history.
The second illustration is the double dissolution election of 1974, the election in which I first had the honour to be elected to the House of Representatives. Except for those of us who were so deeply involved, the 1974 election is in danger of becoming, in the eye of history, the election that never was. But in truth it was one of Labor's greatest successes, because it was a triumph for the legitimacy of the reform program of the Whitlam Labor Government, as expressed by the people-and that was the issue which lay at the heart of Gough Whitlam's mighty struggle in 1975. It is a remarkable tribute to the strength of Labor's commitment that, despite the events of 1975, we have worked within the system to return Labor to its present position.
My third illustration is the 1987 election, in many ways the most remarkable of all. No election has better illustrated the role of the House of Representatives as the true expression of the will of the people on the central question: who shall govern? There was something quite majestic about the way the people of Australia went about achieving exactly what they wanted to achieve, just as they did in South Australia last week. In many electorates where they could afford to .do so, they took the opportunity to deliver a warning and they did that in South Australia, too. But wherever it counted and was necessary for achieving their central purpose of returning a strong government, the people made sure that that was what Australia would get. They did that in South Australia and they will do that again next year. I emphasise that such a result, such a vindication of parliamentary democracy, could only be achieved through the House of Representatives operating on the basis of single member constituencies.

By contrast in the Senate we remain a minority and increasingly the Senate will become a chamber for registering public opinion on a range of issues, very often single issues. That may be a legitimate function for an upper House, but I do not think that was what was envisaged by the Constitution. The registration of temporary public opinion is not the same thing as the expression of the will of the people about who shall govern. (Extension of time granted). That is always the central question for parliamentary democracy and governments can only be formed through the House of Representatives. That will always be the central role of the Australian House of Representatives-it is the people's House carrying out the people's will.
The greatest source of strength which the House of Representatives has in fulfilling its true role remains the enduring commitment to parliamentary democracy on the part of the Australian Labor Party. It is a commitment based upon our recognition .of the House of Representatives as the best instrumentavailable to us for the advancement of our cause of change and reform. Long may both the commitment and the cause endure.
Mr ROCHER (Curtin) (12.52)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I pay my compliments to the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child) in what is more than likely to be her last speech in this place. It is fitting that she pay tribute to her Party and to this House as the basis of parliamentary democracy in the Commonwealth. I commend her for her remarks. What I shall say today is more topical and up to date and certainly will not be in the same complimentary vein to her Party as the speech of the honourable member for Henty.
I want to touch firstly on the level of foreign debt and those matters which go the root of our economic malaise in this country. Apart from a couple of parliamentary occasions, we rarely get an opportunity to discuss the economy and its problems in this House. As. I said, I will touch first on our foreign indebtedness and note that in every year since the Labor Government took office in 1983 Australia's level of international debt has reached record heights. In fact, since 1982-83, our net foreign debt has increased by some $87 billion to a staggering $11 0 billion. As a percentage of gross domestic

3236 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Grievance Debate

product, that represents an increase from 21 per cent on an amount just under $14 billion to 33 to 35 per cent today on that $110 billion debt figure I have just mentioned.
The interest payments necessary to service our foreign debt bill over the same period since the election of Labor in 1983 have trebled from $2.9 billion to $9.4 billion at the end of the last financial year. Our obligation to meet those interest bills is increasing by the day. To put it another way, our total net debt represents a debt for each man, woman and child in Australia of $7,400.

Or to put it another way again, the first 63 cents in every dollar earned in exports is owed overseas simply to meet our interest payments. The outcome of that is that Australia has the world's third highest external debt to overseas private banks and is behind only Brazil and Mexico. In the context of these remarks it is also useful to refer to the Government's response to our current account deficit problems. But before I do so, Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek leave to incorporate a table in Hansard.
Leave granted. The table read as jollows-

THE PROGRESSION OF THE CURRENT ACCOUNT DEFICIT ($m) (Non-seasonally adjusted)

Month July. August. September October November December January February March April May June Annual Total

Financial Year

1982-83 1983-84 1984-85 1985-86 1986-87 1987-88 1988-89 1989-90

-537 -731 -680 -743 -373 -483 -313 -515 -603 -666 -339 -714

-542 -1,173 -772 -1,094 -677 -712 -620 -1,209 -444 -890 -326 -918 -464 -1,268 -635 -658 -748 -660 -248 -632 -1.094t -1,044 -664 -929

-1,486 -1,044 -1,117 -1,675 -1,050 -1,206 -I,m
-969 -1,192 -1,528 -1,313 -1,172

-1,572 -1,211 -1,380 -1,748
-798 -464 -1,254 -904 -779 -1,109 -840 -840

-1,323 -860
-1,241 -1,368
-909 -691 -449 -986 -1,222 -506 -1,321 -956

-1,461 -1,376

-1,812
-2,512 *

-1,048 -1,776

-1,747 -2,242

-1,487

-1,048

-1,659

-1,292

-1,774

-1,348

-2,033*

-1,793

-6,697 -7,234 -11,187 -14,923 -12,899 -11,832 -18,066 -18,500 (est. )

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics.
* Highest ever monthly CAD on record.

t First ever monthly CAD of $1,000 Million or more.

* First ever monthly CAD of $2,000 Million.

Mr ROCHER-nhank the House. Under the goals for this financial year, 1989-90, is

this Hawke Government, the first monthly a total current account deficit for the year

current account deficit of $1 billion was exof around $18.5 billion. A simple reference

ceeded for the first time in May 1984. In the to the table will tell us that we are well on

66 months from May 1984 to October 1989, the way not only to exceeding that, but also,

Australia's current account deficit was more perhaps, to a total current account deficit at

than $1 billion on 44 occasions. The first $2 the end of this financial year in excess of

billion-plus current account deficit was ob- $21 billion, and perhaps as high as $25 bil-

tained in May of this year and since then lion.

there have been two further monthly current account deficits in excess of $2 billion.

The Treasurer also said that by the end of this financial year, inflation would still be

The Treasurer (Mr Keating) said in his around 7.5 per cent. The trouble with taking

Budget Speech only this year that the Budget those figures at face value is that the Treas-

would take up the challenge of getting Ausurer was woefully inaccurate with his fore-

tralia's trade and inflation problems under casting in the previous financial year. He

control. However, on that occasion and since predicted then an annual current accQunt

he has outlined no coherent policy initiatives deficit for the 1988-89 financial year of $9.5

to achieve the stated goals. Included amongst billion, when in fact it turned out to be just

Grievance Debate

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3237

in excess of $18 billion. So much for the estimates and the predictions of the Treasurer. Let us compare Labor's performance in office with that of the coalition. For the whole of 1981-82, the last full year the coalition was in government, the current account deficit was $8.8 billion and for 198283, the last coalition Budget year, it was down to $6.6 billion. That is a measure of the problem.
One result has been a downgrading of Australia's credit rating. We saw the first episode of that as long ago as September 1986 when Moody's first dropped us from a AAA rating to AA 1 rating. At the time you might recall, Mr Deputy Speaker, the Treasurer was not particularly impressed and preferred to rely on Standard and Poor's credit rating for Australia. Well, he was not to be seen on 3 December 1986 when Standard and Poor's did exactly the same and downgraded its assessment of our rating from AAA to AA-plus. Since then, of course, we have seen both Moody's and Standard and Poor's reduce our international credit rating. However much I, as an Australian, do not welcome that assessment of our credibility internationally, who could blame either of those credit rating agencies?
What has been the response by this Government to this succession of failures in our economic performance-the economic debacle which is verified by the balance of payments, the balance of trade, our international indebtedness and inflation figures? What has been the policy response? Of course, the Government has been dealt a blow by its masters in the Australian Council of Trade Unions because they rule out measures which we will take when we return to government and which, in the medium to long term, would have some hope of reversing the six or seven years of problems and malaise created by this Labor Government. Its response has been to rely on monetary policy in general and high interest rates in particular. In fact it boils down simply' to high interest rates and it is in this context, Mr Deputy Speaker, that I seek leave to incorporate a second table in Hansard.
Leave granted. The document read as follows-

The Upward Progression Of Savings Bank Home Loan Interest Rates

Date
March 1983
June 1987. July 1988 . December 1988 . February 1989 March 1989 . May 1989 . . July 1989. . October 1989

Rate
12.5% (change of Government)
15.5%* 14.5% 15.0% 15.5% 16.0%* 17.0%* 17.0%-18.0%*# 17.0%-18.0%#

* Denotes new record high level for Savings Bank
Home Loan interest rates'.

Mr ROCHER-I thank the House once again. This reliance on high interest rates is all fine and dandy, of course, but the people it affects are home buyers. We see from the table which I have just had incorporated that interest rates have risen from 12.5 per cent in March 1983, with the change of government to something like 18 per cent on saving bank interest rates last month. That is the measure of the problem and it is very difficult out in the electorate for our constituents to see why home buyers should be targeted in this way to correct trade imbalances and balance of payments problems, which in no way can be tied to them. It is the natural desire of all Australians to purchase their own homes for reasons of security and on behalf of their families.

Mr TICKNER (Hughes) (1.02)-The matter that I seek to debate today is one which I raised earlier in the course of today's proceedings, and that is the looming ~risis facing Australian cities in the urban enVlTonment. In the course of an earlier debate, I was in the process of listing what I saw as some major concerns of the urban environment. I had made the point that it was an absolute obscenity that in these times, Australian governments have continued to discharge sewage into the oceans. I made the point that that is one of many major urban problems that need to be addressed.

A further matter that needs to be addressed is the issue of development control regulations and the Treasurer (M.r Keati!1g) has made a public comment on thIS questlOn. I personally believe that there is enormous scope for reform of development control by local government in this country in order to

3238 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Grievance Debate

facilitate innovative forms of development to assist in meeting the population pressures of the city. The point that I make is that those changes must occur in consultation with local communities and not in the form currently being practised by the Greiner-Murray Government in New South Wales, where changes are foisted on local communities without consultation. This was the case in the North Sydney municipality and many others.
My point is, essentially, that too often important planning decisions are taken by planning bureaucracies with no public participation. I take the view that if people power can crush the Berlin Wall, then equal people power ought to be able to bring planning bureaucracies to account to make sure that public participation is an essential part of the urban planning process. Even within my own electorate I have another example of such authoritarian planning with the Greiner-Murray Government proposing what is, in effect, the Bangor-Sutherland to Liverpool Freeway-not to serve the interests of local communities, but rather to have a crossSydney freeway link to serve the freight industry. All this, of course, will divide communities in my electorate.
My parliamentary colleague the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) , who is not in the House today, once told me a very incisive story which highlighted to me the mentality of some planning bodies in this country, which practise planning in a rather authoritarian sense, not accountable to the community and, indeed, not accountable to elected governments. The honourable member was Minister for Urban and Regional Development in the Whitlam Government and he told me the story of an occasion when he was in a meeting with representatives of what was then the Department of Main Roads in New South Wales. In the honourable member's gentle and persuasive manner, he was seeking to make the point to the departmental representatives that it really was not such a good idea to put in an inner city expressway right through the residential community of Glebe and surrounding areas. A short time after the Minister had finished his presentation the departmental representatives leanedacross the table and said, 'Ministers come and Ministers go, but

the Department of Main Roads goes on forever'. Of course there are equivalent bureaucracies in this country; certainly in past years the Tasmanian Hydro-Electric Commission would have to be a prime candidate for an unaccountable, authoritarian planning bureaucracy.
I believe that in changing the shape of our cities, local government has a crucial role to play. The basis of my remarks is to assert that no level of government has all the answers and what we have to do is initiate from the Federal level a cooperative approach to urban issues and the urban crisis that is looming in this country. Tragically, local government in Australia is almost a mirror reflection of the other levels of government. What happens is that people participate in the triennial or every four-year election of their local council, in most cases effectively signing a blank cheque. We then find theelected aldermen and councillors takingit upon themselves to unilaterally make major d~cisions affecting the urban environment, often without consultation with local communities. My view is that an essential part of changing the face of the urban environment in Australia is to argue the case for extended democracy and greater public participation.
Mr Deputy Speaker, my personal view is that the Federal Government is well placed to take some initiatives to advance the enhancement of the urban environment. The Australian Labor Government has a record in the non-urban environment which is unequalled around the world-unequalled. But I believe it is time that we, as a party and as a government, turned our attention to the urban environment which, as I have indicated, has such a direct affect on three-quarters of the Australian population. At least 70 per cent of the Australian people live in cities with populations of more than 100,000 people. We are the fourth most urbanised country in the world.
The cornerstone of this Government's ap-. proach to public policy and the guiding light of our Government is the.social justice strategy, which is about equity in the distribution of economic resources, equality of civil, legal and industrial rights, fair and equal access to essential services, such as housing, health and education and, importantly, as I have stressed,

Grievance Debate

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3239

the opportunity for participation by all people in personal development, community life and decision-making. My essential view is that we ought to apply that social justice strategy to the urban environment. It is not possible of course for one member in limited time to chart a program of reform, but I would like to put forward my own personal views about some of the mechanisms that might be used to advance the social justice strategy of the Government in the urban environment.
First, I stress that it must be done with cooperation. No one level of government can solve all the problems. Secondly, any policies to enhance and improve the urban environment are clearly in conflict with the policies of the Opposition that seek to massively cut public expenditure in crucial areas affecting equity and social justice issues as they relate to urban environments. Thirdly, I believe that programs to improve the urban environment must be community based and not imposed by unaccountable bureaucracies from on high. Some of the mechanisms that we might use to take up policies in this area include section 96 grants to the States, the management of Federal properties in the urban environment and the potential, given the vast Commonwealth resources, for scientific research and planning initiatives to enhance the urban environment. I believe that there ought to be initiatives for land purchases for urban development and that our foreign investment control powers for the Foreign Investment Review Board can be used to advance urban policies.
On this issue, let me repeat my total opposition to the free-market abdication of foreign investment controls, as trumpeted by the Opposition in its clear commitment to abolish the Foreign Investment Review Board. I reject that. I am quite confident that most Australians would reject that attitude to foreign investment.. We ought to have controls over foreign investment in the national interest.
One initiative that we could take would be to. draft a national strategy to deal with urban issues. We could set up a high level and well resourced body in the Federal bureaucracy which could undertake research and coordinate action on urban environmental planning and energy issues. Of course, energy issues are crucial to the future of our

cities. In order to promote the social justice strategy of a government and improve the urban environment, I believe it is necessary for a department to assume responsibility for playing a greater role. That, of course, is a decision ultimately for government. For many years I have believed that there should be a national inquiry into the role and function of local government. We have had an inquiry into local government financing, but such an inquiry as that which I am proposing could lift the horizons of local government and act as a catalyst for public debate.
I am restrained by limited time from dealing further with this matter. I believe that these are the issues for the 1990s and I give my commitment to continue to raise them in the House and elsewhere and to urge government action to take up the challenge of the cities.
Mr MILES (Braddon) (1.12)-This last week in Tasmania we have seen a pitiful sight, and that is the 'green' Field Government's accord, giving rise to what it calls an employment summit. That prompts those of us who are members of this Parliament to reflect on a former summit' which was held in the House of Representatives chamber in April 1983. Exactly the same occurred yesterday and the day before in Tasmania. The summit here in Canberra came within five weeks of the Hawke Government being elected to office.' The Tasmanian summit came five months after the Field-Brown Government took' office. Perhaps that is symptomatic of the lethargy and the slowness of the Government of Tasmania in dealing with some fundamental issues.
We have a new Government in Tasmania which has determined that Tasmania's future will be based essentially on cottage industries and tourism. Yet what do we see in regard to tourism? What happened when we had the pilots strike? The Tasmanian Premier did not even contact the Prime Minister (Mr Hawke) for four weeks. Yet, he and his Party went into the election saying, 'This is the way to go, this will be the powerhouse of Tasmania..We can generate jobs in tourism and in the associated craft industries'. But when it comes to the really hard decisions, the Tasmanian Government is unable to take them. It does nothing about the problems.

3240 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Grievance Debate

The main reason, presumably, for having this summit now is that Tasmania has relatively high unemployment levels. Will this summit which has just taken place bring about any changes? I do not believe that that will be the case. In fact, what Tasmania needs is not summitry, as proposed by Mr Field, but industry-big, medium and small. That is what it needs. I believe that this summit has been a gabfest and all the indications point to it being exactly that, designed by the Premier of Tasmania to share the blame for government failure in the future to do anything about unemployment. As time goes on that is what we will see. When there are unemployment difficulties in Tasmania, when young people come out of school having completed their education, and find that there are no jobs, Mr Field will say to the Tasmanian people, 'But we had a summit; we talked about it and everybody agreed'. That is exactly what we saw on the Federal scene and we are now seeing it repeated, virtually word for word, in Tasmania.
What did we get out of the National .Economic Summit here? Surely, that is a pointer to what will probably happen in Tasmania. We have double the inflation rate of our trading partners. That is what we have out of the summit. We have the highest taxes ever. We have housing and business interest rates going through the roof; a balance of payments problem so enormous that nobody seems to know how to handle it; and an overseas debt crisis which most of us will never see the end of-and our children probably will not either. That is what we got from the National Economic Summit. Tasmania's problems will not be solved by people sitting around a table and talking and not getting any results. The reality is that we have a government in Tasmania at present which does not have policies and does not know how to take the practical decisions that are necessary to create jobs down there.
A report put out by Peter Bennett and Associates last week says this about Tasmania:
Tasmania has lost 7,000 potential jobs, $1.5m in generated output and at least $240m in projected wage and salary income . . .
What are the reasons? First, there was the scrapping of the Wesley Vale pulp mill, op-

posed by the Labor Party. Secondly, there was the scrapping of the Huon forest products mill. Scrapped by whom? Scrapped by the 'green' Field Government in the last few months. Thirdly, there were the restrictions on land use in World Heritage areas. It is staggering to think that these job opportunities were lost, and that they were in fact opposed by the very people who have now put on an employment summit. If the Government had taken the hard decisions and made sure that the Wesley Vale pulp mill had been built, that the Huon forest products mill had kept going, and that the world heritage listings had been kept within reasonable limits, Tasmania would not be suffering these effects.
I was absolutely staggered to see some of the information which came out of the summit and the comments that were made. Honourable members should just listen to this. A tutor in geography, Mr Robert Cotgrove, said, 'The private sector providing jobs is old thinking'. Here is a person in the public sector saying that private industry does not provide jobs. The simple reality is that he would not be there if there were not people out there in the private sector generating wealth in this country, so that taxes could be used for the public sector. He would not have a job. What arrant nonsense it is for that sort of information to be put forward at a summit the purpose of which is, supposedly, to try to deal with the unemployment problems in Tasmania. Not only that, I was interested to read the following from a spokesman from the North-West Employment Forum who said:
With 22 per cent of young people aged between 15 and 19 unemployed on the coast-and 13 per cent of the adult population-it is vital that the problem be urgently addressed.
This is one of the people who fought the Wesley Vale pulp mill on the north-west coast. She did not want it to-go ahead. Such people then have the temerity to go to a summit and say that we have to address these problems. It is absolutely ridiculous that we should spend time and money-I think it cost the State Government $56,000on this two-day summit. It sent out wads of paper. It talks about the environment and then it uses wads of paper to put out very little new information. I had read most of it

Grievance Debate

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3241

before and some of it was five or six years old. The Government thinks that this will reduce Tasmania's employment problems.

This summit has merely been a distraction.

The Government has failed to make the hard

decisions. Depending on the Federal Govern-

ment's guidelines, it should have said, 'Wes-

ley Vale could be a possible site'. The State

Go~ernment should say, 'Yes, we will get

behmd these projects and we will make sure

tha~ we have an environmentally s~nsitive

project put together somewhere in northern

iTnastmhaatnial.ocLaetitoun~

or get

on ~.ith the job of providing industry oppor-

tumtles so that people can have jobs, and so

that medium and small sized businesses can

come in behind larger businesses'. That is

w~at we want in Tasmania; we do not want

thiS nonsense of a gabfest which distracts us

from solving the fundamental problems.

Quite frankly, this situation exists through- ?ut Austra~ia, but it is particularly evident m Tasmama. The present world economic circumstances are such that we are in competition with the 'Asian tiger' economies where people work long hours are more industrious, have clear goals and'are unremittingly competitive. A government summit will not solve Tasmania's problems. The Government has to provide the framework w~thin w~ich priv~te enterprise can get on with the Job of bemg competitive and effective.. At the moment it is being stifled by a government that is indecisive, does not know what its goals are, and is basically opposed to private enterprise getting on with the job.

Dr CHARLESWORTH (Perth) (1.22)- Yesterday's national accounts figures are encouraging, but one should be warned against one off readings. When one looks at those figures it is important that one looks at the trends. I quote from the front page of this morning's Australian Financial Review which said:

National accounts, balance of payments and for-

eign debt. figures for the September quarter gave the

clear~st slg~al y.et that the economy was moving in

the nght with the

directIOn engine of

togrocwortrhecsthitfhteingtrafdroemimdboamleasntcie~

demand to net exports.

. Domestic. dem~nd was flat, with consumer spendmg. and busmess mvest~ent easing from high levels, wh!le net exports contnbuted positively to growth for the first time since March 1988.

I think it is important for us to consider that, while it has been necessary to pursue policies which perhaps were not popular, the Government has shown great responsibility. Further figures indicate that the volume of consumer imports has fallen 3.2 per cent in the quarter, after a rise in the previous June quarter. Against that we have an increase in imports of capital goods of 8.3 per cent. What needs to be understood is that that is further evidence of the re-equipping of Australian industry, which, in the long term, will be part of the solution of our current account problem.
If one .looks at gr~ss national expenditure, one realIses that thiS measure of domestic ?emand indicates that there was no growth m the September quarter, following an increase of 0.9 per cent in the June quarter. And again the indications are that the trend through March to June and June to September is that there are significant falls in annual terms of gross. national expenditure, a measure of domestic demand. Furthermore, some of the Budget predictions are being shown by these figures to be on target. If one looks at the terms of trade one finds that the September quarter fall and the June quarter fall are consistent with and in line with the Budget forecasts. One may be concerned that wages increased during the quarter by 2.2 per cent,.but when one measures that against a profit mcrease of 3.7 per cent, again one finds that the profit share has been maintained. Indeed, one wonders what would have happened had there been a wages break-out as a result of the difficulties we have had with the Australian Federation of Air pilots during the last months.
The Governrnent's course of tight monetary policy and interest rates, tight and targeted fiscal policy and wages discipline is not something that we have pursued bec;use we want to be popular. That suggestion is absurd. What we have been doing is trying to be responsible, considered and prudent in our policy mix. If Australia is to make the necessary readjustments, Australians must und~rstand that there is no panacea; there is no Simple solution. The Opposition suggests that some distortion of the taxation system w~ll encourage investment and suddenly there Will be a turnaround. That is rubbish. Privatisation and deregulation, while they per-

3242 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Grievance Debate

haps need to be part of the solution, are not a cure-all. We need to maintain the profit share. There needs to be continued discipline in respect of the domestic surplus. Wages stability is important, as is a managed change to efficiency and productivity in industry.
Perhaps as important as anything else is the necessity to develop behavioural change right across Australian business. In that respect the issue that I want to raise in particular is that of developing in Australia an export culture. There is great concern that there is still lethargy in business and management and there is not the belief, the will, or the wit to understand that Australia has to embark on a continually outward looking approach. We have to make the sorts of moves that are important in developing export opportunities.
With that in mind, I raise an issue that a constituent of mine, one Greg Poland, raised with me recently. Greg Poland is in some ways, I suppose, a modern day entrepreneur. He is a fisherman and his company, Independent Seafoods, employs about 30 Australians, most of them in Perth, but some in Singapore, some in Dubai and a number in Vietnam. On top of that, he employs about 30 Vietnamese nationals in that country. He trades with North Korea, China, Vietnam and a number of other South East Asian countries and, indeed, he is now looking at prospects in Africa. Mr Poland is not in an easy market, but he is out there going to these places and dealing with these people. He has found that there is considerablede-' mand for Australian commodities and products and, indeed, he finds that his expertise in the areas of fishing and aquaculture and the refrigeration, preparation and marketing of fish products, is something which he .can use to deal with those countries which do not have foreign exchange. Indeed, from Vietnam he is paid in fish which he prepares, markets and sells in Japan and the United States. In this way he is able to conduct business in an area which most business people in Australia would think of as 'tiger country'.
I think that his approach is very aggressive and innovative and in many ways he is a pathfinder. I know that the honourable member for Moreton (Mr Donald Cameron) would agree with me that this man is out

there doing some difficult work and making markets for Australia.
Mr Donald Cameron-It is my turn to agree with you!
Dr CHARLESWORTH-I thank the honourable member. Mr Poland is a man who is involved in trying to sell Australian products and commodities overseas. He is also trying to sell Australian expertise and deal with countries which traditionally, because of their political situation, have been very difficult to deal with.
But he finds that increasingly Australian management is not up to it and he has difficulty in getting Australian manufacturers and producers interested in selling their products. There are some cases in which there are legitimate reasons for that, which I can understand, but there .are one or two cases which are downright reprehensible. I intend to mention them later in my contribution. For instance, Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd (BHP), the corporate father of Australian industry, if you like, had a request to supply corrugated galvanised roof sheeting. The best it could do was suggest that he go to another distributor; or he was told that there was no stock. I understand that in this area there are supply problems for BHP, but it would seem to me that there is some urgency in cranking up the way in which we produce these products. Indeed, Colorbond, a well-known Australian product, used in many houses, is something that is in demand. The company should be improving its performance and urgently rectifying those supply problems.
Mr Poland asked Nestle Aust.-Ltd to supply sweetened condensed milk, but he found that to market the milk effectively in Vietnam, he could buy it cheaper from Indonesia, which buys in the powdered milk, reconstitutes it, cans it and sells it at a cheaper price than we can in Australia. Indeed, in Vietnam everyone rides bicycles and Mr Poland's proposal to sell stackhats in Vietnam found not much interest in Australia.
But the case that really disappointed him and the one that I wanted to mention particularly today is that of Coca-Cola Bottlers. I have been to Vietnam and I have drunk coca-cola in the streets of Hanoi. So you can

Grievance Debate

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3243

imagine my surprise when I looked at a copy of a fax produced for me. It was addressed to Mr Poland, signed by Genevieve Cornish, of Coca-Cola South Pacific Pty Ltd in Sydney. It said:
The products of The Coca-Cola company are not permitted to be sold in Vietnam or to persons intending to sell those products in Vietnam.
What was even more revealing was the fax that was received the day before from one Geoff Kanafacke of Coca-Cola Bottlers, Melbourne, which said:
Regret to advise you that as we are a company with significant American affiliation we are not allowed to offer a product for sale directly to Vietnam or through an export organization trading with Vietnam.
I suggest that Australia should not be a mendicant to United States owners or control. Australian. sovereignty is in question in this case and if companies want to operate in Australia, there should be a significant export potential for those companies and there should be Australian benefits. We have a huge problem in foreign debt. It is necessary to stabilise it and to bring it down. It is not the Government that will solve the problem, it is individuals with enterprise, such as Mr Poland. The export mentality is important. There are legitimate problems and I understand these. But the imposition of American foreign policy should .not be one of them.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Moreton) (1.32)-1 wish to raise a matter relating to the national health survey currently being conducted by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS). On 15 November the Australian Medical Association (AMA) wrote to me advising, and I quote:
The Federal Council (of the AMA) has withdrawn its support from the Australian national health survey on the grounds that participation by respondents is not voluntary.
Originally, the ABS wrote to the AMA soliciting its support for the survey on the ground that the public and the media would put considerable weight on the views of the AMA. The AMA's support was forthcoming. A decision to withdraw that support would not have been made lightly, and I share the concerns that caused the AMA to come to this conclusion. The intention to conduct the survey was tabled by the ABS in this Parlia-

ment, an act which gives it the status of a compulsory survey. If a person included in the survey asks whether this is a compulsory survey, the Australian Statistician is enabled to reply in the following terms:
At this time you are being asked to answer the questions the interviewer will put to you. If you do not answer the questions the Statistician has the power to direct you in writing to answer the questions. If he does this, you are legally obliged to answer them. However, given the high level of cooperation normally received from households, the Statistician expects not to have to make use of these powers of direction.
Those words represent a form of intimidation in so much as people do not really know where they stand. What do they make of the words 'the Statistician expects not to have to make use of these powers of direction'? One could liken this approach to a schoolmaster standing in front of a class of children with a cane in his hand and saying to the children, 'I do not expect to have to use this stick'. The children would look at him and the vast majority would think,. 'That is right, sir'. But he is not saying he will not use it. If it were a simple, uncomplicated survey, different views might prevail about this method of enticing people to comply.
I turn to the subject of women's health issues. This survey quite properly has a section dedicated to women's health issues. Women are presented the opportunity on a voluntary basis to answer a number -of questions ranging from breastfeeding to contraception. They are even asked whether they have an IUD fitted and several other personal matters are raised. That is done, and rightly so, by way of a voluntary self-completion questionnaire which the woman herself completes. If a woman is happy to answer these questions, she places the completed questionnaire back in an envelope, seals the envelope and hands it to the interviewer. This method is being employed because the ABS recognises that the questions it is asking are terribly sensitive and potentially embarrassing to women. I have no argument whatsoever with that voluntary approach.
However, when women are invited to complete this questionnaire they are told that this method guarantees their total privacy. But they are unaware of the fact that the interviewers are instructed to place a code mark on the envelope to enable the Statisti-

3244 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Grievance Debate

cian's office to be able to tie that so-called totally private response in with the main survey.
Mr Miles-That is disgraceful. Mr DONALD CAMERON-The honourable member describes it as disgraceful; I describe it as an act of deceit, because many women will really believe that once that form has been filled in, there will be nothing to identify them, their homes or anything like that. The other concern, which is even worse, was raised here some weeks ago by the member for Chisholm (Dr Wooldridge). The good women of Australia have had all these assurances that the ABS would not intrude in these areas of potentially sensitive or embarrassing matters. Yet the main body of the survey, which carries the status .of compulsion-it was tabled in the ParlIament and that automatically extends to it the status of compulsion-includes questions on sensitive matters. If people ask about their rights they will find that they are intimidated into abandoning them. Most people-particularly women-are unaware of the fact that questions in the main compulsory part of the survey touch on those very same issues that later arise and are paraded as being personal, sensitive, embarrassing and private. I refer to the interviewer manual, which relates to the main body of the survey. The interviewers are told how to code answers referring to contraception habits, supervision of prescriptions in this area, IUD insertion and supervision, sterilisation for males and females-let nobody say it is sexist-menstrual extraction (abortion) and other contraceptive management, specified and unspecified. All these personal questions are supposed to be confined to this separate, selfcompleting, voluntary questionnaire in its special envelope. How much more personal could the questions get? The manual tells the interviewers that the heading 'Menstruation' includes period pain, absence of menstruation, infrequent menstruation and so on. It even goes on to menopause problems, such as flushing. Had all this information been restricted to the voluntary part of the survey, I would not be on my feet today. My concern is that the ABS is using this survey as a means of

extracting information from women. Having extracted information in the main body of the survey, the ABS then says to women, 'We have a few questions we want to ask you which you might possibly find ql:'ite .se~ sitive or embarrassing, so we are domg It 10 this special way which guarantees your total privacy'. To me it is a charade, and a ~ouble deal and it is time that the ABS got Its act together and learned that when it is dealing with the people of Australia-the people who provide the funds, the $179m for its operations-it has to do it up front and honestly.
I could go on about quite a number of issues which really deserve to be raised in this place, but unfortunately my time is up. I make this public plea to the ABS to agree to this survey being conducted on a voluntary basis. Right now the Privacy Commission has all this under investigation. I might tell the Commissioner that we are looking forward to a response because he has been considering the matter for a little while. My advice to hini is not to take any notice of the procrastination and delay tactics that the ABS are more likely than not to put forward. Step in there, stand up for the rights of people and make the ABS introduce more acceptable methods of surveying so that people's rights to privacy are ably protected.
Mr KENT (Hotham) (1.42)-1 understand we have a very alert Deputy Speaker in the chair today. I grieve today about events that originally took place two or three years ago and have been repeated year after year. I am the target of an attack by an organisation which year after year vandalises my office, my house and the cars parked in front of my house. Once, twice or sometimes th~ee times a year I find my office spattered With red paint, with the words 'Kent you are a communist spy' written out on the walls. It seems to me as if some people do not believe in the force and the right of the ballot box. They use scandalous, scurrilous tactics, anonymously trying to damage my reputation, terrorise my family and terrorise me into being silent about certain events that took, place during the Second World War. The people who are doing these things belong to the Ustasha circle, now called the Croatian Revolutionary Brotherhood, which is a secret terrorist organisation whose members year

Statements by Members

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3245

after year vandalise my office and bandy around allegations about me, claiming that in some way or another I am connected with some foreign secret agency.
That matter, which was put so crudely and brutally, was, unfortunately, repeated in another place. It was imputed by a senator who happens to be in charge of the Liberal Party campaign in the seat of Corinella. It is a coincidence, I believe, but never mind. The Senate was used to besmear my character to try to get some electoral advantage. I can assure the Party and the honourable senator that that tactic will not be successful.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Andrew)- I do not wish to interrupt the member for Hotham, but I must point to him that the matter to. which he now refers is before the--
Mr KENT-Mr Deputy Speaker, you are quite wrong. What is happening in the Senate is not the property of any other committee at the moment.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-If I may be allowed to continue, I would remind the member for Hotham that the matter to which he refers was before the Privileges Committee. I understand his comment about the Senate but I would ask him to exercise a great deal of caution in the way in which he deals with this matter.
Mr KENT-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. Once again, I wish to emphasise that there is not one iota of truth in that allegation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! It being 1.45 p.m., in accordance with sessional order 106, as amended for this session, the debate is interrupted. I put the question:
That grievances be noted.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS
Fourth National Prayer BreakfastRecycled Paper: Sales Tax-Pilots Dispute-Buy Australian CampaignSydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport-Old Reynella Primary School-Royal Melbourne Institute of TechnologyQueensland Election-Non-government Schools~MrPeter Hedge-Child-Care Dr HARRY EDWARDS (Berowra)-On Monday, 30 October, the Fourth National Prayer Breakfast was held in the Great Hall

of Parliament House, hosted by a number of members and senators. Notwithstanding the pilots dispute, the breakfast was attended by more than 450 people and brought together parliamentarians from this Parliament and the various State parliaments, representatives from the island countries of Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu, and leaders from all walks of Australian life. The purpose was to join in worship and prayer and a time of fellowship and sharing in the name of Jesus Christ, and thereby contribute to the building up, at every level of the nation's life, of a leadership itself led of God.
The principal speaker at the breakfast was Senator the Hon. Michael Tate, Minister for Justice, who spoke on the theme of Christians becoming 'co-conspirators with the Holy Spirit' in shaping the future of Australia. At the subsequent luncheon, the guest speaker was His Excellency Fred Timakata, President of Vanuatu. The welcome function on the preceding Sunday evening was addressed by His Honour Arnold Amet, CBE, judge of the Supreme Court of Papua New Guinea, who was introduced by a distinguished Australian, Dr Gil McArthur, AM, OBE. As chairman for the occasion, I express our thanks to the members and senators from both sides of the Parliament who took part in the program, to Colin Christian and his parliamentary catering staff, and to the many who so ably helped in the organisation, in particular coordinator Mr John Christison. Mr Speaker, I seek leave to table copies of the breakfast and luncheon programs, and the text of Senator Tate's address.
Leave granted. Mr JOHNS (Petrie)-I reply to a statement by Mr Vince Lester, the National Party' Minister for Industrial Relations in Queensland. Vince says that the Commonwealth Government has imposed a 20 per cent sales tax on recycled paper. Vince, of course, has just had his last how to vote card printed. The fact is that there is no sales tax on 100 per cent recycled paper. Vince knows nothing about recycling and nothing about the environment. What we do have is a sales tax on mixed paper, which comprises less than 100 per cent recycled paper. The reason for this is to avoid opening the gate to tax avoidance. That is why we provide exemp-

3246 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Statements by Members

tion from sales tax only for 100 per cent recycled paper. Vince knows nothing whatsoever about recycling. He knows a great deal, as does his Party, about tax avoidance.
Mr DOWNER (Mayo)-The Opposition has in its possession a sworn statement submitted to the Victorian Supreme Court by a senior pilot-a check captain-with a quarter of a century of experience. The part of the statement. I want to address today was not admitted as evidence in the recent Victorian Supreme Court case, although other parts of the statement were admitted. In this statement the senior pilot makes allegations against the flight operations director of a major airline. The pilot reveals a conversation with the flight operations director which took place several months before industrial action was taken by the pilots. In the sixth paragraph of the statement the pilot says he was told by the flight operations director:
He said that if there was a strike, Ansett could bring in pilots from overseas and would even accept a lowering of safety standards to the extent they would accept a crash if necessary, as insurance would cover loss and the passenger load factors would soon recover.
Similar comments were made to other pilots. Those claims and statements by the senior airline officer were utterly disgraceful and the statement before the Victorian Supreme Court is one that has to be heard by the whole nation.
Mr O'KEEFE (Burke)-When the Opposition recently announced its Economic Action Plan, we were presented with a blatant grab for greed at the expense of those least able to defend themselves, based on sums which just did not add up. To claim that it could fund tax cuts of $2 billion by savings in the welfare, immigration and unemployment budgets was just not on. But now we are beginning to see the real desperation behind the Opposition's figures. Take, for example, the absurd proposition to scrap the Buy Australian campaign. Everyone knows that if we are to bring down interest rates, we must correct our balance of payment situation, we must cut back on imports and buy more of our own products. That is what the campaign is all about.
The Opposition's plan to scrap the campaign is about as useful to this economy as an ashtray on a motor bike. The Buy Aus-

tralian campaign costs only about $3m. It is quite possibly the best value for money in the whole of our Government outlays. It is pitched at creating jobs and a future for our kids, yet the Opposition wants to make paltry savings by scrapping it. Perhaps it thought we would accept its sums if it presented a long list of little things to make it look like a big result. It just does not work that way. Cuts are one thing, but they have to represent quality savings. Scrapping the Buy Australian campaign is just plain silly and it deserves to be.exposed for the sham that it is.
Mr COWAN (Lyne)-The Government has actually decided to build a new runway at Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport. I was amazed this morning, when reading the Sydney Morning Herald, to find that the opponents of the runway have been given $100,000 in order to finance a campaign. Mr Speaker smiles; I do not blame him, either. How ridiculous to think that, after a decision has been made, $100,000 of taxpayers' money is going to be given to two groups to fight the construction of that extra runway. Is this not ridiculous? It is a precedent of which this Government should certainly not be proud. The people whom I represent, the airlines, constituents of New South Wales and throughout Australia will strongly object to this. What they want to see is an upgrading of services at the airport, and the construction of the runway. It is essential for Australia that this occurs. It will affect tourism and our future. The Government should review this decision and decide not to advance that $100,000.
Mr BILNEY (Kingston)-May I take a moment to say how privileged I was to attend on Saturday the closing ceremony of the Old Reynella Primary School. I want to congratulate the people who organised the farewell day-John Potter, John Harris, Carmel Thorn, Myrene Ridge Cook, Peter Woodley, Jean Jeffries and, last but not least, Margarette Powell who is by way of being the unofficial historian of the Reynella district. The Reynella school has been providing education on the same site for 130 years. I think that must be a record in South Australia.
The ceremony was complete with musical items by a choir conducted by Mrs Inwood.

Statements by Members

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3247

Mrs Wright filled in at the last minute as the organist. Among other items the choir sang a school farewell song written by Anne Marshall, a teacher at the school. I had an enjoyable chat with Mrs Win Mitchell, who has sent three generations of children to the school-her children, her grandchildren and her great-grandchildren-and with Mrs Emily Baxter, who attended the school in 1908, and two other pupils who were there in 1910. The whole event had its sad side because the school is being relocated, but was in reality an occasion for enjoyment. May I congratulate Owen Secombe, the principal, and the students who took part, and wish them all well in their new location.
Mr McARTHUR (Corangamite)-The Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT) is the most recent tertiary institution to be pressured into an unwelcomed merger. I join with the head of the lobby group, Friends of RMIT, Mr Henshaw, in voicing the strongest protest at the Government's dictatorial tactics in bringing about this forced amalgamation. Rational discussion on amalgamation proposals was made very difficult by the Federal Government's threats to cut capital funding to RMIT by $15m. RMIT, as the major provider of technical and further education courses in Victoria, along with a proportion of advanced courses, preferred to stand alone as a new university in its own right. The proposed merger with. Footscray and the western institutes will do nothing to improve the status or efficiency of RMIT. Mr Henshaw said:
We were nervous about the Government's massive threats and we simply had to negotiate our bottom line. We were certainly pressured into a political quick-fix. We simply could not have borne that type of funding cut.
This is a perfect example of the Labor Government's manic desire to create megatertiary institutions without regard to the quality of the educational outcomes and to centralise power in Canberra under ministerial control.
Mr SCIACCA (Bowman)-Last week, during debate on a Bill-I think it was last Wednesday night-the honourable member for Richmond (Mr Blunt), the Leader of the National Party of Australia, referred to all of those on this side of the House as bludgers. In case the honourable member does not

know, the word 'bludger' is used to refer to a person who bludges. The Dictionary of Australian Slang by Sydney Baker states that the word 'bludge' draws its origin from one who acted as a harlot's bully. In the Macquarie Dictionary, one who bludges is defined, amongst other things, as a pimp. In other words, the Leader of the National Party last week accused those on this side of the House of living off the earnings of prostitution. I assure the honourable member for Richmond that we on this side of the House do not live off the earnings of prostitution either. Of course, he had recently been in Queensland, to assist the Queensland National Party in its election campaign, and he had mixed with a bunch of bludgers--
Mr McGauran-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. I refer to your admonishing of this House the other day as to language and behaviour. This member is deliberately inflaming, and unnecessarily interpreting the words of the Leader of the National Party for his own cynical purposes.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.
Mr SCIACCA-Obviously the Leader of the National Party had been. in Queensland campaigning for his friends, who probably are bludgers. On Saturday they will find out what it is all about. Mr Fitzgerald has fixed up that for sure and for certain.
Mr MILES (Braddon)-Foreshadowed in the May economic statement last year was the Commonwealth Government's questionable new schools policy. Now law, this policy can be found in the third part of the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1988. Sections 8 and 11 of this Act include provisions designed to limit the establishment, growth and development of non-government schools in Australia. As a direct result of this new schools policy, discrimiriation has been introduced into the funding arrangements for nongovernment schools. New non-government schools, not part of an approved system, will have their per student funding limited to categories 1 to 6. Systemic non-government schools are eligible for funding in all categories to 12. This arbitrary cut of 69 per cent in maximum funding to non-government schools and not others is hardly consistent with the government's stated objective

3248 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Questions without Notice

to promote equity within schools and society. I urge the Government to review this unfair treatment which is contained in its new schools policy.
Mr COURTICE (Hinkler)-With just two days remaining before the Queensland election, the Senior Vice-President of the Queensland National Party, Sir Charles Holm, was quoted in today's Sydney Morning Herald as launching a blistering attack on the Fitzgerald Commission of Inquiry into Possible Illegal Activities and Associated Police Misconduct and calling for charges pending against past and present Ministers to be dropped. He went on to say that 'a few dollars were spent here and there around the place'. He said:
All this came about because of the odd extra meal in a restaurant now and then.
It has been proven by the Public Accounts Committee alone that $30m was misappropriated by way of drougpt assistance, that prostitution has been turned into a cottage industry in Queensland, and that crime has been running rampant. On Saturday, after 32 years, the Australian Labor Party will rightly be returned to office.
Mr HALVERSON (Casey)-Last Monday afternoon whilst the Prime Minister (Mr Hawke) was at his rhetorical best in trying to convince honourable members in this place and the public of Australia at large that his Government is more compassionate than a coalition government would be, Mr Peter Hedge passed away in Buderim Private Hospital on the Queensland Sunshine. Coast. Peter Hedge was one of some 100 survivors of one of the worst disasters in the peacetime history of the Royal Australian Navy, the collision between the destroyer HMAS Voyager and the aircraft carrier HMAS Melbourne. Peter Hedge died of cancer which, according to doctors, was attributable to the after effects of the Voyager disaster.
The sad part of his passing was that the Prime Minister's self-satisfied, so-called compassionate Government has for years been hiding behind the statute of limitations to block Peter Hedge's claim for compensation. Although Peter Hedge was in the same area of the ship at the time of the collision-the ship's refrigerator-as was a Mr Mead whose claim for compensation was settled out of

court, this so-called compassionate Government has done everything in its power to block his claim. Through a fine example of this Government's compassion we have witnessed the passing away of a survivor of the Voyager disaster, leaving an almost penniless wife and child. When will this Government show true, rhetoric-free compassion to people who have not only earned it, but deserve it as well-people like the survivors of the Voyager disaster?
Ms CRAWFORD (Forde)-I wish to address those women and children in Queensland who have needs in the area of childcare. They will have discovered that, despite the fact that their children need after-hours school care, and despite the lack of women's health programs under the current State Government and the current Minister, they have been unsuccessful in obtaining these things, even though the State Government has made promises about the family, and has referred to its commitment to women and children. I urge that they change the situation at the weekend.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! It being 2 p.m., in accordance with sessional order 106A, the time for members' statements has concluded.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
WAGE-TAX DEAL Mr PEACOCK-I ask the Prime Minister whether the Government will cut Government expenditure to fund all or part of the $5 billion plus wage-tax deal foreshadowed by the Minister for' Social Security and by Simon Crean. If not, how does the Government propose to finance its wage-tax deal? Mr HAWKE-I have said on a number of occasions-and I repeat it for the benefit of the Leader of the Opposition-that in 1990 the Government will adopt the sameapproach to economic policy formulation generally and wages policy in particular as it has adopted with success in the previous seven years. I notice the beginnings of hilarity on the other side-admittedly they are more muted than usual-but if there is any doubt about the success of that policy, I simply remind the Leader of the Opposition of a few statistics which, by now, ought to be indelibly engraved in his mind. The first

Questions without Notice

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3249

of those statistics, simply, is that as a result of that policy and that negotiation with the Australian Council of Trade Unions in this area, this Government has created over 1t million new jobs in our period in office. If the Leader of the Opposition would like some method of testing the dimension of that achievement, I simply remind him of two facts: first, the rate of employment creation under my Government has been five times faster than the rate of job growth under the Government of which he was part; secondly, if he would like another criterion by which to judge the achievement of 1.5 million new jobs, I remind him that there is a rate of employment growth more than twice as fast as the rate of the rest of the members of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.
That is what has resulted from the process that we have adopted in the past-a process which has combined a responsibility for overall macro-economic management with fiscal responsibility together with a relationship between wages and taxes. If the Leader of the Opposition has any doubt, as his question suggests, of our capacity to negotiate wage-tax arrangements in the context of our fiscal responsibility, let me remind him of another set of very simple statistics-that simple that even the Leader of the Opposition may begin to comprehend them. The first is that in the last four years we have had-never before equalled in the history of this country-four successive years of real reductions in Commonwealth outlays. Secondly, associated with that, we have a surplus of $9 billion-the perfect symmetry between the $9 billion deficit that we inherited from those opposite and a $9 billion surplus now. Thirdly, in terms of fiscal responsibility, there has been a turnaround in the public sector borrowing requirement of 8 percentage points, which represents a saving in the public sector in its demands upon the savings of the community of $30 billion per annum. If the Leader of the Opposition has any question about the capacity of this Government to negotiate wage-tax arrangements in terms of fiscal responsibility, he should look at those facts, which show a record of fiscal tightness unparalleled in the record of this country.

I conclude my answer to the Leader of the Opposition by simply saying: as we have in the past produced record employment growth, as well as a massive reduction in industrial disputation, and we have done that together with a record of fiscal stringency unparalleled in this country, we will be able again to achieve the same sort of record in our seventh year of office-as we will do in our eighth, ninth and tenth years.
WAGE-TAX DEAL Mr SCIACCA-My question, addressed to the Prime Minister, relates to the previous question on wages. Will the Prime Minister inform the House whether the Government will meet its Budget forecast for the 1989-90 wages outcome? Mr HAWKE-I thank the honourable member for Bowman for his question. The 1989-90 Budget forecast that average earnings on a national accounts basis would increase by 7 per cent. This assumption was based on commitments being given to the national wage case guidelines and a steady flow-through of wage increases in two stages of 3 per cent. Wage restructuring proposals have been agreed to in a large number of industries and the majority of Australian workers have already received their first wage increase of 3 per cent. Given that the union movement has given the undertaking to the Industrial Relations Commission on no extra claims, I can say to the honourable member and to the House that the Government has every confidence that its wages forecast given in the Budget will be met. Everyone in this House knows that the Treasurer and I have said, and said correctly, that if a government cannot run wages in this country, then it cannot run the economy. It is. very simple and an absolutely unarguable proposition: if a government cannot run wages in this country, it cannot run the country; it cannot run the economy. I know it will be of interest to the honourable member and to all members of the House that again today the Leader of the Opposition has confirmed that he is completely at sea in the central area of economic policythat is, wages policy. He has again proved today that wages policy is his absolute nemesis. It is a subject that he cannot get either his mind or his mouth around.

3250 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Questions without Notice

It must be understood that wages policy is supposed to be the key to the Opposition's Economic Action Plan. It is central to the effect of that economic action plan on interest rates. The coalition has explicitly tried to adopt the Government's fiscal policy. Its claims on interest rates therefore residually and essentially depend upon its wages policy. The Leader of the Opposition's statements make it clear that the Opposition's policies are completely on a wing and a prayer. Today in his press conference the Leader of the Opposition said:
I am assuming that any increase in aggregate wages will be associated with an increase in national productivity.
There are deliberately no mechanisms to ensure this; he is just assuming that central fact. So there we have a half truth from the Leader of the Opposition. Later in his press conference, very interestingly, we got the full truth. The question he was asked is specific and it is central; it is not something that can be laughed away as some peripheral issue; it is absolutely central to the success of the whole Economic Action Plan. He was asked the specific and central question about aggregate wages outcomes and how they will be determined:
Will they be determined through the Industrial Relations Commission or through enterprise bargaining?
What was his answer? He said:
Well, who is to know.
And he repeated it:
. . . who is to know.
Here we have the central issue of what will be, in the Leader of the Opposition's judgment, the outcome in regard to aggregate national wages. What is the outcome? He answers, 'Who is to know'. It is not surprising that the Leader of the Opposition does not know, but I will tell him who does know. The employers of this country know the answer because they have given it. As I said yesterday in this place, the New South Wales Minister for Industrial Relations and Employment, Mr Fahey, has outlined the Liberal's policy for New South Wales. As I read to this House yesterday, the Federal shadow Minister for industrial relations, Senator Chaney, said earlier this month that the Federal coalition's wages policy will be very close in shape to that of New South Wales.

What happened in New South Wales in terms of the employers' judgment about the outcome of those policies? I remind the House of what was said. I quote from the Weekend Australian of 25-26 November, which states:
Representatives of the Metal Trades Industry Association, the Australian Chamber of Manufacturers and the Employers Federation of New South Wales told Mr Fahey on Wednesday that the Bill would cause a wages explosion.
The situation is extremely simple. I rep"at it in conclusion. The fact is that under the Government's policy the prediction in regard to the central issue is quite clear: a 7 per cent earnings outcome in 1989-90. When the Leader of the Opposition was asked how aggregate wages outcome would be determined, he said, 'I do not know'. The people who do know, the employers of this country, have said quite simply that the truth is that there would be a massive wages explosion under the Leader of the Opposition's policy. They do not say that simply on the basis of some theoretical analysis. They remember all too painfully that when the Liberal-National parties were in power at the beginning of the 1980s and applied the same policy, they had an 18 per cent wages explosion which produced the worst recession in the history of this country. Little wonder that in 1989 they are saying the same thing would happen. That is why, properly; they will Qot have a bar of the Opposition.
SHIPPING: TRANS-TASMAN TRADE Mr BLUNT-I refer the Minister for Transport and Communications to the Industries Assistance Commission report tabled in Parliament yesterday and, in particular, to section 3.5, 'Conclusions', which I am sure he has read. It states:
The industrial bans. on other than Australian or New Zealand flag ships in Trans-Tasman trade exclude significant potential competition . . . and as such constitute a barrier to the importation of shipping services. The barrier has arisen from trade union action-there is no legislative underpinning.
When will trans-Tasman trade be opened to international competition?
Mr WILLIS-The fact is that the transTasman has been subject to those industrial bans, or limitations, which the Leader of the National Party mentioned, for some time, in fact, during the period of the previous Government; they are, of course, still there. Ship-

Questions without Notice

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3251

ping in Australia is undergoing quite radical transformation.
Mr Tim Fischer-How can you say that? Mr WILLIS-I can say that because it is absolutely true. Opposition members interjecting Mr SPEAKER-Order! Members on my left will cease interjecting. Mr WILLIS-It is occurring in a way that will certainly improve trans-Tasman shipping. When we came into office the average crew size was 33. It is now down to 27. It will be 25 by January of next year and 21 by 1992. We are seeing a very substantial increase in the international competitiveness of Australian shipping by the very substantial de-crewing which is occurring as a result of the Waterfront Industry Reform Authority procedures. That is happening by agreement between the parties and will certainly mean that by 1992 crewing levels for Australian ships will be at Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development levels and will probably be less because of the reforms which are already in train to take us long beyond 1992. Our best ships will have crew numbers of 17 or 18; beyond that we will reduce them to 14.or 16 with the further stage of de-crewing which will occur then. In the 1990s we will move into a position of advantage over OECD competitors. In relation to the basic question of reform of coastal and international shipping, what we are doing in this country contrasts remarkably with the period of total inaction of the previous Government. That will be a significant factor in relation to trans-Tasman trade. It will mean that shipping across the Tasman will become more competitive as a result of de-crewing. The substantial waterfront reforms occurring in this country and in New Zealand will also considerably reduce the costs of trans-Tasman trade. Waterfront costs at present represent half the total costs of trans-Tasman shipping. In relation to the specific point raised by the honourable member, the fact is, first, that the position in relation to the bans is a long standing one. I have discussed the bans with the New Zealand Minister for Transport. Both of us have agreed that the matter should be tackled.

Mr Blunt-He wants to move faster than you.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the National Party will cease interjecting.
Mr WILLIS-Discussions will take place later next month or early next month between our officials. Following those discussions, there will be further consideration of what steps can be taken to bring about that reform and open up that area. Regardless of whether that change is to come about, we are looking at a very considerable improvement in the cost of shipping across the Tasman through both what is happening on the waterfront in both countries and what is happening in regard to shipping reforms in this country, in particular, and to a lesser extent in New Zealand.
MEDICARE Mr LINDSAYI ask the Minister for Community Services and Health whether the Government will amend the present universal health insurance available through Medicare which provides all Australians with basic hospital and medical care regardless of income and accqrding to medical need. Dr BLEWETT-I can assure .the honourable member for Herbert and the House that the Government will not change the universality of Medicare, theheart of the system being the universal levy which goes to the whole fairness and equity in our health care system. The honourable member will probably recall that prior to Medicare the only choice that most people had was to take out private insurance or go without and risk facing huge medical and hospital bills. Many people in Australia were forced to choose the latter. For instance, in my home State of South Australia the largest single cause of imprisonment for non-payment of debts related to medical expenses. Medicare enfranchised two million Australians, wiping out the inequity which the Opposition now seeks to reimpose. I spoke yesterday about the dribbles which were coming out on the Opposition's health policy. Yesterday's dribble: the shadow Minister for health admitted that those who failed to take out private health insurance under his scheme would be financially penalised; there would be a penal levy on them. I make

3252 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Questions without Notice

it perfectly clear that, despite the noises the shadow Minister makes, he was saying that people who cannot afford or do not take out private insurance-there were two million of them, ordinary Australians, before Medicare-will pay a financial penalty because they are essentially less well off. It is not surprising, therefore, that the honourable member for Tangney is not prepared to tell us what the Medicare levy will be under his scheme.
I understand that the press made an effort to find out from the Leader of ~he Opposition whether people would pay more under the Opposition's proposal. The press tried to find out what the levy would be and whether the honourable member could guarantee that people would not pay more. The Leader of the Opposition first said that people would be silly if they did not take out private insurance under the Opposition's scheme, with the implication that it would cost more for the Medicare levy for those who stayed inside the system. He was then asked more specifically whether they would have to pay more and three times he refused to answer that question. Finally, he confessed that he could not guarantee that people would not pay more.
Mr Peacock-That's a lie. Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will withdraw that remark. Mr Peacock-I withdraw. Dr BLEWETTI want to congratulate the Leader of the Opposition because for once he has shown a degree of economic responsibility in refusing to give that guarantee because it is obvious that if all the higher levy payers leave the system-obviously they will-those who remain, the less well off, will have to pay a higher levy. I congratulate the Leader of the Opposition on recognising that economically responsible fact. Of course, it is not surprising that the Opposition is not prepared to tell us what the new Medicare levy will be. In regard to another of the dribbles that came out yesterday, the honourable member for Tangneyit was a classic day for the honourable member-is reported in the Herald as follows:
Mr Shack said no figure had been set for the new Medicare levy-
it gets even better-

and he was not sure that it would be made known when the Opposition policy was made public.
According to the honourable member for Tangney, when the policy comes up we may not be told what that levy figure will be. That is because of the point that I have just made, that if the higher payers drop out of the levy into private insurance, leaving the less well off paying the levy, of course the levy will go up. But I am not finished with these dribblings of the honourable member for Tangney. This morning on TV AM he was asked whether he could guarantee that waiting lists in hospitals would go under his policy. He said:
Under our policy we can, John, exactly.
That is, they can guarantee that public hospitals waiting lists will go. Let me say that that is quite an extraordinary statement. We have had waiting lists in our public hospitals for decades. They have always been a feature of the public hospital system. It is a quite extraordinary statement because the Federal Government is responsible constitutionally for health insurance, but I would have thought that the honourable member for Tangney would recognise that the States are responsible for the administration of the public hospital system.
Mr Ruddock interjecting Mr SPEAKER-Order! The member for Dundas will cease interjecting. Dr BLEWETT-When" the honourable member for Tangney makes those noises, he should take notice of his colleague-his mate-Peter Collins, who is now Minister for Health in New South Wales, because immediately prior to the last New South Wales election he made perfectly clear the State responsibility for waiting lists. Let me quote what Peter Collins said:
Medicare has got nothing to do with the debate on (State) health. The primary issue in the health debate in this State is public hospital waiting lists.
He said Medicare has nothing to do with them. He continued:
Waiting lists are attributable to poor management of the hospital system, to the fact that orthopaedic surgeons have not been available to operate on public patients in the numbers they are needed.
Mr Collins clearly understood the situation. His understanding is right. He clearly stated that waiting lists in his State are his respon-

Questions without Notice

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3253

sibility and his alone-nothing to do with Medicare.
COASTAL SHIPPING INDUSTRY: REFORM
Mr SHARP-My question is to the Minister for Transport and Communications, and follows the question asked by the Leader of the National Party of Australia a few moments ago. Following the Minister's claims that the Government has implemented reforms of the coastal shipping industry that have brought Australian flag vessels in line with those of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries, will he explain how this will be achieved when Australian seamen accrue 338 days of holidays for each 365 days of work, compared with French seamen who receive 226 days; American seamen, 216 days; West German seamen, 176 days; and Norwegian seamen, 141 days? Does this example of continuing inefficiency justify the Industries Assistance Commission's scathing criticisms yesterday of the Government's pathetic reforms of the waterfront and coastal shipping industry?
Mr WILLIS-Let me say firstly that the levels of leave which apply in the shipping industry came in under the Fraser Government and are not in any way a product of something that happened under this Government. So if Opposition members want to throw barbs at us, I ask. If this is such a serious factor, why did they let it happen?
Mr Lloyd-Let us have a comparison. Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Deputy Leader of the National Party will cease interjecting. Mr WILLIS-it is a fact that the leave levels are of the order mentioned by the honourable member for Gilmore and, as I say, are attributable to the previous Government. Opposition members interjecting Mr SPEAKER-Order! There is far too much noise. The Minister might resume his seat until the House comes to order. Mr WILLIS-I know that they do not like it very much, but it is quite true. When comparing the competitiveness of Australian shipping with that in other countrks, various factors need to be taken into account. The

major factor is the number of crew on a ship, and I have addressed that in my answer to the earlier question. Australia is dramatically improving in that regard. One condition of employment is leave. It is the case that the leave provisions for Australian shipping tend to be more generous than those of other countries, but it is also the case, of course, that that is just one condition of employment. It is also the case that the Waterfront Industry Reform Authority addressed that leave provision and recommended changes which would result in a reduction in the number of crew per berth from the current 2.2 per year to two. That will bring about some considerable paring back of the current crew provision in terms of leave.
Apart from leave, however, other conditions of employment are also important. When making comparisons, one simply cannot look at one condition of employment. If other conditions of employment are taken into account, obviously a key one is wages. There is no doubt in the world that the wages paid to Australian seamen are certainly less than those paid by a number of other Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development countries, including a number of the countries referred to by the honourable member for Gilmore when he pointed to leave provisions. One simply cannot point to one condition of employment and say, 'Look at that, that is terrible, do we have to match that?' One has to look at the whole set of conditions of employment. On that basis, as I understand it, the Australian conditions of employment for seamen are not in any way grossly out of line with those of other countries. Indeed, in relation to some countries with much higher wages, we would probably be on the cheap side. I am not suggesting that therefore we need to increase the conditions of employment in this industry, because by the standards of Australia they are relatively generous but it is also true that, by the standards of the rest of the world, taken as a whole, they are not generous.
LABOUR MARKET PROGRAMS Mr GEAR-My question is to the Minister for Employment, Education and Training. Can he inform the House of the purpose and outcomes of the Government's labour

3254 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Questions without Notice

market programs? Do they provide real benefits to the long-term unemployed? Have any alternatives to the current programs been suggested?
Mr DAWKINS-I thank the honourable member for his question. Of course, the greatest achievement of the Government in terms of the labour market is just the major increase--
Mr Pratt interjecting Mr SPEAKER-cOrder! The honourable member for A~elaide will cease interjecting. If he interjects again, I will name him. Mr DAWKINS-The greatest achievement of the Government has been the strengthening of the. labour market generally 'and the creation of some 1t million jobs. However, regardless of the economic conditions, there will always be some who are disadvantaged by the prevailing labour market conditions. The long-term unemployed often suffer problems such as lack of relevant skills, poor literacy levels, poor command of the English language, physical disabilities and problems related to their age. Indeed, if we look at the 160,000 people currently on the unemployment benefit-for more than nine months, we find that three-quarters of them are male, just under a third are over 45 years of age, one-third are married and about a quarter have dependent children, which. means that there are some 88,000 children dependent for their livelihood on long-term unemployed people. It is for this reason that the Government has maintained a variety of labour market programs, largely these days in the area of providing either wage subsidies or training assistance. One of the important programs, of course, is that known as Jobstart, which provides a wage subsidy on average of $100 a week in order to provide assistance to those people who are disadvantaged in the labour market. We know that the wage subsidy program works, because the probability of someone who has been out of work for six months finding a job without any assistance in a period of three months is only 10 per cent whereas, three months after the Jobstart subsidy ends, 60 per cent of those assisted are either in employment or in further education or training. During the period since 1983 we have assisted some 600,000

people under these labour market programs, and at this moment something like 62,000 people are involved in programs such as Jobtrain, Jobstart and Skillshare. They have made a very important contribution to those people who find difficulty in getting back into the labour market or getting into the labour market in the first place.
The honourable member asked about alternative proposals, and we do know that the Opposition has in mind cutting some $250m out of this general area of labour market programs. This will, of course, decimate those programs which have been such an enormous assistance to so many hundreds of thousands of Australians, and that does not take into account the children who depend on those people and whose circumstances are largely dependent on whether the bread-winner is in or out of the work force. The Opposition claims that there will be no need for a wage subsidy program because of the operation of its wages policy. What this seems to suggest is that the $100 that we provide in the form of a wage subsidy can be completely replaced by the sort of wages policy that the Opposition presents.
When one asks the Opposition how this is going to happen, one realises that the Opposition's wages policy is based on ideological fancy, the chaos of which was again revealed by the hopeless inadequacy of the explanation by the Leader of the Opposition of how its wages policy would work. The Prime Minister has made reference to this, but whilst the Leader of the Opposition talks about the importance of linking wages to productivity, when one asks him the hard question about how he is going to ensure that and where is the productivity policeman in the Opposition's wages system, of course one finds that there is none. There is no mechanism to ensure that and what we are offered is absolute chaos under its arrangement. However, it is much worse than that because, on the basis of this fanciful policy, the Opposition will eliminate support for 62,000 people who are currently receiving assistarice to get back into the labour market, get off welfare payments and back intoan independent living, one that is based on their capacity to earn their own income.
The Opposition has no regard for these families; these 62,000 bread-winners and

Questions without Notice

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3255

80,000 children who have unemployed breadheadline story, but I doubt whether I would

winners. There is no concern for them. They get his agreement. I will try.

will be sacrificed for a bunch of ideologues who know nothing about wages policy and essentially care nothing for the poorest families in Australia.

The Leader of the Opposition uses Nobby Clark apparently as a spokesman to set against the range of employers who have made a considered judgment about the Op-

INTEREST RATES Mr PEACOCK-Given the Prime Minister's view, as expressed in a previous answer, on the great value of employers' judgments, I refer the Prime Minister to a statement made on the Australian Broadcasting Corporation only a couple of hours ago by Mr Nobby Clark, the Managing Director of the National Australia Bank Ltd.

position's wages policy. I would have thought that this is a fair question: Does anyone in this place really believe that Nobby Clark is to be set against the range of employer organisations which, on a day to day basis throughout this decade, have had the opportunity of making a judgment between the comparative worth of the Opposition's wages policies and ours? The answer is quite obvious. The employer organisations that I have

Honourable members interjecting-

listed are infinitely better placed to make a

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Newcastle.
Mr PEACOCK-After indicating that he would not expect housing rates to fall at all in April or May of next year, Mr Clark was asked, 'Are the Government's policies working?', to which he replied, inter alia:

judgment about the impact of the two sets of wages policies. The employers of this country have spoken, and it is no wonder that within the last few weeks in the Business Review Weekly, or some such magazine, it could be seen that the overwhelming majority of business executives gave the opposition the massive thumbs down on wages

Yes, at very, very great expense to the enterprises policy; It is not surprising that they have,

in Australia. We're seeing the smaller enterprises in great difficulty because of the application of monetary policy. Good farmers are now in some trouble and the people in the medium levels of the scale are suffering quite badly from this very, very retrograde monetary policy.

because a number of honourable members on this side of the House have said on many occasions, 'If you want to know a horse that is always running, it is Self-Interest. SelfInterest is always steamed up to run flat out

This employer, to quote the Prime Minister, has 'spoken the truth'.

in any race'. The self-interest of the employers in this country lead them inevitably to the conclusion that, in a choice between the

Mr SPEAKER-Order! I think the Leader Government's economic policies in general

of the Opposition might get to the question. and its wages policy in particular, they will

Mr PEACOCK-In the Prime Minister's go for us every time and not for the Oppoown words, this employer has spoken the sition.

truth: so I ask the Prime Minister: When Let us pick up Mr Nobby Clark's obser-

will he take the policy decisions needed to vations about how business has been some-

reduce interest rates?

what disadvantaged by what has been

Mr HAWKE-There is a god. I thank the Leader of the Opposition for his question. I wonder whether I can do a deal with him, and that is, will the Leader of the Opposition agree that, if I can get Nobby Clark's agreement to say publicly what he has been saying privately about the Leader of the Opposition

happening under the policies of this Government. Let me say first of all that, as far as his own industry is concerned, it has not been doing real bad. If one looks at the profit figures of the banks, it is hardly a picture of penury. The banks are not doing real bad. I do not think there will be one

and the Opposition's policies, I can release . single tear shed in this country for the poor

them? Because I can assure the Leader of position of the banks. Let us go beyond the

the Opposition that if I were able to state banks and ask the general question-the ag-

publicly what Nobby Clark has been saying gregate question-what has been happening

about him and the Opposition, it would be a to business under this Government? We will

i 3256 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Questions without Notice

have a look at the question of company profits.
Mr Carlton-Bankruptcy. Mr HAWKE-Bankruptcies; I thank the honourable member very much. In yesterday's newspaper it was reported that there had been a 13 per cent decrease in bankruptcies in the last 12 months. What is the Opposition's next offering? Come on! Government members interjecting Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable members on my right! Mr HAWKE-Come on! Mr Good luck-,--What about the ordinary person? Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Franklin will resume his seat. Mr HAWKE-I wi11 tell the honourable member for Franklin that under this Government the Tasmanian apple crop is up as well. What is next? Mr SPEAKER-Order! The House will come to order. Mr Ruddock-If you carryon like that you will haye everybody shouting across the chamber. Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Dundas will cease interjecting. Mr, Ruddock-He thinks he is a leader. Mr SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Dundas. Mr HAWKE-Let us look at the aggregate figure for businesses in this country in regard to profits. This mob were in government for seven years. What was the profit share of gross domestic product in their last year 1982-83? I will tell honourable members opposite, because they probably would not remember; they would not want to. It was 11.3 per cent; just about an historical low. What was it in 1988-89? It had gone up to 16.5 per cent. That is how the business community has suffered so dreadfully under this Government! Under the Opposition's miserably inadequate, irrelevant, devastating policies profit share had sunk to an almost historical low of 11.2 per cent, but in 198889 it had gone up to 16.5 per cent. I think the last available quarter shows that the figures had gone up to about 19 per cent.

What has happened? That has not happened by accident. It has happened because the trade unions of this countryhave been prepared to accept lower money wage increases, knowirig that by accepting lower money wage increases under the accord, there was then a possibility of creating a better position for companies. There has been a lowering or flattening of the wages share and a move across to the profit share. What has happened in the result in regard to investment? Let us look at the investment position so that we can see the whole picture. What changes happened in the components of gross domestic product in the period before we came to office? From 1979-80 until 1983-84 the annual increase in private business fixed investment was 1.6 per cent. From 1984-85 until 1988-89, against that 1.6 per cent, it has been 10.8 per cent. What a terrible fate the business community has suffered-a massive increase away from wages to profits, which has gone from profits into investment, which in aggregate--
Dr Harry Edwards-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. Did I hear the Prime Minsiter say. 'What a terrible fake has been suffered'? The figures he has just quoted are fake, phoney figures.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.
Mr HAWKE-That is not worthy of you, Harry. It really is not.
Dr Harry Edwards-Mr Speaker, is it appropriate for the Prime Minister to refer to me as Harry?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Prime Minister will refer to the honourable member for Berowra by his title.
Mr HAWKE-It was done in a full sense of Christian charity. If he prefers his full entitlement, I shall refer to him as the honourable member for Berowra. The statistics are in the Budget Papers. They are quite clear. I think the honourable gentleman would know that, if we wanted to translate those figures to an aggregate figure, investment is now at an all time record high at 13.5 per cent of GDP, the highest since records have been kept.
I round up by saying that whichever way we look at it-if there is a god, I thank him

Questions without Notice

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3257

for the question-we come to the conclusion that business has done better and, because of the cooperation of the trade union movement in -facilitating the move from profits into investment, we have record employment growth. Business employs more than 75 per cent of people in this country. As business has become more profitable and has invested, so it has been able to employ more people. That is something that is markedly different from the Opposition's legacy, which I remind it was a unique achievement. Noone had ever been able to do it before. The Opposition parties alone" inflicted on this country simultaneous double digit inflation and double digit unemployment.
Mr O'Keefe-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. Is there some provision under the rules of the House whereby the Leader of the Opposition could ask that question again?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Burke will resume his seat. I remind the honourable member for Burke that facetious points of order will be dealt with.
SPECIAL BENEFIT Ms FATIN-My question is directed to the Minister for Social Security. I refer him to the special benefit program administered by his Department. I ask: Is it a fact that between 1975 and 1983 the number of people dependent on special benefit rose by 280 per cent while in the period 1983 to 1989 the number has grown by 19 per cent? What is the Government's approach to the program and how does it compare with alternative proposals? Mr Good luck interjecting-"Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Franklin will cease interjecting. Mr HOWE-The figures the honourable member for Brand mentioned, as I understand it, are accurate. The number of recipients of special benefit in 1975 was 5,331; by 1983 it had grown to 20,110. By 1983, over 9,000 children and families were dependent on special benefit. That number has fallen to about 8,000. The Government has run a very tight administrative system, with rigorous proof of identity procedures, selected reviews and the overhaul of administrative guidelines. It has also legislated to preclude

from the benefit people not legally resident in Australia. The measures mean that the benefit is a safety net for people who do not fall into other categories of benefit, such as people who are caring for a seriously ill neighbour or mothers whose husbands are on remand.
We have also made sure that the special benefit is adequate through massive increases in payments for children and through indexation. Our approach complements other programs, such as the jobs, education and training program and the Newstart program, helping people back to work, and programs such as the supported accommodation assistance program. No doubt the honourable member for Brand will have a number of agencies in her electorate that are supporting people on special benefit and providing services for those people at a time of quite serious crisis.
So far as I know four different approaches are being advocated for the administration of special benefit. There is the approach which the Leader of the Opposition says would be no different at all from the approach adopted by this Government; that is, the same criteria would apply. But the Leader of the Opposition says that, as a result of administering that program under a conservative government, an additional 80,000 people would be added to the numbers on special benefit, added to the number of people in crisis to be helped by those agencies in the electorate of the honourable member for Brand. That is on top of about 24,000 now. So 100,000 people would be on special benefit as a result of the Opposition Leader's approach. He would increase the numbers by 500 per cent-almost double the achievement of the honourable member for Bennelong of an increase of only 280 per cent.
Mr Peacock interjecting Mr HOWE-The Leader of the Opposition is amused. He is not particularly concerned about people in crisis. Mr Hawke-Anything that knocks the honourable member for Bennelong he is quite happy with. Mr HOWE-He does not mind knocking the honourable member for Bennelong, but I guess he would not want to contrast his

3258 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Questions without Notice

approach-as has already occurred-with the second approach from the honourable member for Wentworth.
Mr Peacock-I don't know about anything else, but this is mental.
Mr HOWE-I think the only person who is mental in this House is on that side of the table.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister for Social Security will withdraw that remark.
Mr HOWE-I withdraw the remark, Mr Speaker, but if the Leader of the Opposition prefers to throw sotto voce insults across the Parliament, he has to expect to get one or two back.
Mr Peacock-I am not complaining. Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will cease interjecting. The Minister will answer the question. Mr HOWE-The honourable member for Bennelong does not need to be so specific about his approach. He simply says that he will make sure that the savings are achieved. That is, he will do whatever is necessary to make sure that more than 60,000 Australians have no income at all. Presumably he argues that so that he can appear to maintain some credibility as a strong shadow Treasurer. Mr SPEAKER-Order! There is far too much noise. Mr Howard.-I haven't been talking. I have been monumentally silent on the discussion. Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Bennelong will cease interjecting. Mr Howard interjecting-Mr SPEAKER-Order! I warn the honourable member for Bennelong. Mr HOWE-I am more than happy to correct my statement; I meant the honourable member for Wentworth. Thirdly, there is the approach of the honourable member for Bradfield. Unlike the honourable member for Wentworth and the Leader of the Opposition, he understands a little about social security law, although not enough to ask questions on policy matters in my portfolio or the portfolio of which he is the shadow spokesman. In fact, he has not bothered to come into the chamber today. At least he understands enough about the law to under-

stand that it lays down conditions of eligibility for special benefit, because the law requires the Secretary to the Department of Social Security to make independent decisions, free of political direction,-because the law provides for the independent Social Security Appeals Tribunal and the Administrative Appeals Tribunal to make decisions in this area.
For those reasons the honourable member for Bradfield understands that what the honourable member for Wentworth suggests is simply not possible-because of separation of powers and because the Secretary to the Department must make those decisions and it is to him that the discretion applies. Because the honourable member for Bradfield wants to maintain some credibility about these illusory savings, he suggests that what is required is that, while retaining current guidelines, for the 60,000 people who are living in regions where there are no jobs a special benefit will not be paid until they move to another region. He does not specify any help that may be provided but will move these people to achieve the savings.
Finally, we have the fourth view, that of Senator Tambling, who, having heard that there might be some suggestion that people would be moved, that is, that the guideline would now operate in a way that would force people to move to qualify for various payments, rejects that approach. Asked that question about whether long-term unemployed living in remote communities would be denied benefits because they would be forced to move to where there were greater employment opportunities, he said that that was not on, that that was not a policy that he would endorse. He said that the long term unemployed would not be required to move from the Northern Territory to Sydney or Melbourne. So there are four different approaches.
I have taken some time to explain this situation for a very good reason. The Leader of the Opposition would try to make himself credible by nominating an area of savings of $600m from the long-term unemployed, claiming that he is somehow pursuing existing legislation and existing guidelines when, in fact, what he is about is making arbitrary decisions affecting some of the least well-off people in the community, simply because he

Presentation of Papers

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3259

thinks that has some kind of popular support.
The Government has achieved very significant savings in social security-almost $5 billion of ongoing savings. We have done that by specifying what we are about, clearly stating what we are about in legislation, and we have not needed to take the kind of arbitrary approach--
Mr Tim Fischer-On a point of order, Mr Speaker: In the Christmas spirit, I draw your attention to a ruling given on 12 February 1986 when the then Madam Speaker ruled that the Prime Minister 'will finish his answer'. We miss you, Joan. I am wondering whether, in the circumstances and given the fact that the Minister has been speaking for eight minutes--
MR SPEAKER-The honourable member for Farrer will resume his seat.
Mr Tim Fischer-For eight minutes-- MR SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat.
PRESENTATION OF PAPERS Mr BEAZLEY (Swan-Leader of the House)-Papers are tabled as listed in the schedule circulated to honourable members earlier today. Details of the papers will be recorded in Hansard and the Votes and Proceedings. The schedule read as follows-
Commissioner of Taxation-Annual Report 198889-including the Auditor-General's Report-section 25 of the Public Service Act 1922.
Industries Assistance Commission Report 422Government (Non-tax) Charges-Summary of Findings.
Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Authority-Annual Report 1988-89-section 16 of the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Act 1973.
Department of Social Security-Annual Report 1988-89-including the Auditor-General's Reportsection 25 of the Public Service Act 1922.
Schedules of Special Purpose Flights by the Royal Australian Air Force-I July 1987 to 31 December 1987.
Australian Heritage Commission-Annual Report 1988-89-including the Auditor-General's Reportsection 43 of the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975.
Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority-Annual Report 1988-89-including the Auditor-Gener-

aI's Report-section 63H of the Audit Act 1901 and section 26 of the Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Power Act 1949.
Department of Transport and CommunicationsAnnual Report I988-89-including the Auditor-General's Report-section 25 of the Public Service Act 1922.
Statement' relating to the Industries Assistance Commission Annual Report 1988-89-section 45 of the Industries Assistance Commission Act 1973.
Taxation Statistics 1987-88-Report. National Film and Sound Archive-Annual Review 1988-89. Comcare-Annual Report 1988-89-including the Auditor-General's Report-'section 90 of the Commonwealth Employee's Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988. Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade-Annual Report 1988-89-section 25 of the Public Service Act 1922. Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody-Report of the Inquiry into the Death of Wayne John Dooler-Corrigendum. Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody-Report of the Inquiry into the Death of Alistair Albert Riversleigh. Defence Service Homes-Annual Report 1988-89including the Auditor-General's Report-section SOB of the Defence Service Homes Act 1918. Office of Parliamentary. Counsel-Annual Report and Financial Statements 1988-89-including the Auditor-General's Report-section 16A of the Parliamentary Counsel Act 1970.
ROYAL COMMISSION INTO ABORIGINAL DEATHS IN CUSTODY
Report Motion (by Mr BeazJey)-by leaveagreed to:
That this House, in accordance with the provisions of the Parliamentary Papers Act 1908, authorises the publication of the report of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody of the inquiry into the death of Alistair Albert Riversleigh.
PRESENTATION OF PAPERS Mr BEAZLEY (Swan-Leader of the House)-I present papers on the following subjects, being petitions which are not in accordance with the Standing and Sessional Orders of the House:
Gay Mardi Gras-from the member for .Oxley89 petitioners
Government funding of abortion-from the member for Macquarie-54,337 petitioners
Mortgage rates-from the member for Denison1,246 petitioners

3260 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Raoul Wallenberg

Peace tax fund-from the member for Swan-76 petitioners
In view of the volume of paper involved in the funding of abortion petition, I have not brought the entire petition into the chamber.
RAOUL WALLENBERG
Ministerial Statement
Mr HAWKE (Wills-Prime Minister)- by leave-I move:
That, noting the continued international concern about the fate of Swedish diplomat, Raoul Wallenberg, who disappeared into Soviet hands in January 1945 following the defeat of Nazi forces in Budapest, and recent discussions between Soviet authorities and Raoul Wallenberg's family about his fate, this House:
(I) affirms its admiration for the selfless and heroic work of Raoul Wallenberg in saving the lives of tens of thousands of potential victims, both Jewish and non-Jewish, of Nazi terror during the Second World War;
(2) urges all interested parties to continue to cooperate in a comprehensive and conclusive examination of the circumstances relating to the detention of Raoul Wallenberg by Soviet authorities from 1945 onwards; and
(3) resolves through its work on human rights issues, to continue to apply the universal principles of freedom, justice and humanity that so vividly manifest themselves in Raoul Wallenberg's work.
Next January will mark the forty-fifth anniversary of the date of Raoul Wallenberg's disappearance. He was by all accounts a truly remarkable man. His actions during the Second World War against appalling odds and possibly at the cost of his own life were simply heroic. Raoul Wallenberg's example shows the power that lies within us all to rally in defiance and eventually to triumph over depravity and intolerance.
. He personally saved the lives of tens of thousands of people who would otherwise have fallen victims to Nazi butchery; ordinary people-workers, mothers and grandmothers, school children-all marked for execution through the frightening and perverse twist of Hitler's call for a Final Solution. But tragically, having survived and helped so many others to survive the Nazi occupation of Budapest, Raoul Wallenberg was himself swallowed by the bloody creation of another dictator: lost into the clutches of Stalin's NKVD whence he was never to emerge.

Raoul Gustav Wallenberg was born on 4 August 1912 into a distinguished Swedish family. After studying architecture in the United States he embarked on various commercial ventures, and through his business activities came to learn of developments in Nazi-occupied Europe. By 1944, Allied leaders could no longer ignore the horrible fact of Hitler's Final Solution and tentative international moves were started to save Jews and other potential victims in Nazi-occupied territories from death camps. President Roosevelt set up a War Refugee Board for precisely this purpose. Attention focused on Hungary, which had at the start of the Second World War Jewish population of 750,000. Discussions took place between the War Refugee Board and the Swedish government to expand Swedish diplomatic and consular representation in Hungary to work to save human lives. It was in these circumstances that Raoul Wallenberg was appointed to the Swedish Legation in Budapest.
In the period from his arrival in Budapest on 9 July 1944 to his disappearance at the hands of the Red Army on 17 January 1945, Raoul Wallenberg and his colleagues in the Swedish legation saved perhaps 100,000 people from certain death. They did so through mustering every resource they had at their disposal; sheer energy, tact, determination, forgery, bluff, and bribery. Ever vigilant, ever present, they were ready to issue Swedish identity papers and passports to anyone under threat.
Joni Moser, who worked in running errands for Wallenberg, describes one incident when Wallenberg learned that 800 Jewish labour servicemen were being marched to the Gestapo concentration camp at Mauthausen. Moser and Wallenberg drove to the Hungarian frontier and caught up with the column. Wallenberg asked that those with Swedish protective passports should raise their hand. On Wallenberg's order, Moser ran between the ranks, telling everyone to do so, whether they had a passport or not. Moser explains that Wallenberg:
. . . then claimed custody of all who raised their hands and such was his bearing that none of the Hungarian guards opposed him. The extraordinary thing was the absolutely convincing power of his behaviour.

Raoul Wallenberg

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3261

In his work, Wallenberg was pitted against the ruthless killing machines of the Gestapo and the dreaded SS. His antagonists included the infamous war criminal, Adolf Eichmann. At the very end' of the Nazi occupation of Budapest, when he learnt of Eichmann's plan for a total massacre of the 69,000 or so Jews who were still alive in the so-called General Ghetto, Wallenberg intervened in a final flourish of threats and brinkmanship to prevent the order being t;;arried out. When Soviet forces took control of Budapest some few days later, they found some 120,000 Jews who had survived the final solutionthe only substantial Jewish community left in Europe.
Tragically, within a week, Wallenberg himself had disappeared. He had devised a relief plan for the Hungarian Jewish community, and was on his. way to present his ideas to Marshal Malinovsky, the Soviet commander, and the provisional Government. His colleagues last saw him in the sidecar of a Red Army motorcycle, on his way to discharge this mission. What happened to Wallenberg after thi~ still lacks satisfactory explanation. There has been much speculation about Raoul Wallenberg's fate, with some-including, importantly, his family and his close colleague from Budapest days, Per Anger-believing that he may still be alive. Soviet authorities, however, have maintained that Wallenberg died of a heart attack in 1947 at the NKVD's Lubyanka prison in Moscow. Only last month, Raoul Wallenberg's family went to Moscow to get to the bottom of his disappearance. They were given a small box containing his belongings-a blue passport embossed with the Swedish crown, some old currency notes and yellowed note pads-together with a reiteration of previous claims about his fate. Sadly, despite the new openness and willingness on the part of the Soviet authorities to discuss the case, the examination of the circumstances relating to Raoul Wallenberg's disappearance is still not conclusive. I for one believe that 45 years after the disappearance of this, as I have described, truly remarkable man, efforts should continue to be made to clear up this matter once and for all.
But what then does Raoul Wallenberg's story mean for contemporary Australia,. so far removed in time and distance? In the

first place, he and his colleagues from the Swedish legation in Budapest saved the lives of many people who subsequently made their homes amongst us. One such person was a 19-year-old woman, Anna Boskovitz, who had recently married. After being arrested in the middle of the day on the streets of Budapest for 'looking Jewish', she found herself released from detention by the Hungarian fascists into the hands of a stranger from the Swedish legation. That stranger extended her the protection of his Government, personified by this very passport I hold here today-protection that literally saved her life and allowed her subsequently to establish a new life in Australia. Anna Boskovitz, who built a professional career in Sydney and who is now also a mother 'and a grandmother, is with us here today, watching this debate from the Speaker's gallery. Not only does Anna Boskovitz owe her life to Raoul Wallenberg; Australia is a better place for having her and many like her among us.
Mr Speaker, the story of Raoul Wallenberg also serves to remind us of humanity's capacity for cruelty on the one hand and its resources for compassion on the other. In the words of one Plfr~on who was saved by him, 'Raoul Wallenberg symbolises the ideal that one person can make a difference'. At a time in humanhistory when there is so much cause for optimism, so much evidence of change, Raoul Wallenberg's legacy de-. mands that we not be complacent. The violation of human rights internationally is still, sadly, a daily occurrence. In too many countries we see daily evidence of suffering and oppression. In many parts of the world we continue to witness unlawful detention, torture, starvation and poverty, and the displacement of large groups of people and refugees.
It would be easy to turn our backs on these problems. It could be as easy as flicking a television switch. But to do so in the face of Raoul Wallenberg's example would be to betray the legacy he left us. In the same Budapest that formed the backdrop for Raoul Wallenberg's heroism, we have this very year seen the determination of ordinary people to turn back the tide of totalitarianism. And as in Budapest, so too in Warsaw, Berlin and Prague.

3262 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Raoul Wallenberg

The universal principles of freedom, justhat he had to try. The success of his efforts

tict: and humanity that so vividly manifest is now legend. Between July 1944 and Jan-

themselves in Raoul Wallenberg's work still uary 1945 Raoul Wallenberg saved the lives

fire the spirit of humanity today, just as the of tens of thousands of Jews, as well as many

dark forces he worked to counter still have others, by granting them Swedish protective

to be eliminated. Earlier this year, I was passports or by placing them in so-called

honoured t.o preside over a tree naming ceremony. here in Parliament House in Raoul Wallenberg's honour. I also paid homage to this remarkable man in July this year in Budapest, when I laid a wreath at a memorial erected to his memory by the people of Hungary. Today, I am pleased to commend this motion to the House.

Swedish homes while they waited emigration to Sweden. As the pace of Eichmann's murderous deportation of Hungarian Jews accelerated, so did Raoul Wallenberg's defiant acts of bravery. He actively rescued people from death trains, convoys and forced marches. He often did so by offering Swedish papers to all hands that could reach them

Mr PEACOCK (Kooyong-Leader of the and then insisting that those with such pa-

Opposition) (3.07)-The Opposition is pers be released.

pleased to support the motion wholeheartedly. I speak on behalf of the Liberal Partyand the National Party of Australia in support of the motion moved by the Prime Minister (Mr Hawke). The story of the courageous deeds of Raoul Wallenberg is one of the most stirring episodes of the Second World War. It is the story of decency and uncommon bravery in defence of human life at a time when man's inhumanity to man was reaching unparralled depths. Raoul Wallenberg was unquestiomibly an unlikely hero. He could have settled for a more comfortable life than the one he chose. As the Prime Minister said, he was a member of Sweden's most comfortable and indeed wealthiest fam-

During a six-month period between 1944 and early 1945, Raoul Wallenberg achieved one of the most significant rescues of Jews from the Holocaust. Time and distance, however, make it almost impossible for most of us to comprehend fully the truly heroic scale of Wallenerg's achievement and the appalling circumstances under which he operated in Budapest. The Jewish population of Budapest at the time knew full well the unique role that he played. It was largely as a result of his energy and courage that the Nazis and the notorious Hungarian fascist group the Arrow Cross were unable to act with total impunity in Budapest.

ilies and during the early years of the war Something of Raoul Wallenberg's charac-

was comfortably secure in the haven of neuter and the scale of his achievements comes

tral Sweden.

through in the following words of Tommy

But the path he chose was not that of comfort, nor was it the path of personal security. In 1944 he left Sweden for what was then one of the most perilous places in Europe-Budapest. Raoul Wallenberg ar-

Lapid, a Jewish survivor from Budapest and later to become the Director-General of the Israeli Broadcasting Authority. Describing his mother's seizure by the Arrow Cross and her later unexpected return,he wrote:

rived in Budapest in July 1944, at the age of Wallenberg was a legend among the Jews. In the

32, as First Secretary of the Swedish Emcomplete and total hell in which we lived, there was

bassy. He was sent by the Swedish Government at the request of the American War Refugee Board at a time, again as the Prime Minister said, when Adolf Eichmann had taken charge of what was to be the final solution for about 900,000 Jews in Hungary.

a saviour-angel somewhere, moving around. After she had composed herself, my mother told me that they were being taken to the river when a car arrived and out stepped Wallenberg-and they knew immediately who it was, because there was only one such person in the world. He went up to the Arrow Cross leader and protested that the women were under his

It was also a time when hundreds of thouprotection. They argued with him, but he must have

sands of other Jews throughout Europe were had incredible charisma, some great personal author-

being hounded to their deaths. Raoul Wallenberg refused to accept the
inevitability of this human tragedy. He firmly believed that he could make a difference and

ity, because there was absolutely nothing behind him, nothing to back him up. He stood out there in the street probably feeling the loneliest man in the world, trying to pretend there was something behind him. They could have shot him there and then in the

Raoul Wallenberg

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3263

street and nobody would have known about it. Instead, they relented and let the women go.
It is an extraordinary tribute. Such is the calibre of the man whom we honour today in this bipartisan motion. In January 1945 the forces of Stalin's Russia achieved what the Nazis never could. In a tragic irony, imprisonment was Raoul Wallenberg's reward for his extraordinary achievement in support of the most basic of human rights. For over 40 years after his disappearance the Soviets maintained what can only be described as an elaborate cover-up. For many years they simply denied having arrested Wallenberg in January of 1945. That pretence was, of course, dropped when Andrei Gtomyko, then Deputy Foreign Minister, admitted that a search of Soviet prison archives had revealed that Wallenberg had died, as he put it, of a heart attack in 1947.
Over recent years-and again the Prime Minister reminds us-the Wallenberg case has been one of the beneficiaries of President Gorbachev's glasnost. Soviet authorities have stated that to the best of their knowledge Raoul Wallenberg died in 1947. During a recent visit to the Soviet Union by members of the Wallenberg family, the Soviets claimed to have shown them all the relevant documentation, including papers not previously released. The coalition parties welcome the greater openness on the Wallenberg case which the Soviet Union is now showing. In particular, we welcome its apparent willingness to correct the inexcusable cover-up that lasted for decades. The fact that the Wallenberg family could visit the Soviet Union and make its own inquiries is undoubtedly a great advance and a positive development. But the case of Raoul Wallenberg is not closed.
I endorse so much of what the Prime Minister said. Contrary to Soviet accounts of his death in 1947, there have been reported sightings of Raoul Wallenberg in various Soviet prisons, some of which, as I recall, date as recently as 1980. Until an objective international inquiry is given free access to all relevant information, written or otherwise, in the Soviet Union and elsewhere, final judgment of the circumstances of Raoul Wallenberg's disappearance and alleged death will need to be reserved. We on this side of the House hope that the processes of glasnost in the Soviet Union have reached a

stage where the Soviets are prepared to cooperate with such an inquiry so that whatever doubts that remain can be dispelled. It is the combination of Raoul Wallenberg's heroism and his persecution that has generated such momentum over recent years in international efforts to publicise his case.
Jewish communities throughout the world, and in Australia particularly, have played a vital role in these efforts, and the coalition parties have long supported them in this objective. In my own electorate, by the Kew Junction, a memorial to Raoul Wallenberg's work in Budapest was established some years ago, and I was proud to be associated with and attend that opening. Promoting Raoul Wallenberg's case is not limited to the work of Jewish communities. Groups such as Free Raoul Wallenberg committees now operate in many countries and consist of people drawn from diverse religious, racial, national and political persuasions. What unites them is the chord that the Prime Minister struck in his speech, the concern for basic human rights and a commitment to honour Wallenberg's wartime deeds. We share that concern and commitment.
Raoul Wallenberg's weapons against arbitrary violence and genocide were his idealism, his courage and, of course, his compassion. He was truly a hero of the holocaust, one of the so-called righteous gentiles who risked their lives to save Jewish people from Hitler's Final Solution. Mark Twain rightly told us that courage is resistance to fear, courage is mastery of fear; it is not the absence of fear. In a world in which fear is often inspired and often encouraged, certainly both' personal and governmental courage is still a vital requirement, and in that context there can be no doubt that Raoul Wallenberg stands as the ultimate inspiration to all.
So in supporting this motion today the coalition honours Raoul Wallenberg for his heroic deeds and calls for renewed international pressure to resolve uncertainties over his fate. We, on this side of the House join with the Prime Minister in rededicating ourselves to the advancement of individual human rights and freedoms which Raoul Wallenberg so bravely defended and which have always been at the heart of our beliefs.

3264 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Disability Reform

Mr KENT (Hotham) (3.17)-1 was unaware that this motion was coming on, just as unaware as I was in 1944 in Budapest that I would be here in this Parliament one day paying tribute to Raoul Wallenberg and his inimitable courage. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Peacock) has referred to what Mark Twain said about fear. Raoul Wallenberg was there and he would have experienced fear as would the population of Budapest under the Nazi occupation. The younger members of my family and I-I was very young-went underground and were illegal. I had an elderly grandmother and we had nowhere to place her except in a protected house, a Raoul Wallenberg house. She survived the war thanks to Raoul Wallenberg, ironically only to die from hunger and sickness under the Soviet occupation of Budapest soon after the so-called liberation.
I remember Raoul Wallenberg. I also remember the detention of 250,000 Jews in Hungary, along with the many other nonJews, who had no hope of surviving the war. Only one man fearlessly came out and protected the persecuted people. No-one would give any sanctuary to the Jews and to the others persecuted by the Nazi regime-I do not blame them-because of the fear that his whole family would be shot if he did so. Raoul Wallenberg had the fame. He could stand up with strength of character, with nothing behind him, not a weapon or a revolver in his pocket or a bodyguard, and bluff the Nazi dictatorship. That was his downfall, because another dictatorship would not cop the situation where someone could call a dictator's bluff without anything behind him. lam sure that Raoul Wallenberg was not involved in clandestine activities against the Soviet regime or the Soviet army. He had one purpose only-to protect and to give humanitarian aid to those who were persecuted. I believe an inquiry would establish that the Soviet regime had a fear of people who stand up' against dictators.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins) (3.20)-1 wish to associate myself with the motion moved by the Prime Minister (Mr Hawke) and particularly to identify myself with the remarks of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Peacock). I have long campaigned for the Soviet Union to release details of Raoul Wallenberg in terms that have been ex-

pressed in this House today-whether he is alive or, if he is not, the full circumstances of his passing. As has been said by a number of honourable members today, it is ironic that Raoul Wallenberg fought one kind of totalitarianism probably to perish, and certainly be incarcerated by the Gulag, under another. Raoul Wallenberg was not only a man of his time but a man for all time. At a meeting of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in Budapest I visited the memorial to Raoul Wallenberg erected by the Hungarian people. I think it is a credit to the Hungarian people that that memorial was built at the time and in the way it was.
I hope that the Soviet Union, in the spirit of glasnost and under the new leadership of President Gorbachev, will agree to the international inquiry that has been suggested in this House today. I think that the InterParliamentary Union, which is a world body of parliamentarians from east, west,north and south that does have credibility, is an appropriate forum to carry out such an inquiry with the permission of the Soviet Union. I hope that that comes about partly as a result of this motion in the House today.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Ronald Edwards)-The motion is carried unanimously.
DISABILITY REFORM Ministerial Statement
Mr HOWE (Batman-Minister for Social Security)-by leave-This statement provides an outline of the Government's forward looking, comprehensive and integrated agenda of reform of disability measures. It emphasises our commitment to enabling policies that will assist people with disabilities to maximise their work force potential and participate more fully in Australian social and economic life. It brings into sharp focus the contrast between our approach and the hastily assembled and ill-considered savings measures on disability outlined in the Opposition's recent statement.
This Government is committed to social reform. As a result of the Social Security Review process and as part of its social justice strategy, the Government has already undertaken far-reaching reforms to assist

Disability Reform

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3265

families, sole parents, young people, older people and long-term unemployed people. These reforms have resulted in social security clients no longer being passive recipients of income support payments. Instead, they have been provided with opportunities to achieve financial independence and to improve their employment prospects. We are now undertaking another major element of social policy reform: the development of more active income support, rehabilitation and labour market policies for people with disabilities.
Since coming to office in 1983 the Government has continually demonstrated its commitment to improving the quality of life for people with disabilities. Following extensive consultations in 1983 and 1984 and the release of the report New Directions in 1985, the Government comprehensively reviewed the services available for people with disabilities. In 1986 the Government introduced the Disability Services Act and the related statement of principles and objectives. These provided the framework for developing a range of services to enable people with disabilities to achieve increased independence, greater employment opportunities and fuller integration into community activities.
The next stage of the Government's reform of disability programs involves income support arrangements and their links with rehabilitation lind labour market programs. This stage follows from the work of the Social Security Review, headed by Professor Bettina Cass, and its comprehensive Issues Paper No.5 Towards Enabling Policies: Income Support for People with Disabilities.
Since the early 1970s there has been a significant increase in the level of dependence on invalid pensions and sickness benefits, which are the major forms of income support for people with disabilities. The numbers receiving these payments are now greater than the numbers in receipt of unemployment benefit and the cost is in excess of $3 billion a year. There has been no fundamental review of the eligibility criteria for theselpayments since their introduction-,----in 1910 for invalid pension and 1944 for sickness benefit.
The increases in numbers cannot be accounted for simply by changes in the inci-

dence of disability. In fact, it appears that many people receiving these payments have been cast adrift by structural changes in the labour market. Typically they are older males who have been employed in manual occupations and have few skills. In many cases they are of non-English speaking backgrounds and do not have a good command of English. At the other end of the spectrum there is a significant number of young people receiving invalid pension. Under current arrangements the overwhelming majority of these will spend the rest of their lives dependent on income support.
One of the major problems with the current income support system for people, with disabilities is that once they are on invalid pension it is very difficult for them to move off this form of economic dependence. Each year less than 2 per cent of invalid pensioners actually move from income support into employment. I do not believe that all of those remaining are incapable of working, at least on a part-time basis. Rather, it would appear that up until now we have taken the easy way out. We have judged these people to be unemployable and have therefore ignored their needs and capabilities.
However, development of effective policies and strategies in such a complex area requires taking careful steps, gathering additional information and trialling different approaches. The Government therefore announced in the 1989-90 Budget a series of pilots and research projects which will provide us with the necessary information to make firm decisions.-
The Opposition proposes to introduce punitive and discriminatory review measures on the pretence that these would magically reduce the numbers of people on invalid pension and sickness benefit. They are proposing even more insensitive and counter productive changes for unemployment beneficiaries, many of whom have disabilities as well as other labour market disadvantages. We do not believe that this is either a sensible or effective approach. In contrast, the Government is looking at positive and more sophisticated ways to assist people with disabilities' to improve their work force potential. We are examining:

3266 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Disability Reform

the appropriateness of the assessment basis and income test for invalid pension to encourage greater labour market participation; the scope for improvements to the delivery of services, particularly labour market anq rehabilitation programs; the issue of costs of disability; and strategies to assist people with low levels of disability but other labour market disadvantages to undertake education, training and employment. At the same time, we recognise that there will always be people with disabilities who, for lengthy periods, if not their lifetimes, cannot participate in the mainstream labour market. The Government is sensitive to the fact that these people need a secure income support system which provides them with adequate incomes. ' To achieve reform will require fundamental changes in attitudes. Employers, employees, the community generally and some people with disabilities themselves need to change their attitudes from focusing on disabilities to focusing on abilities-on what people with disabilities can achieve and on how independent, rather than dependent, they can be. The Government intends to lead the way in changing attitudes by ensuring that people with disabilities have proper access to employment and opportunities for advancement within the Australian Public Service. We therefore provided additional resources in the 1989-90 Budget to foster the employment of people with disabilities within the Government sector. These included: additional resources for the selective placement officers in the Department' of Employment, Education and Training; funding for community agencies to enable access to the Australian Public Service for people with intellectual disabilities; and funds for promoting employment of people with disabilities among Public Service managers. In addition, the Government is committed to improving access to rehabilitation services. We will provide 21,000 places in 1990-91, 23,500 places in 1991-92 and 27,000 in 199293. This represents growth of 9,000 new

places over the triennium, or a total of 17,500 additional services. This will be a continuation of the already strong growth in places which we have seen over the past three years.
As we move into the 1990s, the challenge is for all Australians to shed their prejudices and change their restricted thinking so that we can share a vision which will provide real choices for people with disabilities. These people have a right to make choices to enable them to develop fully their potential and this Government is committed to providing the opportunities for them to do so. We are at another important milestone on the road towards a new system. The vision is of a new system which more actively encourages independence for people with disabilities; a more humane system with better community understanding of basic human rights which apply equally to people with disabilities; a system with integrity, providing comprehensive assistance; and a system built from cooperative balance among agencies addressing the individual needs of clients. In the course of the consultation that followed the production of the Cass review, we were made aware of the general support for the approach taken by Professor Cass in her report and, of course, the need to proceed cautiously but nevertheless along the lines I have outlined in this statement. I now table the full statement associated with these brief remarks.
Mr CONNOLLY (Bradfield)-'by leaveThe Opposition welcomes the statement of the Minister for Social Security (Mr Howe). It is a clear recognition of the need to improve'the invalid pension system, a fact that the Opposition recognises in its recently released Economic Action Plan, which holds out real hope of the hundreds of thousands of disabled Australians who for so long have been forgotten and ignored and effectively locked out of the mainstream of society due to their inability, in most cases, to be rehabilitated and to use their abilities to attain greater financial independence.
The Minister in his statement made much of the alleged success of the Disability Services Act. Unfortunately, the principles and objectives were never placed before Parliament and were left entirely in the hands of the bureaucracy for implementation. Regrettably, the carers and service providers

Disability Reform

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3267

have found that the principles and objectives are inflexible. For example, one organisation wishes to establish a factory model to provide income' and training for the disabled, but the Department of Community Services and Health has refused to grant funding for this obviously necessary project. Furthermore, on two occasions the Opposition has had to refer aspects of the Act to Senate committees for inquiry. In fact, a committee is currently investigating the employment services provided for under the Act because providers are finding that the Government's principles and objectives are too inflexible. Consequently we cannot assume, as the Government does, that the Disability Services Act is adequate for providing the range of skills necessary to ensure that disabled people can enter the work force on a competitive basis.
We, applaud the fact that 1,420 disabled people previously on the pension are now in employment. Of these, 1,100 are in open employment and a further 320 in supported employment. What has the Act done for the many thousands who are denied access to employment because they lack the skills required and who are not provided for under the Act? This is because the Government has refused to accept that a more flexible approach to the provision of employment opportunities for the disabled is essential. It is in fact impossible for many of the disabled to obtain supported or full time employment under current arrangements. It is their welfare which the Liberal and National parties have addressed in the draft Bill-a Bill to amend the Disability Services Act 1986which was introduced into Parliament this morning by my colleague the honourable member for Dawson (Mr Braithwaite). This legislation seeks to provide services for those people whose interests have not been catered for under the existing Act. The Opposition's draft amendments will overcome many of the evident deficiencies in the existing legislation.
We are pleased to note that the Government intends to lead the way in changing attitudes of employers and the community generally towards the pisabled by providing access to opportunities within the Australian Public Service. In government the coalition would certainly ensure that all Australians

have the right of access to employment within the public sector. It is unfortunate that the Government's objective has not been entirely successful. On occasions I have brought to the Minister's attention cases where people have been given employment in the Public Service but were later threatened with termination due to their inability to perform tasks the criteria for which were measured against those of able bodied persons. Clearly there is a need to have more effective guidelines which will ensure that disabled persons are not expected to perform tasks for which they may not be capable.
The Opposition notes and welcomes the Government's proposal to provide an additional 9,000 rehabilitation places over the next three years. This' will represent an expenditure of approximately $25m over that period but should be compared with the coalition's commitment to increase the funding of rehabilitation by an additional $30m in the first year of our government. This is a firm commitment and demonstrates our determination to ensure that people who are disadvantaged will be given a second chance to rejoin the mainstream of society. For the Government to call our proposals 'punitive' and 'discriminatory' merely demonstrates its failure over nearly seven years to address one of the most important social issues facing our society. We find it incomprehensible that, the Governmenl having established the Cass Social Security Review in 1986, the report into income support for people with disabilities was not the first but the last to be released. Surely this demonstrates the Government's priorities in this important field. Even the 1989-90 Budget referred only to 'pilot programs', while .the Minister's statement today, referring as it does to positive and more sophisticated ways to assist people with disabilities, has provided little light on the subject, other than words such as 'appropriateness', 'scope for improvements', 'issues' and 'strategies to assist'.
The service providers and the over 300,000 people-as the Minister rightly points out, more people are now receiving these pensions than are receiving unemployment benefit-who are currently receiving invalid pensions will be justified in asking why, after seven years, the Government is offering so little so late. This sad situation was identified

3268 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Disability Reform

by the Minister when he said that less than 2 per cent of invalid pensioners actually move on from invalid pension to a job. There is nothing in his statement which sets an achievable target or gives the disabled any reason for confidence that their circumstances will improve under Labor.
The coalition's policies are based upon the objective of assisting back into employment at least 6 per cent of those who are currently on invalid pensions. This represents a trebling of the number of people on invalid pensions that we wish to assist back into the work force under current circumstances. No doubt the success of this program will act as an encouragement for even more beneficiaries to be prepared to do more to help themselves and to utilise more fully the rehabilitation programs we will fund. We are surprised that even the Minister in his statement said:
I do not believe that all of those remaining are incapable of working, at least on a part time basis.
On that surely we should all agree. He went on to say:
It would appear that up until now we have taken the easy way out.
I assume he is referring to the Government, which after seven years in office has achieved so little for this most disadvantaged section of the community, which has so much to offer if only it has the opportunity. Regrettably, this has not been the case. Again I use the words of the Minister:
We have judged these people to be unemployable and have therefore ignored their needs and capabilities.
May I add, for far too long. The coalition will continue to support financially disabled persons and those community programs which enable them to live in a suitable environment. Our financial support must be directed to ensuring that those who can be helped back into the work force are given the assistance to do so, while equally ensur. ing that those who are unable to be brought back into the work force are given adequate support. However, with an annual budget in excess of $2.5 billion we believe that the administration of the invalid pension system can be improved so as to ensure that beneficiaries are encouraged and assisted to be more independent by entering the work force

on a part time or permanent basis, depending on their capabilities. We have noted the conclusions of the Cass report. It recommends income support for people with disabilities and suggests that a greater reliance on the invalid pension may reduce further labour force opportunities for those who are unable to gain employment or who might be assisted to re-enter gainful employment.
As a first step towards assisting beneficiaries and ensuring a greater degree of accountability, we will examine giving those on invalid pensions-except those who are blind or totally and permanently incapacitatedthe opportunity to have an annual medical and non-medical review which will be conducted by Commonwealth medical officers and representatives of the Department of Social Security and the Department of Employment, Education and Training to establish the individual's potential for rehabilitation.
We must encourage greater work force participation for disabled or incapacitated people who have some ability to contribute towards their own well-being and that of the community. We do not accept that people on invalid pensions should receive them indefinitely with no prospect of participation in the work force or in the mainstream of society. The Minister has said that we will introduce 'punitive' and 'discriminatory' review measures, yet he apparently accepts that many thousands of people currently on unemployment benefits are effectively being removed from and are unable to return to the work force because unemployment benefits are not satisfactory for persons in that situation. We do not accept that approach.
We believe that if people are disabled they should be placed on invalid pensions where they can be supported. In seven years, the Labor Government has clearly done nothing to help a single disabled person on unemployment benefits. It has taken it six years to get in place a program to do anything to help people who have been unemployed for over 12 months. Approximately 50,000 people have been on unemployment benefits for over three years; yet the Minister has the audacity to make the sorts of puerile accusations that he has. The least a compassionate and responsible government can do is ensure that those who are disabled have a

Joint Committee of Public Accounts 30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3269

second chance, something that has been denied them for far too long.
In 1989-90, the Community Services and Health Department alone spent approximately $120m on rehabilitation and employment programs directed at assisting disabled people back into the work force. While some of these programs have successfully rehabilitated disabled people, the coalition believes that greater access to rehabilitation and labour market programs tailored to suit the special needs of disabled people should be provided. It is precisely for those objectives that we propose that additional funding of $30m be made available so that those programs can be improved, the disabled can go into job training schemes, and those who are able to return to permanent or part time work can be assisted to do so.
I also make one other observation. In our retirement incomes policy, we have taken a worthwhile step forward in relation to the establishment of retirement savings accounts. We are very conscious of the fact that many severely disabled people do not have the opportunity to provide for their later years through their inability to enter the work force and earn a sufficient income. The parents of these people in particular are often concerned about their children's future when they are no longer able to provide for them. The retirement savings account could well be a very useful mechanism to assist parents in those circumstances to provide adequately for the welfare of their children in later years. We will certainly examine this in government, because we believe that a sensitive and compassionate government ought to be concerned about parents and their disabled children, the very people who for far too long under the Labor Government have been effectively ignored. We see no virtue in leaving people dependent on invalid pensions, virtually for life, when they are denied access to the mainstream of society and are often marginalised through no fault of their own.
AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL
(No.2) 1989
Message received from .the Senate acquainting the House that the Senate has agreed to the amendments made by the

House in the Australian Federal Police Legislation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1989.
APPROPRIATION (PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS) BILL 1989
Bill returned from the Senate .without amendment.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
Message received from the Senate transmitting the following resolution relating to a reference to the Joint Committee of Public Accounts:
The Senate acquaints the House of Representatives of the following resolution which was agreed to this day by the Senate, having considered the report of Estimates Committee A:
That the following matter be referred to the Joint Committee of Public Accounts for inquiry and report:
An examination of the events surrounding the establishment and operation of the "unofficial PISO account" with particular reference to: (a) the role and responsibility of the former man-
ager of PISO; (b) the role and responsibility of the Parliamen-
tary Librarian; (c) the role and responsibility of Computer Power
as prime contractor to PISO; (d) the role and responsibility of consultants em-
ployed by Computer Power on behalf of PISO; (e) whether a conflict of interest did arise when
a consultant, employed by Computer Power, acted in a line management position; (f) the role and responsibility of other managers of PISO who were associated with this account; (g) the apparent lack of involvement of the Finance Section, Parliamentary Library with the auditing procedures of PISO's accounts and the role and responsibility of the Auditor General in oversighting this matter; and (h) whether the breaches outlined in the Auditor General's report warrant further action.
ECONOMY Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Ronald Edwards)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Peacock) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:

3270 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Economy

The damage being done to the Australian economy and families as a result of the Prime Minister's broken promises.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number of members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr PEACOCK (Kooyong-Leader of the Opposition) (3.45)-At this late stage in the wind-down of parliamentary activities, it was not the wish of the Opposition to delay matters but the Opposition felt it was imperative, before the Parliament gets up, that the Australian people be reminded of the damage being done to their economy and their families as a result of the broken promises of the Prime Minister (Mr Hawke). The Hawke Government has failed by its own criteria. It has failed to keep its promises and it has therefore failed Australia. Its third term has been characterised by-in addition to quick fixes and broken promises-a policy of doing nothing.
I remind the House that in August 1987, the Prime Minister said that the agenda was for sweeping reform. As I remarked in regard to that claim on one occasion, the only sweeping done was the sweeping under the nearest carpet. These days the Government believes that if there is a problem, one simply states the problem, claims victory over it and leaves the field. Government members are the ones who have set the criteria, but they have not been the ones who have been able to implement success when grappling with problems within the criteria. What we have had from the Government, after it stated the problem and walked away from the field after claiming silccess, has been what I have termed the five great lies of the Hawke Government. Today, I add a sixth. The first was the deplorable statement that no child will live in poverty by 1990. It is deplorable because it was made with the full knowledge that it could not be achieved.
Mr Downer-He has no shame. Mr PEACOCK-He has no shame at all; and that goes down as the first of the six great lies. The second was that interest rates would fall, but Australians are paying record rates. The third was the statement that the industrial dispute, the pilots dispute, was over.

Industrial peace was another matter that he was promising. The fourth lie was the promise of tax reforms, so that 'the hard work of ordinary Australians is not penalised'. The taxation of individuals has doubled from $23 billion in 1982c83, to $47.5 billion in 198889. The fifth is that inflation 'will be under 5 per cent'. It is 8 per cent and it is stuck.
The sixth lie is one that refers to that graphic occasion at Wentworth when the 'world's greatest environmental statement' was brought down. When launching that statement as recently as 20 July, the Prime Minister referred to a tree he planted as the first of one billion trees to be planted. He conceded it was an ambitious program, but let me tell honourable members that according to a quickcalculation I did today-I thought I would do it before we left-the Hawke tree plan calls for an average of about 250,000 trees to be planted every day. That means that between the launch of the tree plan a few months ago and today, over 33 million trees should have been planted. Do honourable members believe it-33 million trees! Nothing like that number, of course, .has been planted. The element of tragedy about it all is that the Shire of Wentworth, where the Prime Minister launched his tree plan, has been denied adequate funding for its own tree planting program. So to all the other lies-that the pilots dispute is over, interest rates will come down, no child will be living in poverty by 1990we add that to the list.
Opposition .member-What about there being no capital gains tax?
Mr PEACOCK-There were many more, but I want to use in this wrap-up the phrases of this Government. It does not take much recall to recall that it was April of 1986, I think, when the Treasurer (Mr Keating) said we were heading towards becoming a banana republic. The current account deficit, when he was moved to say that, was $1.5 billion; last week it was $2.2 billion. By the Treasurer's own measure, the country is moving closer to becoming a banana republic.
I am asked frequently by the media whether I think there will be a recession. I say, 'Look, we have very significant problems. I will rely on the words of the Government to tell you how bad they are'. In 1986

Economy

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3271

there were the words 'banana republic', but other words are oft forgotten. In August of 1986 the Prime Minister said that the economic crisis was the equivalent-do honourable members remember this-of war. He used the term 'equivalent of war'. We have had the declaration of war on the pilots, but on the economy he was moved to say that it was the 'equivalent of war'. Since then the position has become worse. So he just laid down in the face of this conflict and has not sought to turn it around. In June 1987 he said that the fall in living standards was over. Earlier in that same year, in April, the Treasurer said the economy had turned the corner. I am reminded, in terms of the parlous outlook for the economy, that it was September of 1987 when the Minister for Finance (Senator Walsh) said:
If this goes on much further, it could well be irretrievable. If there is a commodity price slide the IMF will be knocking on the door.
Whether it is the banana republic, the equivalent of war, or the possibility of the International Monetary Fund knocking on the door, this Government has done nothing to correct Australia's needs and the miseries and the difficulties which are caused by higher interest rates, the Government's only economic policy and sole pursuit.
If honourable members want to know what the people are thinking, they should have a look at what Labor Ministers are doing in this day and age. The Minister for Defence, the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley), has a seat that requires a swing of only 8.4 per cent. 'Only'? What is he doing? He is placing giant advertisements in local papers. He has never before placed advertisements in his own local papers and he has never before been seen knocking on doors; but there he is-knock, knock, knock. He is not the only one. The honourable member for Cowan (Mrs Jakobsen) is getting into the act, too. Mr Deputy Speaker, do I see a familiar face? You, Mr Deputy Speaker- 'Ron Edwards protecting our environment'. The honourable member for Moore, Mr Alan Blanchard--
Opposition members-Who? Mr PEACOCK-Unfortunately the photograph is abit blanked out. I do not recognise him in this place and I do not recognise

him in the advertisement. He is fighting to protect our environment, too. Then there is the honourable member for Canning, Mr George Gear, who is tackling the problem of roads. And here is an advertisement featuring the doctor, the honourable member for Perth, Dr Ric Charlesworth, who bulk bills all his colleagues in this Parliament when they ask him to fix them when they are crook. But it does not end there. Here are advertisements featuring the Minister for Defence defending the future of our children, protecting our environment, working for our community,and getting a better deal for youth. One would not think that these advertisements have come from only one week. They are churning them out. As I say, the Minister for Defence needs a swing of only 8f per cent to lose .the seat, yet there is doorknocking. But what about the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins), who requires a swing of only 13 per cent.
Mr Downer-Surely he is not advertising? Mr PEACOCK-I am amazed that the honourable member would ask. Here I have an advertisement with the caption 'John Dawkins tackling the tough issues in Fremantle', one with the words 'John Dawkins working for a better Fremantle', and yet another, 'John Dawkins. He is committed to Fremantle's future'. Before leaving this I want to point out one salient factor about all these advertisements. The test of how imperilled Government members feel is that these guys in safe Labor seats have never before been moved to do this. I have examined every advertisement that I have held up here today, and do honourable members know what is missing? There is no reference to the Labor Party. They got in here on their own ability. There is not one mention of the Australian Labor Party not one mention of the Labor Party. They are very clean advertisements-not a dirty word within them. Are Government members going to stand as independents at the next election? The pendulum has swung. I remind honourable members that for the seat held by the Minister for Defence, the Opposition needs a swing of 8.6 per cent and it needs 13.8 per cent in Fremantle. That is the measure of the task. After the way in which this economy has been run down, no wonder it is being done.

3272 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Economy

Honourable members might well ask: What is going to happen in the future? The past we can recall. For the future we have produced the Economic Action Plan. We have set out for Australians the relief with child tax rebates, childcare tax rebates, amendments to the dependent spouse rebate and so on. Economic management takes up one-third of the document. That is our Economic Action Plan-it is fully costed, page after page. I got out the 1983 economic action plan of the Treasurer--
Opposition members-Has he got one? Mr PEACOCJ(-No, for 1983. I got it out because, on the last day of sitting, I wanted to review the period. Here it is in my hand. That is the Keating economic action plan. It is headed 'First year cost of Australian Labor Party's national recovery and reconstruction plan'.
Mr McGauran-How many pages?
Mr PEACOCK-It is on one page-that was the Government's economic action plan. Honourable members should not be troubled, because there is more to come. For those who wanted a clear and undistilled account from the Prime Minister, no less, of what is going to transpire in the future, let me quote what he said at a press conference yesterday. I will read the exact quote from the journalist. He was asked:
Does this mean that you'll accept a fall in the Budget surplus and therefore no further cut?
I want honourable members to listen carefully. The Prime Minister said--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr PEACOCK-I had better stick with my own diction. He said:
I'm not prepared to say now what the outcome is that we will be aiming for. I mean I want to with this qualification, we're obviously going to be requiring a very, very substantial surplus. I've said, and I think Paul has probably said too, that the judgment may be at a time when we come to consider it that we need surplus, the same sort of dimension that we' need to keep at all for debt repayment, there's nothing there for any other purpose. Now, we're not pre-empting that sort of position. I'm simply saying-
there is a conflict in terms-
to you what I said beforehand that at the appropriate time we'll make the judgment as to whether there is a need for a statement and if so, the range of matters that will be involved in it. But I'm not

simply saying at this point whether there will be, what would be in it and what actual Budget outcome we would be aiming for. It would be far too early now to be saying that.
Honourable members can rest assured that Hawkespeak, or Hawkesquawk, is alive and well, but as for knowing what is going to happen to the future of this economy and the future. of this nation, the tragedy is that we will continue to get further pledges from the Prime Minister like the one a few years ago. Do honourable members remember it? 'We pledge to bring home ownership within the reach of Australian families'. Another one from the Prime Minister was: 'We will keep inflation below 5 per cent'.
The harsh reality is that the Government wants to distort the views of great Australians like Nobby Clark. Honourable members heard the quotation today from the managing director of the National Bank-
Mr Ruddock-Disgraceful. Mr PEACOCK-And. the honourable member says 'disgracefill'. Government members cannot cop it because they' know that when those quotes come through they are doomed to hear and see more and more of them, but the Government seeks to ridicule a person outside who today nailed the problem of this economy. What is the problem? It is the sole reliance on high interest rates. For all the talk of interest rates, we say to people, 'We are the only ones with a program for a sustained attack on inflation, and unless we have a sustained attack on inflation, we cannot get interest rates down'. With our tight fisoal policy, with our labour market deregulation, with ourprivatisation and with our reforms on the waterfront and in coastal shipping, we will make Australia more productive and bring inflation down. With sustained reductions in inflation will come reductions in interest rates. The Government cannot say that because it has but one policy-high interest rates. Those high interest rate policies will continue, and that is what strikes fear in the hearts of all of us. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Ronald Edwards)-Order! The Leader of the Opposition's time has expired. Mr MARTIN (Macarthur) (4.00)-As usual in a matter like this, coming at the end of a parliamentary session, we have seen the

Economy

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3273

Leader of the Opposition (Mr Peacock) give nothing but bluff. and bluster. Once again this is simply an attempt to denigrate personalities by producing advertisements from Western Australian newspapers and pointing out the fact that--
Mr Pratt-No ALP endorsement. Mr MARTIN-There is no Australian Labor Party endorsement; shock, horror, full stop. That says a great deal about what the Opposition would do to overcome the economic concerns of Australians and what it would do for families and the disadvantaged. Did anyone hear the Leader of the Opposition mention the disadvantaged or what the Opposition would do under this brilliant Economic Action Plan that this brilliant economic action man would bring. to Australia? There was not one word. What he did say was things like, 'Heed the warnings of this great Australian, Nobby Clark'. I will refer the Leader of the Opposition to another great Australian, Mr Clark's opposite number at Westpac Banking Corporation, and what he had to say yesterday. I am referring to Mr Stuart Fowler, who said:
The Australian economy is on the threshold of a new period of growth and dynamism.
This is based on the same economic information, but Nobby Clark said that we are going down the gurgler. Mr Fowler holds the same position, but with a different bank. As the Prime Minister (Mr Hawke) said this afternoon in Question Time, the banks are coming from a pretty reasonable position, making accusations about how well the Australian economy is going. What about the record bank profits that were announced last week? For some reason Nobby Clark said, 'It is not going all that well, boys'. What absolute nonsense!
I wish to take honourable members in this place, those who have a genuine interest in the problems associated with bringing the Australian economy to where it should be and the problems of giving families a true understanding of the economic circumstances facing Australia today, to a few important points. The first is that the Opposition has had what I think even its own members would have to regard as a pretty poor week. It started off pretty poor for them. In South Australia the Australian Labor Party was

returned to office. They do not like to admit it but the Labor Party is back there; we are the Government. It ain't you, boys! Last year the Labor Party won in Victoria, we are in government in Western Australia ,and Tasmania and, come this Saturday, we will have another shot at Queensland as well. This is simply a shabby exercise before Saturday's poll to try to divert attention away from the basic issues of the Queensland electionwhich are corruption, corruption and corruption, largely as a result of National Party people--
Opposition members interjecting Mr MARTIN-I admit it. On this side of the House people do not come in with brown paper bags and leave them in the front offices for us. That is quite right, but up in Queensland they do, and Opposition members can ask any number of their friends up in Queensland what the size of the brown paper bag was and they will tell them all about it. Secondly, a series of economic statistics came out this week and those statistics have shown-and it has been widely recognised and indeed today all commentators have agreed-that the Government's economic strategy is on course. Thirdly, this week Opposition members on the other side, with their self-professed' concern about interest rates, through a number of their spokesmen had to admit not only that the Opposition has absolutely no timetable for bringing down interest rates, but that interest rates would have to stay high for the foreseeable future. Let us look at some of the statements that have been made. The shadow finance Minister, Senator Stone-another National and I suppose one can excuse him for that-said that the Opposition had 'no magic wand'. They are not wrong there; they have no magic wand and no idea. When the shadow Treasurer, the honourable member for Wentworth (Dr Hewson), was asked whether he could guarantee that interest rates would come down by Christmas of next year, he said, 'Oh, no, no. We don't put out timetables; we never have'. Honourable members must not forget that this is the shadow Treasurer, the person brought in here to lead the charge with this Economic Action Plan. and he got rolled by a National Party chap, the honourable member for--

3274 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Economy

Mr Simmons-Gilmore. Mr MARTIN-Yes, Gilmore; he rolled him the other day. The shadow Treasurer is supposed to be the guru, but he said, 'No, we don't put out timetables; we never have'. Then the Leader of the Opposition said that any interest rate relief would 'take time over the first term of our government'. In other words, up to three years. Yet here are these crocodile tears being displayed in this House about interest rates and the effect on families. In addition, in the last week we have seen the already bodgie figures from this so-called Economic Action Plan which were further eroded by the National Party's promise to find an extra $400m for roads. That was demonstrated this week as well. The shadow health Minister, the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack), has revealed a halfbaked health policy which would apparently gut Medicare and make millions of Australians worse off. As far as the Liberal Party is concerned, that is in the family. interest. There was a great quote from the Leader of the Opposition in describing the health policy when he said, 'Well, well'-getting as appropriately serious as the honourable member can be-'if they are silly enough not to take private insurance, they will not get the reb&te'. He was talking about what the Opposition would do with its health insurance policy. Meanwhile, the people they identified in the Economic Action Plan that they had kicked to death, the disadvantaged and poor in our community-the people they are .going to take from while paying child maintenance in some way to their rich mates, such as John Elliott-have been completely disregarded. Yet the Opposition stands up in this place and says that it is concerned for the family and about what this terrible Government has done for this country. Let us have a look at what this dreadful Government has done for the country in the not too distant past. Firstly~and one cannot get away from it-one of the basic things that most people want is a job so that there is a bread-winner. This Government has created 1t million new jobs. That is not half bad. People out in. the community now know that at the end of two weeks they will have something in their kick. That is helping a family, and perhaps honourable members on

the other side of the House really do not know what that is all about. Again the Opposition Leader raised the nonsense about the tax take having increased. I have to admit that the tax take has increased. Why? Because more people are working. People are working and are paying tax-many of them for the first time in their lives. More importantly than that, there are all these lurks merchants out there, the free lunch brigade, who are now having to pay tax as well. These are the people that those on the other side are trying to look after with the speculative gains tax. The Labor Party introduced a capital gains tax, exempting the family home and making some allowances for inflation, and so on. It is one of the fairest capital gains taxes in any western country. Yet the people on the other side say, 'Scrap the capital gains tax. Terrible thing. We will make it speculative. We will make it retrospective as well.' Who will that help? It will help the likes of John Elliott. Various amounts have been mentioned, and I will not go into specifics because it embarrasses the Opposition too much. Yet Opposition members deny that this is the case. But perhaps their idea of helping families is a little different from the ideas of those on this side of the House.
Mr Simmons-A different world. Mr MARTIN-Yes, the Minister is quite correct; it is a different world. They march to the tune of a different drum in a different world. (Quorum formed) Who could forget the Government's achievements in terms of family allowance and family allowance supplement as part of looking after the real families in Australia, about whom this Government has been consistently concerned for the last seven years. Increases in family allowance have been indexed to the rate of inflation to protect its real value. What a major step forward. Has that received the accolades or any form of acknowledgment that it should from those on the other side? Not one word. What about the landmark family allowance supplement, lifting children out of poverty because it is paid to those people most in need. Does the Opposition care about them? Not one word. What about the 930,000 homes constructed in Australia since March 1983. Surely that is a statistic that cannot be de-

Economy

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3275

nied and that demonstrates the commitment of this Government to look after families.
We have already said that we have given those people jobs; we have given them homes; we have given them family allowance and family allowance supplement so they can live in some degree of dignity. We have taken those people who cannot fend for themselves and clearly given them support. But do we hear one word of praise, one word of acknowledgment, one work of commendation from those on the other side? No way. All Opposition members do is knock; all they do is say, 'We have an economic action plan'. But that plan does not mention interest rates; it does not mention foreign debt and what they would do about it. It mentioned a speculative gains tax, which will look after their rich mates and give the likes of John Elliott millions of dollars of benefit. Those are the people they are looking after and that is the family they are looking after.
I suppose we can make allowances because, as we all know the Federal President of the Liberal Party of Australia has recently acquired his second family. I suspect that the changes the Opposition is proposing to its child-care policy are geared to that. I wonder if there was another little. fireside chat when the Opposition was dreaming up its childcare policy. If it was in the last nine months, perhaps we should check that out. It was certainly the case as far as the capital gains tax matter was concerned.
The Leader of the Opposition also had the temerity to come in here and laugh at the Government for expressing concern about the environment. What hypocrisy we hear from members on the other side about what they will do with Kakadu, the tree program and all the rest of the plans that have been announced by this Government. Where were they in the days of the Franklin? Where were they in the days of Kakadu stages 1, 2 and 3 and what is their position on that? Where were they in terms of Jisting the World Heritage areas in the rainforests in Queensland? Where were they in terms of their support in Tasmania? Where were they-I ask the honourable member for Dawson (Mr Braithwaite)-in terms of their support for the Great Barrier Reef? What was their view about that 98 per cent listing? Opposition members probably would have said no be-

cause there might have been a chance to harvest something from the sea.
Quite clearly, the Government is concerned about families. We have taken the economic steps necessary to put in place policies that will see benefits to families. I have demonstrated that quite clearly, in contrast to this weak and puny effort by the Leader of the Opposition, waving around advertisements by some of our colleagues, trying to be a vaudeville comedian, as the Treasurer (Mr Keating) described him the other day. The Leader of the Opposition failed miserably then. Half of his colleagues did not even laugh at his attempted humour. This matter of public importance is a nonsense. The Government rejects it out of hand. We can hardly wait to see what happens in the next few months.
Mr BLUNT (Richmond-Leader of the National Party of Australia) (4.15)-As usual, we got from the Australian Labor Party 15 minutes worth of personal abuse. As to this clown who purports .to be the honourable member for Fisher (Mr Lavarch), coming in here after his record as a councillor on Pine Rivers Shire Council, let me tell him that we have a lovely little file on him. He could join the right wing of the Australian Labor Party with his record. As for the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Martin), who is part of the right wing of the New South Wales Labor Party, coming in here and talking about corruption, let me tell him about the Government's grubby little deals. Let me tell him the grubby little deal that his mate Richo has done in the past couple of days. Let me tell him about the Buy Australian campaign. Does he know what that is all about? It is all about no Labor Party mate living in poverty in 1990. He knows what that is about. The Australian Public Service recommended another agency. The research said another agency. His mate Singo-John Singleton-put up a campaign which was lousy. It was appalling. It did not even cover the fees. So what happens? The advice from the Public Service is overruled. Who overruled it? The Government's mate, Richo.
Government members interjecting--
Mr BLUNT-Can't you cop it?

3276 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Economy

Mr Simmons-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. It is my understanding that the matter of public importance this afternoon deals with damage purportedly being done to the Australian economy and families as a result of the Prime Minister's broken promises. I fail to see what the honourable member's contribution for the last couple of minutes has to do with any aspect of that subject.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Mountford)-I suggest that the Leader of the National Party of Australia come back to the terms of the matter of public importance.
Mr BLUNT-I was, Mr Deputy Speaker. What I was saying has a lot to do with the damage done to the Au~tralian economy because the rorts, the rip-oft's, the manipulation and abuse of the system by this Government, the Prime Minister (Mr Hawke), the Minister for Defence Science and Personnel (Mr Simmons), who is at the table, and the whole of the Government mob are being paid for by the Australian taxpayer.
Let me go back and talk about that Buy Australian campaign, which obviously embarrasses the Minister because he is part of Richo's faction, is he not? He is one of his little mates.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I suggest that the Leader of the National Party not pursue that line but rather come back to the matter before the House.
Mr BLUNT-Mr Deputy Speaker, why not? As far as I am concerned, we are debating a matter of economics, and the way in which this Government has spent the taxpayers' money is covered by this matter. If you disagree, I am quite happy to move dissent.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I just suggest to the Leader of the National Party that he come back to the terms of the matter of public importance raised by the Leader of the Opposition.
Mr BLUNT-I can well understand the Labor Party's embarrassment at this issue; but there is a need for the Australian people to know what sorts of grubby little deals are being done and what their tax money is being spent on. It is being spent on the mates of the Labor Party. Let us have a look at

this deal. The Buy Australian campaign was proposed. The Public Service recommended one agency. The research said that Singleton's proposal was no good and was inadequate. The matter went to the ministerial committee-a. great little ministerial committee. The Minister for mates, Senator Richardson, Senator Kelly--

Mr Simmons-Senator Kelly?

Mr BLUNT-Ros Kelly and Senator Walsh. They sat there and said, 'We have to look after Singo, so Vie will overrule the advice; we will reverse the determination'. Let me tell honourable members what it is and how it works. This is a grubby little contra-deal whereby Singleton charges the taxpayers for the Labor Party's campaign.

Mr Simmons-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise

a further point of order. Can I suggest that,

in the light of your earlier ruling, the Leader

of the National Party is showing complete

and utter contempt. I ask you to ask him to

get back to the subject of the matter of

public importance.

.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I would again ask the Leader of the National Party to come back to the terms of the matter of public importance before the House.

Mr BLUNT-As I said before, what I am debating is a matter of economics.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I am asking the Leader of the National Party for the last time to come back to the terms of the matter of public importance before the chair at present.

Mr BLUNT-I am more than happy to talk about the way the Labor Party runs this economy, looks after its mates and spends taxpayers' money. As I was ,saying, the money that goes to John Singleton Advertising as a result of this campaign, comes from the Australian taxpayer. The deal is very simple. It is a little contra-deal: 'You scratch my back and I will do YQur campaign a bit cheaper'. That is what it comes down to. I can well understand that the Australian Labor Party is embarrassed about that. It says, 'You will get the full cost for the Buy Australia campaign even though the proposal is no good and you don't charge as much for doing the Labor Party election campaign'. The agency knows what it is about, Government mem-

Economy

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3277

bers know what it is about and Senator Richardson knows what it is about. Let me say something more about the Labor Party and some of its grubby little deals. Let me talk about the way this Government--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! Again I ask the Leader of the National Party to come back to the terms of the matter of public importance that is before the House. If he does not do so, I will ask him to resume his seat.
Mr BLUNT-Let me talk about the pilots dispute. It is a classic example of the Prime Minister's broken promises. He said that the pilots dispute would be over in September. Let me outline how that little deal works. The full cost of running a 707 aircraft is $12,000 an hour. The Government's original deal on the 707 aircraft was to charge it out to the airlines at $4,000 an hour. Australian Airlines Ltd agreed to that. That is, a subsidy of $8,000 an hour. Suddenly there was a phone call. Guess who made the telephone call? It was someone from Ansett Airlines of Australia who was probably blowing cigar smoke down the line. The Prime Minister smells the cigar smoke and knows who is on the line. And what was the deal-$1,500 an hour for an aircraft that cost $12,000 an hour to run. This Government is corrupt. It looks after its mates and it does it by spending the taxpayers' money. It is no wonder the Government does not want to talk about it. That is the standard on which this Government operates.
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Peacock) pointed out how petrified some of the Labor members are. Let me talk about the Minister for Defence Science and Personnel, who is at the table, and his use of taxpayers' money. In his electorate, there is a little arrangement called Telemarketing Dynamics. The Minister, to save his own political skin, is ringing everyone in the electorate of Calare and saying, 'I care about you and I want to help you'. Who is paying for the telephone calls-most of them are STD calls-the staff, the word processors, the postage and the stationery? Australian families are paying for this man's election campaign. That is exactly what is going on. That is why this Government increased, to $30,000, the postage allowance for these desperately scared and terrified backbenchers. That is

why the honourable member for Fisher (Mr Lavarch) is posting mail to everybody for whom he can find an address. This Government, which professes to be concerned about the environment and preserving trees, has given us all unlimited stationery allowances. Somebody should tell the Government that trees have to be chopped down to provide stationery. We have been given unlimited stationery. That is totally unnecessary. That is the standard of this Government. The list goes on and on. There is something suspect about everything this Government touches. It cannot do anything out in the open.
For three weeks, I have been trying to get the Prime Minister to tell me the way in which the airlines are to be compensated. Do we get a note from Sir Peter reading, 'Please send me $15,000,000', or will his account be audited? On what basis is the appropriation made? Who will authorise the cheque? Who will send it? What is the deal? What is the deal that has been done between this Government and the airlines? I have been given no answer. I have been told not a thing. All we get is rhetoric. The Government is preoccupied with looking after its mates. It is out of touch. It will do anything to get itself re-elected. As for governing in the national interest, as for addressing the real problems of the country and as for knowing the problems of Australian families, the Government would not have a clue. Its total agenda is political and all it is prepared to do are the things that will enhance its standing. Its commitment to any issue is no deeper than the ballot box.
Mr LAMB (Streeton) (4.25)-This matter of public importance is merely a stunt that comes at the end of a very bad week for the Opposition. It has been so bad that, instead of getting something good in the speech of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Peacock), we got farce, cheap humour and an attack on members of this Parliament in a most despicable way. He attacked them for doing their jobs properly. He held up in this Parliament a photograph of several members advertising to the people what they believe in and offering the services that every member of parliament should provide. That is one of the most disgraceful things that could come from a Leader of the Opposition. He attacked members of this Parliament for

3278 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Economy

doing their job properly. Opposition members do not do it like that; they do not advertise and they do not offer the services because they cannot deliver.
Several constituents in my electorate say that they cannot find the office of the Liberal members of parliament because the policy of Liberal Party members is to have their offices on the top floor of a building so that the disabled, the elderly and the pensioners cannot see them because they cannot climb the stairs. Liberal Party members put barriers in the way of the ordinary' people and the families about whom Liberal members bleat so much so that those people cannot go and see them.
Mr Hawker-On a point of order: I take exception to what the honourable member for Streeton has said because my office is on the ground floor and anyone can get to it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Mountford)-Order! There is no point of order.
Mr LAMB-By raising the one single exception, the honourable member proves the rule. The honourable member for Deakin (Mr Beale) is on record as going to ground by saying to the electors whom he is supposed to represent, 'We cannot win this electorate. The Labor Party will win this electorate. I am going to set up shop in another electorate'. How bad can you get? The abuse of members of parliament did not stop there. The Leader of the National Party of Australia (Mr Blunt) rose to his feet and the anger he displayed was an attempt to brush off the wimpish image which I thought he was cultivating but it now seems is natural. The members of his Party are embarrassed and extremely worried about his wimpish image. We find them grouped in twos and threes around the building muttering together, 'We are in trouble. We have lost leadership. We have this wimpish person who leads us'. All I can say is, 'Sinkers'- the honourable member for New England (Mr Sinclair)-'you are looking good. YOl~ are needed like never before'.
I say again to Opposition members that they have had an extremely bad week. The Labor Government was returned to the treasury bench in South Australia for the next four years. Opposition members know full well that, on Saturday, the Labor Gov-

ernment will be returned to the treasury bench in Queensland. It has been a bad week for the Liberals indeed. However, enough of projections and records at the ballot box. A series of economic indicators has come to light in the last few days that is really worrying them. They know now that this Government's policy of demand restraint through, unfortunately, high interest rates but the level of interest rates that is necessary to curb demand and to prevent any further increase in our balance of payments problem brought about by a burgeoning and growing economy, which cannot satisfy the demand for domestic resources, is working and that indeed demand is falling. What Opposition members worry about so much is that interest rates will fall because the correct economic prescription is in place.
Opposition members also know that. the one cop they had in going to the people, their one hope, was to delude the people by saying that they can reduce interest rates. But they forgot one thing. In all their dishonesty and the portrayal of their economic plan, there was one honest voice in the Senate-that of Senator Stone. Senator Stone was the adviser to that lot when they were in government, so we can expect and trust that what he says is true-that is, they cannot guarantee a drop in interest rates and they will need to sustain interest rates at least at their current level for several years to come. We have already indicated that our demand restraint policies are working and that interest rates will not rise. Looking at the Opposition's past performance and recognising that it still does not have a wages policy in place, the people of the electorate can expect a repeat of the disastrous economic policies of 1982-83 when those opposite were last in government. They did not have a wages policy in place then and they do not have one now. (Quorum formed)
This matter of public importance is about promises. One thing that the people in the electorate know is that the Opposition will promise a repeat of its disastrous economic policies of 1982-83. Once again,it will give us record unemployment of 10.2 per cent or more. The 1t million jobs which have been created by this Government will evaporate. Those people who now have the income to afford houses will lose those houses under

Personal Explanation

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3279

the Opposition because they will not have a job to sustain regular payments on their mortgages. We will see a return to the high level of industrial disputes.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Mountford)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired. The debate is concluded.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

Mr SIMMONS (Calare-Minister for Defence Science and Personnel)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?

Mr SIMMONS-Yes, Mr Deputy Speaker.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Please pro-

ceed.

.

Mr SIMMONS-In the course of the contribution of the Leader of the National Party of Australia (Mr Blunt) to the matter of public importance, an accusation was made that taxpayers' funds were involved in a telephone survey carried out recently in my electorate. No taxpayers' funds-I repeat: no taxpayers' funds-were involved in that survey. The survey was fully funded by my Party, the Australian Labor Party, and not by Australian taxpayers. Further, as I have instituted legal proceedings in the Supreme Court of New South Wales ,against the Liberal Party candidate in Calare, who made a similar claim, I am more than happy to include the Leader of the National Party in that action if he is prepared to repeat that claim outside cowards' castle.

SPECIAL ADJOURNMENT Motion (by Mr Simmons) proposed:
That the House, at its rising, adjourn until a date and hour to be fixed by the Speaker or, in the event of the Speaker being unavailable, by the Chairman of Committees, which time of meeting shall be notified to each member.
Mr TIM FISCHER (Farrer) (4.36)-On behalf of the honourable member for Hume (Mr Fife), who has to attend an important committee meeting at this time, I signify that the Opposition supports the motion but with some reluctance. Through this motion the Government is indicating to the House of

Representatives, the Parliament and the nation that the Budget session is coming to an end. This is the twenty-seventh day of sitting of the 1989 Budget session. If we are called back for one or two more days, now set down for 21 or 22 December, that would make it 28 or 29 days of sitting. This compares with 34 sitting days in last year's Budget session and reflects a trend in the Parliament's sitting pattern under this Government. Those factors indicate that the Government is not prepared to face the House extensively. In the last six months a lot of hurt and agony has emerged for many Australians. Yet many of us were not able to speak on matters that we would have liked to have raised in that context. However, the coalition does not oppose the motion in the knowledge that the House will be recalled sometime just prior to Christmas.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE Motion (by Mr Simmons) agreed to:
That leave of absence be given to every member of the House of Representatives from the determination of this sitting of the House to the date of its next sitting.
DISCHARGE OF ORDERS OF THE DAY
Motion (by Mr Simmons)-byleaveproposed:
That the following orders of the day, government business, be discharged:
14. Australian National University Bill 1988Second reading-Resumption of debate.
29. Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade-Joint Committee-Report on Australia's relations with the South Pacific-Government response-Motion to take note of paper: Resuinption of debate.
30. Commonwealth procurement guidelinesPapers-Motion to take note of papers: Resumption of debate.
31. Pulp mills-Modern technology and environmental protection-Report-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.
32. Retirement income policy-Paper and ministerial statement-Motion to take note of papers: Resumption of debate.
33. Social justice for young Australians-Paper and ministerial statement-Motion to take note of papers: Resumption of debate.
34. Coringa-Herald National Nature ReservePapers-Motion to take note of papers: Resumption of debate.

3280 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Discharge of Orders of the Day

35. Residents' rights in nursing homes and hostels-Final report-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.
36. Residents' rights in nursing homes and hostels-Paper-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.

Michael-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate. 56. Aboriginal Deaths in Custody-Royal Commission-Report of inquiry into death of Edward James Murray-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.

37. Industry, Science and Technology-Standing Committee-Report on superconductivity and related new materials-Government response-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.

57. Aboriginal Deaths in Custody-Royal Commission-Report of inquiry into death of John Clarence Highfold-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.

38. Guidelines for the preparation of departmental annual reports-Paper-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.
40. Reform of shipping and the waterfront-Ministerial statement-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.

58. Aboriginal Deaths in Custody-Royal Commission-Report of inquiry into death of Kingsley Richard Dixon-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate. 59. Northern Land Council-Report-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.

41. Government business enterprises reforms and telecommunications pricing-Ministerial statement and paper-Motion to take note of papers: Resumption of debate.
42. Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission-Report on homeless children-Motion to take note of papers: Resumption of debate.
43. Science and technology-Ministerial statement (Mr Hawke)-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.
44. Science and technology-Ministerial statement (Mr Jones) and papers-Motion to t\ike note of papers: Resumption of debate. 45. Census of population and housing 1991-Ministerial statement and paper-Motion to take note of papers: Resumption of debate.

60. Central Land Council-Report-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.

6!. Aboriginal Development Commission-Delayed report-Paper-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.

Mr TIM FISCHER (Farrer) (4.38)-ln

the spirit of Christmas cheer, on this occa-

sion the coalition supports the motion, which

essentially is intended to clear a number of

long standing items from the Notice Paper,

some of which are of considerable impor-

tance. Unfortunately, in the scheme of things, .

it is unlikely that these items will get up for

debate, given even more important matters

listed on the Notice Paper.

.

47. Australian Airlines Limited-Report-Motion to However, I wish to make two other com-

take note of paper: Resumption of debate.

ments. On the good news side, as a result of

48. Inter-State Commission-Report on waterfront the motion the size of the printing run for

investigation-Motion to take note of paper: Re~ the Notice Paper each day, including the

sumption of debate.

one or two additional sitting days of the

49. Film Censorship Board and Films Board of. ReHouse this year, will be somewhat reduced.

view-Report-Motion to take note of paper: ReI guess that is a positive contribution to the

sumption of debate.

.

environment, given the massive tonnage of

50. Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing Authority-Repaper associated with the printing required

port-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of for the operation of the House of Represen-

debate.

tatives and the Senate each year. Hundreds

5!. Australian Security Intelligence Organisationof tonnes of paper are required for. printing

Report-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.

papers, notices, the Votes and Proceedings, and so forth. We welcome this streamlining

52. Special purpose aircraft-Paper-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate. 53. Aboriginal Development Commission and Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Report of Auditor General-Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.

measure. One of the Bills being discharged is the
Australian National University Bill 1988. That was the now failed attempt to stitch together a particular merger in the Austra-

54. Aboriginal Deaths in Custody-Royal Commislian Capital Territory, with ramifications sion-Interim report-Motion to take note of paper: elsewhere. In the outcome of that, we have

Resumption of debate.

had a scramble for linkage amongst tertiary

55. Aboriginal Deaths in Custody-Royal Commisunits across Australia. We certainly have a

sion-Report of inquiry into death of Charles Sydney. major problem in the Albury-Wodonga area,

Publications Committee

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3281

created in part by the border and a lack of fundamental cooperation. It is a matter of considerable concern that we have two totally separate higher education elements, one north of the border and one south of the border and within 10 kilometres of each other, lacking in fundamental cooperation. So in this discharge motion there is a plethora of matters being discharged, but by no means have the problems which some of these matters refer to been overcome. These matters must be addressed further down the track.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE Mr JENKINS (Scullin)-I present the twentieth report from the Publications Committee sitting in conference with the publications Committee of the Senate. Copies of the report are being circulated to honourable members in the chamber. I seek leave to move a motion: Leave granted. Mr JENKINS-I move:
That the report be agreed to.
Dr HARRY EDWARDS (Berowra) (4.42)-1 support the report from the Publications Committee and the Chairman, the honourable member for Scullin (Mr Jenkins). The Publications Committee is a little known standing committee of the Parliament which reports regularly on the Thursday of the second week of sittings, but is otherwise little heard of. Yet under the guidance of the present Chairman, the honourable member for Scullin, and meeting with its Senate counterpart, it does important work focused on increasing efficiency and saving money, reducing expenditure, in respect of the many fold printing and publishing activities associated with this place. The report on the distribution of bound volumes of Hansard, which is to be tabled in a moment, is a case in point.
In some respects the Committee's work requires a most judicious mix of firmness and tact. I have in mind its responsibility to oversight the shape, design and production of the annual report of departments and statutory bodies generally. One would sometimes think that there was something of a competition on for the glossiness and colour

in their presentations. Indeed, the degree of difference in the printing standards of annual reports and other parliamentary papers is very large-it is quite unbelievable-and while some authorities go to great lengths to meet existing guidelines others just go their merry way, at considerable cost. This is an issue which the Committee will be addressing at an early stage.
On behalf of the Opposition and the Committee, I wish to thank the staff of the Committee at this stage of the year-Mr Max Kiermaier, the secretary; Ms Bev Orr, from the Senate side, and by no means least, Mr Alex Goodieson.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Mr JENKINS (Scullin)-by leave-I wish to make a very short statement in respect of the twentieth report of the Publications Committee. In its consideration of the papers presented to Parliament, the Committee has noted an increasing trend among departments and authorities to ignore mandatory production standards as set out in the Commonwealth Printing and Publishing Manual. In some cases it would appear that the primary purpose of preparing a report for the scrutiny of the parliament is being overshadowed by a perceived need to produce an elaborate and expensive self-promotional document. As the honourable member for Berowra (Dr Harry Edwards) pre-empted, the Committee is concerned with this trend and intends to continue to monitor this situation closely.
JOINT COMMITTEE ON PUBLICATIONS
Mr JENKINS (Scullin)-On behalf of the Joint Committee on Publications I present the Committee's report on the distribution of bound volumes of Hansard, together with the minutes of proceedings and evidence received by the Committee.
Ordered that the report be printed. Mr JENKINS-by leave-In May of this year the Presiding Officers requested the Joint Committee on Publications to review the distribution arrangements for bound volumes of Hansard. At the outset 1 would like to place on record the thanks of the Committee to the Committee Secretary Max Kiermaier, who, along with Alex Goodieson and Bev

3282 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Health and Safety Bill

Orr from the Senate, provided valuable support and guidance to the Committee in carrying out not only this inquiry but its work in general. I thank the other members of the Committee, including the honourable member for Berowra (Dr Harry Edwards), for their cooperation in the conduct of not only this inquiry but all the business that we attend to.
Currently, 619 sets of the Hansard of each House are bound and distributed, and in the last financial year this cost the Parliament in excess of $460,000. The Committee considers that the distribution arrangements for the weekly Hansard adequately meet the goal of disseminating parliamentary debates to interested persons and, therefore, an extensive free distribution of bound volumes is not warranted. Accordingly the Committee recommends, among other things, that: members and senators be entitled to receive only bound volumes of the Hansard of the House in which they have served covering their period in office; eligibility to be placed on the free distribution list be similar to that for the bound volumes of Parliamentary Papers; and subscription be raised to a level which acknowledges the 'cost of production and distribution.
Mr Speaker, acknowledging that you are in the Chair, implementation of the Committee's recommendations would reduce the annual cost to the Parliament by $260,000. Additionally, the Committee expects that further savings are achievable should the parliamentary departments rationalise their requirements.
OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY (COMMONWEALTH EMPLOYMENT) BILL 1989
Bill presented by Mr Peter Morris, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr PETER MORRIS (Shortland-Minister for Industrial Relations) (4.47)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Occupational Health and Safety (Commonwealth Employment) Bill 1989 seeks to establish a statutory framework to secure the health and safety of Commonwealth Government employees while at work. In doing so, it will provide Commonwealth Govern-

ment employees with the protection of modern occupational health and safety (OHS) legislation similar to that which is presently enjoyed by both public and private sector employees in most States.
Background The incidence of occupational death, injury and disease in Australia, including in Commonwealth Government employment, is unacceptably high. Some 400 Australians are killed each year by accidents at the workplace. The number of deaths from occupational diseases is thought to be considerably higher. More than 300,000 Australians suffer compensable work injuries each year. Apart from the human suffering involved, occupational injury and disease results in massive costs to the Australian community through the need to provide medical and rehabilitation services, retraining and workers compensation schemes. There is also a huge cost through lost production. In 1986 working time lost in Australia as a result of occupational injury and disease was 10 times that lost through industrial disputes. If all the associated indirect costs such as lost production and retraining are included, it is estimated that the total cost of occupational injury and disease is nearly $10 billion a year, which is more than 3 per cent of Australia's gross domestic product. At a time when Australia faces considerable economic difficulties and is striving to improve its international competitiveness by improving productivity and holding down costs, this is a cost which cannot be ignored. Every effort must be made to reduce it. It follows that the reduction of occupational injury and disease should be seen as an integral part of efforts to improve Australia's performance through the Government's micro-economic reform program, including workplace reform through award restructuring. It is essential that consideration be given to improvements in occupational health and safety when changes in job design and work patterns associated with award restructuring are being developed. These are the reasons which make improvements in occupational health and safety essential. Of course, this Government's commitment to improved occupational health and safety is not new. It is contained in the

Health and Safety Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3283

Australian Labor Party platform and was included as a key factor in the non-wage element of the accord.
That commitment arose because it has been known for many years that Australia has a relatively poor occupational health and safety record. With the honourable exception of the Whitlam Labor Government, however, our predecessors in government have chosen to ignore the problem. This Government did not. Instead, it has' formulated a strategy, initiated action and provided the leadership which Australians are entitled to expect from their Federal Government in dealing with matters of national importance.
In 1983 the Government commenced negotiations with the States, unions, employers and occupational health and safety professionals about the development of a national approach to occupational health and safety. In 1985 we established the National Occupational Health and Safety Commission. The Commission is comprised of representatives from the Federal, State and Territory governments, the Australian Council of Trade Unions and national employer bodies.
The fundamental aims of the Commission are to rectify the consequences of the previous fragmented and piecemeal approach to occupational health and safety and to provide a national focus for the development and application of uniform occupational health and safety standards and strategies. The Commission is thereby facilitating the development of a uniform approach to OHS across Australia and the most effective use of scarce occupational health and safety resources. This will avoid the duplication of effort which we as a nation can no longer afford.
An important element of the Government's strategy is the development of legislation for the protection of its own employees. Unlike other workers in Australia, Commonwealth employees are not covered by comprehensive occupational health and safety legislation. Under the previous Labor Government a general code of principles on OHS for application to Commonwealth employment was declared with a view to introducing appropriate legislation. These intentions were thwarted in 1975. Apart from the period of the Whitlam Labor Government, only the

barest lip service was paid to the health and safety of the Federal Government's own employees until the election of this Government in 1983.
This Government commenced extensive consultations on the content of OHS legislation to cover the entire area of Commonwealth responsibility, that is, Commonwealth employment, the external territories and the Australian Capital Territory (ACT). In the course of those consultations two significant developments occurred. The first was that the Australian Capital Territory became self governing. The Federal Government decided that it was more appropriate for the ACT to develop its own legislation in consultation with the community it served. Consequently, the ACT Administration proceeded to develop legislation appropriate for application to the ACT private sector, and that legislation has now been passed by the ACT Legislative Assembly. The ACT legislation embraces the modern self-regulatory approach to the management of health and safety in the workplace, which recognises the responsibilities of both employers and employees. It is therefore consistent with recent State legislation and similar to the Commonwealth approach. The second development which coincided with consultations on this legislation was an extensive review of compensation and rehabilitation arrangements for Commonwealth employees.
This year the Commonwealth's expenditure on workers compensation will be of the order of $148m. Our compensation costs have therefore risen significantly since 1976 \Vhen the amount spent on workers. compensation was $25m. This Government could not allow that situation to continue. The problem had to be tackled not only to reduce costs but to ensure that Commonwealth employees were protected from occupational death, injury and disease, and that injured workers were assisted to achieve a prompt return to work by effective rehabilitation and adequate and timely support, treatment and financial assistance.
The Government has created an integrated approach to prevention, compensation and rehabilitation. A progressive compensation and rehabilitation system was introduced under the Commonwealth Employees Rehabilitation and 'Compensation Act 1988

3284 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Health and Safety Bill

and is administered by the Commission for the Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation of Commonwealth Employees (Comcare). It is designed to minimise the human and financial costs of work-related injury and disease while at the same time providing adequate compensation and support for long term incapacitated employees. Those reforms are complemented by this Bill, which aims to provide mechanisms for reducing occupational injury and disease that give rise to these unacceptable human and economic costs.
During the extensive consultation processes and the development of the resulting legislation, the Government was anxious to ensure that worthwhile improvements in occupational health and safety were not delayed unnecessarily. Accordingly, after careful consideration of the directions of consultations and the likely content of the resulting legislation, the Government agreed to the implementation of interim occupational health and safety agreements between the management of individual public sector bodies and relevant unions. These agreements cover the detailed occupational health and safety arrangements to apply in individual Commonwealth bodies. It is not intended that this legislation override these arrangements except where any provisions of those agreements are contrary to the legislation.
I will now describe some of the major features of the Bill.
Legislation The Bill is a comprehensive piece of legislation. A key aspect of the Bill is the emphasis it places on direct involvement by employers and employees in workplace occupational health and safety. Accordingly, it requires Commonwealth employers and employees in each workplace to take greater responsibility for the management of health and safety in that workplace. In this way it is consistent with the modern self-regulatory approach already adopted in most States of Australia and the ACT as well as a number of overseas countries. It recognises the difficulties involved in attempting to prescribe minimum standards to cover all possible hazards in a work force as occupationally and geographically diverse as the work force of the Commonwealth.

Accordingly, the legislation provides for regulations and codes of practice to be developed to cover specific problems. At the same time it imposes a duty of care on employers and employees, as well as manufacturers, suppliers and owners of workplaces, plant and substances, to take all reasonably practicable steps to ensure a safe and healthy work environment. It provides a framework for employers and employees to cooperate and consult in addressing health and safety matters in the workplace through the establishment of designated work groups and health and safety committees, and the selection of health and safety representatives.
The legislation will be administered by Comcare, with a small core of permanent staff providing an advisory and investigation service. The service will assist Commonwealth agencies in complying with the Act, provide technical advice and have the power to issue improvement and prohibition notices and other orders and directions. In addition to the expertise of its own employees, Comcare will be able to draw on outside experts to provide advice and assistance on particular occupational health and safety problems.
The Bill covers the employees of Commonwealth departments, statutory authorities, government business enterprises and companies. Commonwealth employees will be covered wherever they are working, in Australia or overseas, although not all provisions will apply overseas. The Bill covers persons employed by the Commonwealth under a law of the Commonwealth or of a Territory or under a contract of service or apprenticeship.
We have ensured that the legislation will not prejudice national security. It provides arrangements which enable particular provisions to be declared not to apply in relation to specified matters concerning national security, or to apply in a modified form. In addition, where the application of the Bill to a person who exercises a power or function under a law of the Commonwealth or a State or Territory would prevent the proper exercise of that power or function, regulations may be made excluding the Bill, or particular provisions of the Bill, from applying to that person.

Health and Safety Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3285

Duties of Care The legislation imposes duties of care on employers and employees, and manufacturers, suppliers and owners of workplaces, plant and substances used in workplaces. In all cases the duty of care is limited to what is reasonably practicable in the circumstances covered by the Bill. Most importantly, the provisions require employers to provide and maintain safe workplaces and safe systems of work and to provide adequate information, training and supervision. Employees have a duty to avoid creating risks to their own health and safety or that of others at the workplace and must cooperate with the employer to enable the employer to fulfil his or her obligations under the legislation. The duty imposed on manufacturers and suppliers requires them to ensure that equipment and substances are safe for use by employees. A person who is not an employer or an employee but who has control over a workplace is also required to take all reasonable steps to ensure health and safety at the workplace. These duty of care requirements reflect the provisions of International Labour Organisation Convention 155, which deals with occupational health and safety. In 1984 this Convention was identified by Commonwealth and State labour Ministers as appropriate of ratification, and work on this is progressing.
Workplace Arrangements As I mentioned earlier, the cooperative workplace arrangements provided for in the legislation are built around designated work groups, health and safety representatives and workplace health and safety committees. These arrangements are an integral part of the concept of self-regulation and provide the framework for ensuring the participation of employees in occupational health and safety matters, and cooperation and consultation between employees and employers. Employees or unions with members at a workplace can request an employer to consult about the establishment of designated work groups at the workplace. An employer is required to enter into consultations, which are to be directed primarily at ensuring that the size and composition of a work group

will best represent and safeguard the employees' interests in occupational health and safety, and that the health and safety representative for the group is accessible to each employee in the group.
The legislation does not specify the size of the group as this will depend upon factors such as the nature of the workplace, the number and grouping of employees who perform similar work, the dispersion of the work force and the nature of any occupational health and safety risks at the workplace. It is possible that all the employees of an organisation may be included in a single designated work group. There may be one health and safety representative for each work group drawn from that group. A person may be selected if he or she has the unanimous support of the group. If there is disagreement amongst the group, then an election may be conducted by a union with members in the group, which will nominate candidates or, where there is no involved union, by a person authorised by Comcare to conduct elections. All employees in the group may vote. The representative will normally be elected for two years.
The Bill requires a representative to undertake occupational health and safety training which is accredited by Comcare. The employer is required to allow the representative the necessary time away from work without loss of remuneration or entitlements. The duty of a health and safety representative is to promote and ensure the health and safety at work of the members of the group which he or she represents. For that purpose, the legislation gives representatives certain powers. A health and safety representative may inspect the workplace if the employer has been given reasonable notice, there has been an accident or dangerous occurrence or there is an immediate risk of an accident or dangerous occurrence. The representative can also request an investigator to attend the workplace and may accompany the investigator during any investigation.
The representative has a number of other powers which are listed in the Bill, including the power to issue a provisional improvement notice requiring the employer to take corrective action to stop or to avoid a breach of the legislation. In an emergency, where the representative believes there is an im-

3286 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Health and Safety Bill

mediate threat to health and safety, the representative may order a cessation of work, but only when a supervisor cannot be located. If a supervisor is located, the supervisor has the right to decide whether work should cease. This approach has been adopted in most of the existing occupational health and safety agreements in Commonwealth agencies but has rarely, if ever, been used. A health and safety representative who misuses his or her powers is liable to be disqualified by Comcare from holding such a position for up to five years. The Government will closely monitor the activities of health and safety representatives and take whatever action is necessary to ensure there is no abuse of their power.
Health and safety committees can be established in a workplace at the request of either a health and safety representative or a union, if there are 50 or more employees and designated work groups have been established. If there are less than 50 employees, a committee may be elected if the employer, unions and employees agree. A committee is to consist of representatives of the employer and of any involved union, or, if there is no such union, of the employees. The number of members on the committee will be subject to agreement between the employer and unions, or if agreement cannot be reached, there will be an equal number of employee and employer representatives. The Bill requires committees to meet once every three months. The main function of committees is to assist the employer in developing, implementing and reviewing occupational health and safety measures in the workplace. Other committee functions are set out in this Bill.
Advice and Investigations Comcare's advisory function will be most important in assisting employers, employees and contractors with their obligations under the legislation and in dealing with occupational health and safety problems. Use of the advisory facility may be a first step in an investigation process. I have already mentioned that the legislation enables Comcare to refer requests for advice to experts outside the Commission. It is anticipated that, in future years, the advisory area in Comcare will be able to develop its technical and professional expertise and focus on key oc-

cupational health and safety issues in Commonwealth employment.
While the legislation's self-regulatory approach, which I have outlined here, emphasises cooperation in securing health and safety in the workplace, it is recognised that there needs to be effective enforcement of standards. The Bill provides investigators with comprehensive powers to enable them to adequately enforce its provisions. These include powers of entry, and powers to issue prohibition and improvement notices to remove threats to health and safety or to stop or prevent breaches of the legislation. An inspector entering a workplace is required to carry an identity card and produce it upon request.
The Bill provides for appeals against the decisions of investigators. In each case, the appeal is to the Australian Industrial Relations Commission, referred to in the Bill as the 'reviewing authority'. The reviewing authority may determine an appeal against a decision of an investigator by confirming, varying or revoking the decision. If it revokes a decision, the reviewing authority may substitute another decision which it considers appropriate.
Sanctions
The provision of advice and assistance to prevent injury and accident is one of the main objects of this Bill. However, it does provide, where a breach of the legislation occurs, that financial penalties can be imposed on government business enterprises, or their employees. Manufacturers, suppliers and persons in control of a workplace but who are not employers or employees will also be liable to prosecution and fines for contravening the legislation. Commonwealth departments and authorities which are not government business enterprises may be the subject of a report to Parliament if found to be in contravention of the Act. Employees of such agencies may be subject to disciplinary action under the Public Service Act or other terms and conditions applying to non-Australian Public Service personnel.
The Bill expressly states that it does not affect the operation of any Commonwealth, State or Territory laws which impose obligations on manufacturers in respect of defective goods, or which impose an obligation in

Industrial Relations Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3287

respect of the supply or sale of goods. The Bill is not intended to exclude the application of the criminal law in appropriate cases. Instead, it is intended that the criminal law of the States will continue to apply to Commonwealth employees to the extent that those laws are capable of concurrent operation with this legislation.
It is appropriate that I say something about the level of pecuniary penalties which this Bill imposes upon government business enterprises and individuals who contravene the legislation. Those penalties have been set at levels which broadly reflect the penalty levels in similar State legislation. This is consistent with the policy of striving for uniformity in occupational health and safety legislation, standards and strategies and will ensure that persons who breach the Commonwealth legislation are treated similarly to persons who breach equivalent State laws.
Financial Impact Statement The cost of implementing the proposals included in the Bill will be offset by savings already being achieved by Comcare through the rehabilitation of long term compensation claimants and by a reduction in accidents in the workplace. Even so, additional expenditure will be required to cover the cost of five additional staff in the first two years of operation and 10 by the third year; this will involve a salary cost of $400,000 by the third full year of operation. Contract staff will be used to supplement the minimum permanent resources at an estimated additional cost of $500,000 in the first year, decreasing to $200,000 by year three. There will also be some additional expenditure for essential operational costs. The total cost during the first three full years of operation will be between $1.1m and $1.4m per annum. The Government envisages that the legislation will take effect from 1 July 1990, and, to facilitate this, 'start-up' costs of the order of $300,000 will be incurred during the first half of 1990.
In addition, individual agencies may incur additional expenditure to implement the workplace arrangements. The net additional cost attributable to this activity cannot be precisely estimated due to the wide variety of existing occupational health and safety arrangements currently in place in various Commonwealth agencies and the offsets and

savings which will be associated with revised arrangements. The provision of a safe and healthy working environment and the increased emphasis on cooperation to achieve such an environment is expected to reduce the incidence of accidents and injuries for which the Commonwealth would be liable. Implementation of the provisions of the Bill should,' therefore, result in reduced Commonwealth expenditure on compensation and associated costs such as retraining, lost time and sick leave.
Conclusion This Bill contains iinportant reforms which, together with the compensation and rehabilitation arrangements already in place, will ensure that Commonwealth employees receive the protection at work to which they are entitled. I commend this Bill to the House and present the explanatory memorandum to the Bill. Debate (on motion by Mr McGauran) adjourned.
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL
1989 Bill presented by Mr Peter Morris, and read a first time. '
Second Reading Mr PETER MORRIS (Shortland-Minister for Industrial Relations) (5.10)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Industrial, Relations Legislation Amendment Bill amends several Acts within the Industrial Relations portfolio and makes a technical amendment to the Trade Practices Act 1974 which is within the Attorney General's portfolio. The Bill contains amendments of a minor policy nature or which correct or improve existing legislation. No amendments contained in the Bill concern major new policy proposals or sensitive policy issues. The provisions of the Bill are not expected to have any significant financial impact. The proposed amendments are explained in the explanatory memorandum circulated with the Bill. I will confine my comments to a few of the more noteworthy amendments.

3288 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Industrial Relations Bill

Amendments to the Commonwealth Employees' Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
The proposed amendments to the Commonwealth Employees' Rehabilitation and Compensation Act are mainly technical in nature and will assist in the more effective operation of the Act. A number will benefit claimants under the Act. In particular two new sections to be inserted into the Act will ensure that employees who were entitled to compensation under the previous Compensation (Commonwealth Government Employees) Act 1971 and other prior Acts remain entitled to compensation and are not required to satisfy the stricter liability tests which may apply under the 1988 Act.
Amendments to the Industrial Relations Act 1988
The proposed amendments to the Industrial Relations Act 1988 are of a technical nature. The need for the amendments has become apparent since the Act commenced operation on 1 March 1989. The most important amendment concerns the powers of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission in relation to demarcation disputes. Under the Industrial Relations Act, the Commission has a wide range of powers in relation to industrial disputes generally, including demarcation disputes. The Commission is, however, specifically empowered in relation to demarcation disputes to make orders concerning the representation of employees by a registered organisation. It was intended that only a presidential member or a Full Bench be able to make such orders and the Act so provides. The relevant provision could also be interpreted, however, as so confining not only the making of such orders but the exercise of any of the Commission's other powers in relation to demarcation disputes. This is an unnecessary and unintended restriction which could result in inflexibility in the organising of the Commission's work and consequential delays. The proposed amendment will ensure that the provision operates as originally intended so that it will be clear that non-presidential members of the Commission are able, subject to any other requirements of the Act, to deal with demarcation disputes except by making the orders to which I have referred.

Amendments to the Industrial Relations (Consequential Provisions) Act 1988

A new provision is proposed for inclusion

in the Industrial Relations (Consequential

Provisions) Act. It concerns the application

of the Judges' Pensions Act 1968 to a presi-

dential member of the Australian Industrial

Relations Commission. A presidential mem-

ber has the status of a judge of the Federal

Court of Australia and thereby comes within

the Judges' Pensions Act unless, before ap-

pointment, that person was eligible for ben-

efits under the Superannuation Act 1976.

Such a person may, however, elect to forgo

those benefits and to come within the oper-

ation of the Judges' Pensions Act instead.

No provision has been made, however, for

such a presidential member's prior service as

a presidential member of the former Austra-

lian Conciliation and Arbitration Commis-

sion to be taken into account in determining

whether such a person qualifies for a judicial

pension under the Judges' Pensions Act. The

proposed amendment so provides. The time

in which such an election may be made is

stipulated. Provision is also made to prevent

a person who has made such an election

from continuing to have entitlements under

the Superannuation Act as well as under the

Judges' Pensions Act. The amendment does

not affect other persons who have been or

may be appointed as presidential members.

Their right to make an election of this type,

where necessary, is provided for under the

Industrial Relations Act.

'

The Consequential Provisions Act is also amended to correct an omission which occurred at the time the Act was drafted. The amendment will make it clear that a reference in the Coal Industry Act 1946 to the repealed Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904 includes a reference to the Industrial Relations Act 1988.

Amendments to the Remuneration Tribunal Act 1973
An amendment to the Remuneration Tribunal Act 1973 will enable the remuneration of the Vice Chief of the Defence Force to be determined by the Remuneration Tribunal, complementing the provisions of section 9B of the Defence Act 1903.
Other amendments to the Remuneration Tribunal Act will clarify the jurisdiction of

Taxation Laws Amendment Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3289

the Tribunal in relation to certain offices in higher education institutions. The Tribunal was given this jurisdiction when the Academic Salaries Tribunal was abolished on the commencement of the Industrial Relations Act 1988. As a consequence of the transfer of part of the jurisdiction of the Academic Salaries Tribunal to the Remuneration Tribunal, some ambiguities have arisen in the relevant provisions of the Remuneration Tribunals Act. Amendments are proposed to clarify the jurisdiction and ensure that the original intention behind the legislation is reflected in the Act.
In summary, this Bill provides some finetuning to our industrial relations legislation. That legislation provides the framework for the Government's industrial relations strategy. As part of that strategy, we have a comprehensive wages policy. Our policies are effectively addressing the key issues of labour market reform, occupational health and safety, rehabilitation and affirmative action. The Government's policies are clearly working, with the creation of 1.6 million new jobs under Labor, and 60 per cent reduction in industrial disputation compared to our predecessors' record. We have established the National Occupational Health and Safety Commission to coordinate and develop safety workplaces across Australia-the first time there has been such an initiative. For Commonwealth employees, the establishment' of Comcare has led to a marked improvement in the speed with which injured employees return to work. There has also been a resounding acceptance of affirmative \1ction programs by the private sector, with 97 per cent of employers with over 500 employees complying with affirmative action legislation. I commend the Bill to the House. I present the explanatory memorandum for the Bill.
Debate (on motion by Mr McGauran) adjourned.
TAXATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL (No.6) 1989
Bill presented by Mr Peter Morris, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr PETER MORRIS (Shortland-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Treasurer) (5.17)-1 move:

That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No. 6) amends the laws in a number of respects. It contains all but one of the capital gains tax measures announced in the 1989-90 Budget. These amendments do not encompass any fundamental changes in the design of the capital gains tax. Rather, they represent a finetuning of the provisions that the Government believes necessary having monitored the function of the tax over the past four years. The one capital gains tax Budget measure not included concerns securities lending arrangements. This amendment will be introduced early next year.
The Bill proposes amendments on the subject of so-called double-dipping tax avoidance arrangements announced in December 1986. Since that time the Government has given detailed consideration to various representations received in relation to the matter and to the effects of numerous other legislative changes and developments both in Australia and overseas. It has decided that the scope of the arrangements requiring legislative action now is not as broad as that foreshadowed earlier. This result is reflected in the relevant provisions of this Bill.
Another measure included in the Bill is the amendments to the research and development expenditure provisions foreshadowed on 7 September 1989. Also included are consequential amendments reflecting-a change in the basis of payment of the carer's service pension. Finally, the Bill proposes a number of minor amendments to the income tax law. I turn now to a more detailed discussion of these measures.
Capital Gains Tax The Bill contains three categories of capital gains tax measures. The first category is of an anti-avoidance nature, consistent with the Government's ongoing commitment to prevent abuses of the taxation system by a small minority at the expense of the honest tax-paying community. Although these amendments do not represent any significant policy initiatives they are of considerable importance, not only in promoting fairness and equity in the system but also in preventing significant losses of revenue. These particular amendments, which generally apply to assets disposed of after 15

3290 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Taxation Laws Amendment Bill

August 1989, are largely technical in nature. Some minor technical amendments of a

They will, amongst other things, vary the concessional nature are also included. These

consideration taken to have been paid or will ensure the availability of full indexation

received on an acquisition or disposal of an of amounts remaining in the cost base of

asset other than from or to another person, shares or units following the payment of an

and will prevent abuses of certain concesamount that is not a dividend or amounts

sional provisions relating to transfers of capthat are tax-free. The concessional treatment

ital losses and assets between companies in for rights or options issued by a company to

the same group. Certain consequential shareholders of another group company is to

amendments in relation to exemption from be extended. They will also ensure that as-

capital gains on the disposal of traditional sessable amounts on the conversion of a con-

securities are also included.

vertible note are included in the cost base of

The Bill will also address technical deficiencies in the operation of provisions designed to prevent 'double tax' on the disposal of assets, and in transitional measures that apply on the disposal of shares or interestsin companies or trusts acquired before 20 September 1985 where, on or after that date, the particular company or trust has acquired significant new assets.

the shares thereby acquired. The harsh operation of one of the transitional provisions in certain situations following the roll-over of a taxable Australian asset to a non-resident group company is also to be removed. All of these amendments have been brought forward by the Government in response to concerns identified about the operation of the capital gains tax, and are a further demonstration of the Government's commitment

The final anti-avoidance amendment will to a fairer tax system.

prevent taxpayers from obtaining benefits of indexation for amounts incurred on the acquisition of an asset-where the asset was not disposed of by another person-until such time as those amounts are actually paid. This will prevent widespread abuses, particularly in the area of nominally paid shares schemes in respect of liabilities to make call payments that are incurred but not yet discharged.

The third category of amendments will ensure that certain capital gains provisions only apply from 23 May 1986, the date of introduction of the original legislation, rather than 19 September 1985 when the new regime was announced. The areas affected by this amendment concern the deemed disposals of created assets, for example, leases, options and restrictive covenants. These

The second category of amendments will amendments will address concerns expressed

implement a number of concessional measby bodies such as the Law Council of Aus-

ures which, to the extent that they operate tralia that the original provisions could, in

. to a taxpayer's advantage, will generally apcertain circumstances, be perceived as having

ply from 20 September 1985. Foremost a retrospective application. It is not possible

amongst these concessional measures are to put a precise revenue figure on these

amendments to the capital gains principal capital gains tax amendments. Some are

residence exemption. Broadly speaking, these concessional, some are not. On balance they

changes will expand the availability of an will prevent a substantial loss of capital gains

extended exemption for the construction of tax revenue.

-a new home, or during a temporary absence

from an existing home. The circumstances in

Double Dipping Tax Avoidance

which the exemption is available to a trustee

Arrangements

for periods where a home is occupied by a beneficiary will be extended.

This Bill will insert in the income tax law rules to counter arrangements-referred to

Another measure provides roll-over reas double dipping tax avoidance schemes-

lief-that is, deferral of tax on accrued gains under which a tax benefit is obtained both

or the retention of the effective capital gains in Australia and in another country for a

exempt status of assets originally acquired loss incurred by a company that, under their

before 20 September 1985-for certain strata respective income tax laws, is resident in

title conversions and incorporations of assoboth countries and that is essentially a

ciations as companies.

financing vehicle within a company group.

Customs (Detention and Search)

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3291

The measures will deny a dual resident investment company the ability to transfer either income or capital losses to other group companies under the group relief provisions of the income tax law. The amendments will apply to such losses incurred in the 1989-90 and subsequent income years. The proposal is broadly in line with measures taken in the United States of America, United Kingdom, and New Zealand to counter the double deduction of losses. These measures will effectively prevent a dual resident investment company from having the ability to transfer to other group companies both income and capital losses under the group relief provisions. However, such a company will retain the ability to carry forward such losses for set-off respectively against future income or capital gains it may derive. Although these measures cannot. be quantified they are expected to result in revenue savings.
Research and Development Expenditure The Bill proposes four changes to the operation of the research and development tax concession. As the law now stands a deduction of up to 150 per cent of the cost of acquisition of core technology may be allowable and in addition, the original developer may also have obtained a deduction for expenditure in developing the core technology. This can lead to a double deduction in relation to the same work. This Bill proposes, therefore, that the company acquiring, or acquiring the right to use, the core technology be only able to claim a deduction at the reduced rate of 100 per cent of the expenditure incurred. The second change proposes that, where a deduction has been allowed or is allowable for expenditure on a research and development project, receipts for granting access to or the right to use the results of the project are to be included in the assessable income. The third change relates to commercial risk in research and development ventures. Deductions at the rate of 150 per cent are now available where all or some funds may be invested at less than full risk. The Government considers that the highest rate of deduction should only be applicable where all of an investor's funds are at full risk. New provisions are therefore proposed by the Bill which will reduce the deduction al-

lowable proportionately, from 150 per cent to 100 per cent, as the element of risk is reduced.
Finally, the fourth change will widen the range of potential investors by deleting the requirement that syndicates of eligible companies must include financial institutions. Savings from these changes to the research and development tax concession are estimated to be $55m in 1990-91.
Veteran Carer's Pension Before 1 November 1989 a carer's service pension was payable only to a relative of a severely handicapped veteran where the relative provided constant care and attention to the veteran. The pension is exempt from tax where both the veteran and the carer are below age pension age and the veteran is receiving a service pension because he or she is permanently incapacitated for work. In all other cases the carer's service pension is taxable. The carer's service pension is now to be extended, operative from I November 1989, to any person caring for a severely handicapped veteran, without regard to whether he or she is a relative of the veteran. The amendment will ensure that the existing tax treatment of the carer's service pension will be retained in respect of the person providing the care. The revenue effect of the amendment is expected to be negligible. I present the explanatory memorandum which contains more detailed explanations of the provisions of the Bill. I commend the Bill to the House. Debate (on motion by Mr Andrew) adjourned.
CUSTOMS (DETENTION AND SEARCH) BILL 1989
Bill presented by Mr Staples, for Mr Duffy, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr STAPLES (Jagajaga-Minister for Housing and Aged Care) (5.29)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill proposes amendments to the Customs Act 1901 to repeal the current power to detain and search persons suspected of unlawfully carrying prohibited goods, and insert in its place a new division containing a more comprehensive range of Customs de-

3292 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Customs (Detention and Search)

tention and search powers. The Bill gives effect to several major elements of the Government's anti-drug strategy. Foremost amongst these is: the Government's decision to implement the legislative framework for the detention and, if necessary, search of persons reasonably suspected of importing narcotics by internal concealment, which has been settled in consultation with the Commonwealth-States Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy as one of the outcomes of the 1985 Drug Summit; and the Government's decision announced on 18 July 1989 to allow authorised Customs officers to stop and frisk search persons for prohibited goods within Customs controlled areas at international air and sea ports.
It is an unfortunate fact of our modernday life that there are persons who wish to corrupt our society by importing illicit drugs, and some of those persons will even go to the extent of concealing the drugs inside their bodies or force a courier to do the same, in order to escape detection. Tragically some of those persons or couriers pay for this very dangerous and difficult attempt to avoid detection with their lives.
The present Customs Act power to detain and search persons reasonably suspected of carrying prohibited goods has remained largely unchanged since Federation, and is currently contained in section 196 of the Act. The section, however, does not deal adequately with the problem of internal concealment in that it does not expressly provide adequate protections and rights either for the officers or suspects concerned, or the medical practitioners who may be asked to conduct an internal search. On the other end of the spectrum, the present detention and search regime is unnecessarily complicated for the simple frisk of a person at the Customs barrier.
With evidence to hand of a growing trend towards the importation of drugs using concealment on the body, and the community's expectation and legitimate demand when travelling for a speedy clearance through the Customs barrier, a corresponding mechanism for the quick and efficient checking of pers~ns reasonably suspected of carrying prohibited goods is necessary. The proposed new Division IB inserted by clause 8 of the Bill, proposes 22 new sections for Part XII of the

Customs Act 1901, bringing together the full range of proposed Customs body-search powers, from the least intrusive frisk, through external search, to the more intrusive internal search. By splitting the three types of searches into distinct subdivisions, the new division not only highlights the progressive strengthening of the statutory protections and rights afforded persons to be searched as the level of intrusiveness increases, but it also highlights the more rigorous legal requirements' on officers of customs and police as the searches become more invasive.
The first level of search, the frisk search, is set out in proposed new subdivision A of the Bill, new sections 219L to P. It is limited to Customs-controlled areas at international air and sea ports, and will be available to enable the detention of persons by Customs where a Customs supervisory officer suspects on reasonable ground that a person is unlawfully carrying any prohibited goods. The search itself, which is a common and widespread barrier feature of most Customs administrations around the globe, involves the quick pat-down of a person's outer garments and must be carried out as soon as practicable after the person is detained, by an officer of customs of the same sex as the detainee, and in private if so requested. The proposed regime includes the right of Customs to require the production of any thing revealed by the frisk search, in order to determine whether the thing is, or contains, prohibited goods. Failure to submit to a lawful frisk search, or to produce upon request a thing revealed by the search, shall constitute sufficient grounds for the next level of search, an external search, under proposed new subdivision B.
This second level of search, the external search, in proposed subdivision B, new sections 219Q and R, effectively continues the current detention and search power in section 196 of the Customs Act, with minor drafting amendments to make it consistent with the proposed new frisk and internal search regimes, and express provisions to highlight a person's rights if detained for such a search. The initial decision to detain a person under this regime is one which must be taken by an authorised Customs officer, an experienced officer of supervisory rank, or an officer of police, who must decide

Customs (Detention and Search)

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3293

whether there is sufficient cause' to suspect that a person is unlawfully carrying any prohibited goods. Where a person is detained, the detainee must be taken as soon as practicable to either a special detention place or a place that offers the detainee adequate personal privacy. The Custo~s or police then must apply, as soon as pra'@Sicable, for an order for an external search from a justice of the peace, the Comptroller-General of Customs or an authorised officer of supervisory rank, unless the detainee consents to be searched.
Special protection is provided for those detainees whom the Bill describes as 'in need of protection'; effectively those persons who because of their age, under 17, or mental or physical incapacity, are entitled to special rights. Consistent with the spirit of Australia's international commitments under human rights and privacy conventions, especially with regard to children, such persons may only be searched by order, and any search order is to be carried out in the presence of the detainee's legal guardian or another person capable of representing the detainee's interests, with the person, so far as practicable, being acceptable to the detainee. Finally, similar to the frisk regime, wh8're an external search is to be carried out on a detainee, the search must be carried out by a person who is of the same sex as the detainee.
The final level of search proposed by the Bill is the internal search, proposed by subdivisions C and E, new sections 219s to 219z, and 219zE to 219zH. The term 'internal search' has been defined as an examination by medical practitioner of the body of a person, including an internal examination of the person's body, to determine whether the person is internally concealing a narcotic substance, and includes the recovery of any substance suspected on reasonable grounds to be so concealed. The overriding policy of this proposed regime is, that if a search is not consented to, it will only be ordered as a last resort. To give effect to that policy, the Bill provides for two periods of 48-hour detention, which may only be ordered by a magistrate or judge, to maximise the chances of any drugs being eliminated naturally. The Government appreciates that the detention of a person on suspicion only is a serious

and very sensitive matter, and were it not for the fact that the control of the importation of drugs requires strong powers, the civil liberties implications of detention represented by this regime would not have been countenanced. Therefore, the Bill provides that detention will occur only when that action is authorised by an appropriately senior judicial officer-that is, a judge or magistrate.
in that respect, this part of the bill is similar to the Customs Amendment Act of 1979 which proposed an internal body-search regime, but which was never proclaimed. The protections afforded suspected persons under the terms of that aruendment Act were not considered adequate )'arid, partly as a consequence, all the States and the Northern Territory were not able to agree to provide access to the necessary judicial officers before the Act could be proclaimed. As far as the detention and internal search provisions of this Bill are concerned, the Government has included specific provisions to protect the rights of persons detained, while retaining the practical and necessary flexibility for Customs officers and police officers charged by the community with the responsibility of controlling the importation of narcotics. All States and the Northern Territory have been consulted on the terms of the Bill and are expected to agree, this time, to allow access to judges and magistrates to consider applications for orders to detain or search under the terms of the internal search regime. This exercise has been a protracted one and various amendments and suggestions made in the course of those discussions have been incorporated in the Bill. In addition, consultations on the obvious privacy and human rights implications of this regime have occurred over the period during which this Bill has been settled, to ensure as far as practicable that the rights of the individual are not submerged by the community's interest to control the influx of drugs into this country. The rights in particular of a detainee at any time during detention under the internal search regime to consult a lawyer of his or her choice, and to have adequate opportunity to obtain legal advice and legal representation in relation to detention and search order applications, are ample evidence of the civil rights emphasis proposed by the Bill.

3294 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Sandfilling. Brisbane Airport

Finally, I think it is important to put into context the frequency of current detention and search activity at the Customs barrier, to allay any fears that the proposed powers in this Bill might in fact alter markedly the current practice of passenger-processing. The power of search of persons under the Customs Act presently is exercised mainly by Customs officers and mainly at Australia's international airports. In 1988-89 the total number of persons searched was 2,505, which represents 0.06 per cent of the total arriving passenger population of 4.2 million. Of this number of searches, 102 persons where detained for internal search and, in most cases, those persons consented to X-ray by a medical practitioner. The figures clearly show that the present power is exercised in a judicious and controlled way, and it is not expected, as a result of this Bill, that the number of p'ersons searched should show any marked increase.
Financial Impact Statement , The costs associated with this Bill relate to the provision of medical and judicial personnel for the internal search regime (new subdivision C and E of proposed new Division IB). It is estimated the costs for medical personnel and 'facilities to carry out those internal searches whic:.h are ordered, and the costs of the States' and Territories judicial officers to service detention and search order applications, will total $150,000 dollars per annum.
I commend the Bill to the House and present the accompanying explanatory memorandum.
Debate (on motion by Mr McGauran) adjourned.
COMMITTEE OF PRIVILEGES Mr GEAR (Canning)-Mr Speaker, I present the report of the Privileges Committee along with two dissenting reports in the matter referred to the ,Committee by the House of Representatives on 23 November. Motion (by Mr Beazley) agreed to:
That consideration of the report be made an order of the day for the next sitting.
Ordered that the report be printed.

SANDFILLING OF INTERNATIONAL TERMINAL, OPERATIONAL AND COMMERCIAL SITES, BRISBANE AIRPORT
Approval of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr WEST (Cunningham-Minister for Administrative Services) (5.41) - I move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the committee has duly reported to Parliament: Sandfilling of international terminal, operational and commercial sites, Brisbane Airport.
Since completion of the domestic terminal building at Brisbane Airport in 1988 the need has arisen for the Federal Airports Corporation (FAC) to prepare for further developments, including a new international terminal, aviation industry requirements and commercial sites. In its report of 28 November 1989, the Parliamentary Committee on Public Works recommended that the sandfilling of the international terminal, operational and commercial sites, at Brisbane Airport go ahead. The development sites are located on low level salt marsh or open grassland. The underlying subsurface soils comprise 24 to 30 metres of soft saturated soils. As was the case with preparation for the new Brisbane Airport, it is necessary that prior to any facilities being constructed the area be filled and surcharged with sand to avoid flooding and to minimise differential settlement of the saturated subsoils.
After undertaking feasibility studies into the possible sources of material for the fill, the FAC decided to use the same source as employed for construction of the new Brisbane Airport. Discussions have been held with the appropriate State Government authorities and approval in principle has been received to draw sand ftom Middle Banks in Moreton Bay. The sand will be dredged from Middle Banks using one or two cutter dredges and then transported to an existing handling basin adjacent to the airport site. This basin will be redredged and the sand pumped through an overland pipeline to the development sites. As the sand accumulates earthmoving equipment will shape the fill and surcharge sand as required. The process is

Sandfilling, Brisbane Airport

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3295

essentially identical to that used in constructing the airport.
The $44m project, at January 1989 prices, is to be financed from FAC internal sources and supplemented if necessary by commercial borrowings. It is expected to take a little under two years to finish-four months for tendering and to establish the pumping and servicing infrastructure, and about 17 months for the sand dredging. This part of the project will employ about 40 people. Settlement of the subsoils will take 12 months before final shaping can be completed and the proposed development commence. This part of the project will employ about 20 people.
The Committee recommended that the Federal Airports Corporation should undertake a thorough re-examination of the Brisbane Airport master plan. I am advised that the Federal Airports Corporation intends to undertake 'this review shortly. It will take account of a study being undertaken by a task force established by my colleague the Minister for Transport and Communications (Mr Willis) to look into planning and operation of Brisbane Airport to minimise the impact of aircraft noise on surrounding communities. The task force has met and agreed to try to complete its study within 12 months. The Federal Airports Corporation believes the existing master plan is still valid and that the proposed location of the sandfill and new international terminal will maximise the use of existing infrastructure.
Although the Committee believes that the proposal to develop an international terminal in the centre satellite area of the domestic terminal is a viable interim measure, the Federal Airports Corporation advises that this area is needed for new entrant domestic airlines after deregulation. If this area were unavailable, the Federal Airports Corporation would need to develop alternative facilities and the 60st of these facilities was not taken into account by the Public Works Committee. In addition, Qantas and the International Air Transport Association have indicated that they do not support expansion of the domestic terminal for international flights as it would not provide the capacity needed and would cause severe congestion in the departure and arrival areas of the domestic terminal.

The environmental aspects of this project have been examined in detail and studies have indicated that development works will have no adverse effects on the environment. The project will nonetheless employ the same environmental protection measures as were used during construction of the new domestic airport. I thank the Public Works Committee for its prompt consideration of this issue and for its report. I commend the motion to the House.
Mr JULL (Fadden) (5.46)-1 would also like to address the report on sandfilling of the international terminal, operational and commercial sites, Brisbane Airport and the statement today by the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr West). When the report came into the House yesterday I said that some of the aspects that had been brought out by the Chairman of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works, the honourable member for Throsby (Mr Hollis), were quite commendable. Overnight I have had the opportunity to study this report which, by the very nature of the problem the Committee had to address, is quite complex. The whole matter of the Brisbane international airport development over the years has been quite complex. In terms of a reference document, this is, very good and will be very helpful to the interest groups throughout Brisbane who have had some concern about just which way the airport will go.
The Minister's statement today is principally about the sandfill for the international terminal, the facilities for new players who will be coming into Brisbane as a result of deregulation of the domestic airline industry on 31 October next year, and some other works. It has always been my particular contention that the decision to place the terminal where it is was not necessarily the right one. It was always my understanding that the new international terminal would be built to the north of the present domestic terminal in an area which is presently being developed for general aviation and, I am told, air freight. I am sorry that that decision has not been proceeded with because it made a lot more sense to me in terms of the physical operation of the airport. It would have been much easier for the international terminal to operate nearby the present domestic structure

3296 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Sandjilling, Brisbane Airport

rather than a couple of kilometres down the ro~d. The first thing this decision has done is to duplicate the headaches of Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport, with everything that is required for transfers and so on. I do not think the middle finger proposition was ever a real proposition for Brisbane, for those reasons that the Committee rightly brought out: it was very hard to control; there was not enough room to move for the large aircraft that are coming in; there was no chance for expansion; and, most importantly it really ruled out the proposition of the new entrants who would be coming into the airline game, hopefully towards the end of next year.
I sincerely hope that there will be enough room for the new entrants to set up their bases because at least one of the proposed new carriers, Capital Airlines, has said quite publicly that it intends to headquarter its operations in Brisbane. That will be a great boon for Brisbane and a great boon for Brisbane international airport. There is no doubt that Brisbane is the fastest development airport in Australia at the moment. There is no doubt in my mind that it will be the second busiest airport in Aust, probably in the latter half of the 1990s. The studies that have been done through the Federal Airports Corporation with its British associates and those that have been done by the Boeing International Corporation indicate, in the case of Boeing, that Brisbane will probably be No. two by the year 2000. From memory, according to the FAC study, it will be the year 2005. Most of the projections that have been made on Brisbane have been wrong and the growth rate has been much greater than ever predicted. There is no doubt that once the pilots dispute is really over and things get back to normal, there will be a great build-up of tourist pressure in the next few years on the Brisbane International Airport. Consequently, we must have an adequate facility to get construction under way.
The real pity about the decision today is that it has come so many. years down the track. I acknowledge the difficulties we have had with previous reports by this Committee and I acknowledge the difficulties the Government has had through advice from the Federal Airports Corporation, but, quite frankly, the new international terminal should be up and operating now. The fact that

money has been spent on the extension of the old terminal really does not do very much at all for improving the traffic. That is as it might be, but I suppose we should be thankful for small mercies, and at least now we have a definitive statement that this particular project will go ahead.
I notice a number of my Queensland colleagues in the House. There is nothing like a debate on the Brisbane International Airport to bring us all in in a bipartisan way to express our concerns to the Government about what is happening at Brisbane International Airport. I am delighted that the members for Bowman (Mr Sciacca), Lilley (Mrs Darling) and Moreton (Mr Donald Cameron) are in the chamber. I promise I will not take up too much of their time. The Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Mr Humphreys) is present too.
Mrs Kelly-I am trying to keep hIm quiet. Mr JULL-I sincerely hope that the Minister does make some statements because he, as much as any of us, is aware of the real difficulties that the noise problem has caused on the south side of Brisbane, particularly since the opening of the new terminal and the associated problems with the siting of the present runway. I emphasise that I was delighted that the Public Works Committee has not closed off the option of a future development of the cross runway and that it has flagged its concerns about the parallel runway for future development. In that respect, the Public Works Committee has done a magnificent job in putting together this particular document, which is comprehensive, which will be a handbook for future development, and which frankly does put the Federal Airports Corporation on notice. One of the difficulties over the years has been that while members of parliament have been belting at the doors of Ministers of all political persuasions and have been trying to get across to the Government the real concerns of the people of Brisbane, we have not always had the right reaction or indeed responsive reaction from the departments or instrumentalities concerned. Mr Donald Cameron-They pretend we don't exist.

Sandfilling, Brisbane Airport

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3297

Mr JULL-I am afraid that the honourable member for Moreton is right and that is a very sad reflection on those departments. In that respect, the Public Works Committee has done a magnificent job in compiling this document. I know that it will be compulsory reading for many hundreds of residents on the south side of Brisbane, and I have no doubt that the honourable member for Lilley will say that it will be compulsory reading for many members on the north side of Brisbane as well.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Moreton) (5.54)-1 thank the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and its Chairman, the honourable member for Throsby (Mr Hollis), for recognising one aspect of the evidence that I thought it would not touch. Both the honourable members for Bowman (Mr Sciacca) and I sang the same tune before the Committee in terms of the continuing effect that aircraft are having on the peace and lifestyle of residents of the south side Brisbane. In the report, the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) is reported as having opposed the views expressed by the honourable member for Bowman and me. I say right now that even with the air pilots dispute continuing, there are days on which the people on the south side of Brisbane are subjected to the noise of a large number of aircraft. The only good thing is that there are not as many aeroplanes around as there were before the dispute. Months ago we were promised that Brisbane airport would waive the rule that planes would have to land in a certain direction when the wind was blowing at more than five knots. The wind speed was to be increased to 10 knots. That promise was made months ago. The Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Mr Humphreys) assured his electors months ago that there would be no more noise. Those people are ringing me and saying that so many aeroplanes are flying over their homes that it sounds as if war has been declared. I make the plea to the Minister that he delve into the Department and find out why we have been conned again. I ask him to give us an explanation.
One Sunday the noise of an aeroplane almost frightened me out of my wits. I rang the airport and said, 'Whatis the wind level?'. I was told that it was six knots. I

said, 'The aeroplanes are flying over the south side. Why?' I was told, 'You will have to take that up with other people, sir.' All I did was confirm the fact that the 10-knot rule is not being applied. Are you aware of that, Mr Minister for Veterans' Affairs?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Andrew)- Order! Would the honourable member for Moreton address his remarks through the chair and perhaps get a little closer to the report?
Mr DONALD CAMERON-I guess you have not read the report, Mr Deputy Speaker. Being a South Australian, you would probably not be very interested in the Brisbane Airport. Many more members are in the chamber today than on most days and that indicates the intense interest in this matter.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I ask the honourable member for Moreton to return to the report and direct his remarks to the chair.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-The report contains 18 pages on aircraft noise and I have been making my own sounds about aircraft noise since 1968-69 when the first inquiry was held into it. I plump very strongly for the extension of runway 14/32 in Brisbane. I know that this matter causes some excitement for the honourable member for Lilley and she puts forward that the people living at Nudgee Beach will be affected. How many people live at Nudgee Beach? About 200? Not even that number? I want to draw a comparison. There are literally tens of thousands of people on the south side of Brisbane who have become SUbjected to aircraft noise to an extent that they did not know previously. How much was spent on the whole airport complex?
Mr Jult-Half a billion. Mr DONALD CAMERON-Half a billion? At least! The honourable member for Fadden is a little bit inaccurate. Mr Jult-It was half a billion. Mr DONALD CAMERON~For the whole complex? Mr Jult-yes. Mr DONALD CAMERON-The point is that there are literally tens of thousands of people being affected in the electorate of

3298 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Sandfilling, Brisbane Airport

Griffith and Bowman and in my own. I suggest that the runway extension be given a much higher priority than the passing references to it in the report. It is utterly ridiculous to spend $500m on a new airport with all the assurances in the world that aircraft noise will be almost non-existent on the south side and then, when the airport opens, to find that more aeroplanes are flying over the south side than previously.
Mr J ull-They are radar vectoring the foreign pilots.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-If that is what they are doing, I am not quite sure what they are doing to the foreign pilots. I congratulate the Committee for having strayed from its terms of reference a little to acknowledge the real concerns of the people of Brisbane about aircraft noise. The only people who are interested in it are those whose homes are affected by it. The honourable members who represent the thousands of people who are affected have an obligation to stand at every opportunity and present their case. I hope that the Government is more determined now than it appeared to be earlier to do something constructive about the problem.
Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (6.00)-In speaking to the report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works relating to the sandfilling of the international terminal, operational and commercial sites at Brisbane Airport, I thank members of the Committee, under the chairmanship of the honourable member for Throsby (Mr Hollis) for giving due recognition to the issue of aircraft noise following submissions from residents of Brisbane. I reiterate what was said by the honourable member for Moreton (Mr Donald Cameron) that a large amount of time was spent looking at that despite the fact that the Committee was considering sandfilling. I appreciate that.
I am concentrating on these aspects precisely for the reason that was shown by the honourable member for Moreton who displayed a lack of understanding of the number of people who would be affected if the cross-wind runway 14/32 were extended or used for wide-bodied jets. For the honourable member's information, we are. not looking at 1,000 residences along the bayside

strip; we are looking at over 10,000 homes and 40,000 people. Fewer people reside in the Nudgee Beach area. I have figures showing that the flight path, if used, would cross at altitudes from 400 feet off Nudgee Beach, which is a small community-those people deserve to have recognition of the extreme noise factor that they would suffer-up to 1,700 feet at the Brighton end of that strip and over one of the largest aged people's homes in Queensland-the Eventide Home.
I refer to page 20 of the Committee's report. My colleagues claimed on behalf of their constituents-it is their right and their duty to represent their constituents, as it is mine-that the extension of the cross-wind 14/32 runway was favoured as a solution to the noise problems of the southern suburbs. My expressed opposition to any extension of 14/32 was based on the ground that use of the runway for heavy aircraft would put Nudgee Beach and other bayside suburbs into an unacceptably high aircraft noise zone. I reiterate this view. While the Public Works Committee may have found the construction of 14/32 feasible, which it may be in the context of ability to construct same, it is not reasonable in the context of safety or of noise hazard or, at a cost of $100,000, value for money. How could anyone believ~ it is reasonable to move flight paths from an altitude of 2,000 feet-plus over a built-up area to an altitude of 400-feet-plus over a built-up area on the basis of noise hazard? I do not think that it is feasible, reasonable or desirable for runway 14/32 to be upgraded or used as is for wide-bodied jets.
I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table showing altitudes on approach to the northern end of runway 14 as registered during a flight with colleagues on 24 June 1988.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Aodrew)- Provided the document meets the Hansard requirements.
Mrs DARLING-I showed the table to the relevant Minister and shadow Minister a little earlier and it was acknowledged.
Leave granted. The table read as follows-
FLIGHT PATH ALTITUDES ON NORTHERN APPROACH TO RUNWAY 14 ON 24/6/88
BRIGHTON. . . . . . . . . . 2,000 FT

Sandfilling, Brisbane Airport

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3299

EVENTIDE HOME . . . OFF-SHORE BRIGHTON OFF-SHORE SANDGATE SHORNCLIFFE PIER . . OFF-SHORE SHORNCLIFFE OFF-SHORE NUDGEE BEACH

1,700 FT 1,500 FT 1,200 FT 1,000 FT
800 FT 400 FT

Mrs DARLING-J thank the House. Honourable members will see from the table that the altitudes range from 400 feet for offshore Nudgee Beach to 2,000 feet for Brighton. From Brighton through to Sandgate, Shorncliffe and Nudgee Beach people would suffer severe noise. It is accepted by civil aviation authorities and people on the ground that, when flying, pilots do not follow a straight line. It is not feasible to do so. Obviously on either side of the noted flight path people will suffer severe noise.

Not only will people in Nudgee Beach and Shorncliffe be affected by heavy noise nuisance as craft fly above the fringe of beach which their homes front but also craft will fly directly over homes. The figures which I have submitted clearly place Nudgee Beach and areas from Shorncliffe to Brighton in a zone of severe noise nuisance-of greater severity, because craft fly at lower altitudes.

On the flight to which I have referred, an altitude of 2,000 feet was registered after crossing the Brisbane River, out of the electorate of Lilley and into southern suburbs. I refer also to the official Civil Aviation Authority-Federal Airports Corporation (FAC) flight path map which shows that the areas now suffering noise are those where planes fly over at an altitude of between 2,000 and 4,000 feet. I do not suggest that those areas do not suffer noise; of course they do. In all areas topography influences the extent of noise nuisance and the intensity-if there are hills there. I accept that. However, it is entirely unreasonable for some organised groups and some honourable members in a 2,OOO-plus area to call for flight paths to be transferred to an area which would obviously suffer greater noise due to the lower altitude of 400 feet-plus.

Some supporters of-the concept of extension of runway 14/32 speak as if movement of noisy jets to the northern bayside area would affect no-one-as if a vast and uninhabited desert stretched north from Nudgee

Beach to Brighton. I inform the House that that is far from the case. The site of some of the earliest European settlements in Queensland-historic Sandgate and suburbs adjoining the coastal strip within my electorate-have, and I refer to official figures, 10,709 buildings, mainly private residences but including 381 businesses. These buildings house over 40,000 people.
As well as noise being suffered in the bayside strip to which I have referred, it is obvious that it would be suffered further inland, going into the electorate of Petrie. One would also expect some sort of noise nuisance in Bald Hills. There are 18 schools in that area where no-one lives. Of great importance is the number of aged and infirm people living in an area where it is supposed that no-one would be affected by jets flying above at altitudes of between 400 and 2,000 feet. I refer to people living in some major residential and nursing homes in the bayside strip under consideration.
I have referred to Eventide Home. A total of 549 people live in that home. One noted that craft flew directly over Eventide at an altitude of 1,700 feet. There are 36 aged residents at the Blue Waters Nursing Home at Brighton and 577 aged residents at the Freemasons Home in Sandgate. Of the 230 people in the nursing home, 32 are senile dementia patients and they would be adversely affected by a sudden increase in heavy aircraft. Of the 290 people in the hostel, 12 are senile dementia patients and would also be affected. At Yallambee Lodge in Deagon there are 82 aged and frail aged residents.
I have brought forward these figures not because I am saying that the bayside area is the only area that has aged residents and is the only area where people would suffer adversely from aircraft noise but to correct the inaccuracies that are being repeated. It is hogwash to say that no-one would be affected by transferring craft from an area on the south side of Brisbane to an area where planes would fly over at lower altitudes.
In my submissions to the Committee J included the concerns of a significant number of residents, including those at Pinkenba, which by virtue of its close proximity to the airport must register the highest noise level

3300 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Sandjilling, Brisbane Airport

of any suburb in Brisbane. I was pleased to see that a task force was set up. Earlier my colleagues and I welcomed the Minister for Telecommunications and Aviation Support (Mrs Kelly) to the electorate. Special efforts should certainly be made to ensure that in any proposal of the FAC or the task force the area of Pinkenba should suffer as little noise nuisance as possible. I have already presented the concerns of Pinkenba residents to a number of fora including the Federal Airports Corporation and Ministers. The Brisbane Airport task force will be considering them, and I will continue these representations.
Other areas I have received complaints from are Hendra, Doomben, Hamilton, Ascot, Clayfield, over to Wavell Heights and surrounding districts. The residents of these areas have identified noise since the opening of the new Brisbane Airport. It has not been as severe as was suffered from the old Brisbane Airport, but I am firmly opposed to any measures which would result in the transfer of noise, where residents have suffered extensive noise, without flight path changes to alleviate such noise. In areas where people did have excruciating noise over a period of decades and have now received some relief, it would be a very bad move for us to be subjecting them again to severe noise. Enough is enough, and I think the residents of Hamilton, Hendra and Ascot, who would sympathise and empathise with people who are now complaining of severe noise because they suffered it for decades, should not have heavy jets flying on flight paths across their areas again. I do not think that would be fair.
I thank the House for the opportunity to address these different concerns of people in the electorate of Lilley. I commend to the House and to the task force that is looking at the complaints of aircraft noise the points I have made both in submission form and in the House today.
Mr SCIACCA (Bowman) (6.12)-There are a number of members from both sides of the House with constituents who are affected by this particular noise problem. Of course, we try to do the best we can for our constituents in our own electorates. I guess that we would not be good members of parliament if we did not. I can certainly appreciate my

colleague the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) taking the attitude that she has. I point out perhaps two things to her, and I think it would be unfair to both me and my constituents if I did not. The report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works does not in any way, shape or form say that the cross-wind runway is going to be extended. In fact, it has rejected that, and the only two dissenting voices, Senator Burns and Senator Devereux, were supporting the cross-wind runway, The report does not in any way, shape or form condone the argument. In fact, it seems to have rejected that argument.
Mrs Darling-I am very happy to hear you say that.
Mr SCIACCA-I said that just in case it was concerning my friend, the honourable member for Lilley. I also say for the record in order to look after my constituents, just as the honourable member for Lilley is looking after hers, that there is a difference between an area all of a sudden being hit with aircraft noise, which comes from nowhere in properties one would have purchased not knowing that anything like this was going to happen, and an area being affected by noise for 30, 40 or 50 years. One becomes rather used to it or purchases a property at a decreased value because it is under a flight path, et cetera.
Having said that, I very much appreciate the hard work that has been done by the Committee on this matter. There is no question that it had a very difficult job. It took notice of all the evidence that was placed before it. There are a number of little--
Mr McGauran-Inaccuracies. Mr SCIACCA-Not inaccuracies, but there are a number of small criticisms I have of the report, and I think it would be very improper of me again if I did not point them out. First of all, I am very happy that the Committee has decided in recommendation 108 that:
The Committee recommends that the Federal Airports Corporation should undertake a thorough reexamination of the Brisbane Airport master plan before further runway developments are undertaken.
Obviously, in making that recommendation, the Committee has taken a lot of notice of the evidence that was given to it by members

Sandfilling, Brisbane Airport

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3301

of Parliament and other concerned people. One criticism I want to make is that on page 31, recommendation 93, there is what I call a classic understatement:
The Committee regards it as unfortunate that neither the FAC nor the CAA appeared to have perceived this problem-
that is, of noise-
prior to the opening of the airport
They were downright incompetent. There is no other way to describe what was done in recommending the siting of this airport. I do not include the Federal Airports Corporation (FAC) , because it was not in existence at the time, but I certainly include the Civil Aviation Authority. The absolutely stupid remarks that were contained in that little glossy pamphlet saying that no more than 20 houses would be affected by noise was just absolute bunkum.
Another matter, which was touched on by the honourable member for Moreton (Mr Donald Cameron) and the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Jull) , is that it seems that the Federal Airports Corporation and the Civil Aviation Authority treat members of parliament and Ministers as nothing more than mere passing nuisances. I said this in evidence before the Committee and got criticised for saying it by the very next witness, if I remember correctly, but I do not resile from that statement for one moment. They get so wrapped up in what they have got to recommend and say that they do not understand the feelings of the people out there. I do not give a damn if they do not like it, and I will say it again and again.
I also very much appreciate the little comment at the end of the report which says that the Committee 'notes' that certain noise abatement procedures have been put forward. There have been three Ministers for Telecommunications and Aviation Support. Certainly the present Minister for Telecommunications and Aviation Support (Mrs Kelly)-and I am sure that the previous Ministers who were in this portfolio will not get dirty when I say this-has been one of the best at looking at this noise problem. She has been very concerned about it and has met with a lot of people. If these noise abatement measures that have been laid down by the Minister for Transport and Commu-

nications (Mr Willis) are adhered to by the Federal Airports Corporation, the Civil Aviation Authority, the airlines and the pilots, and if they do exactly what the noise abatement measures say then there will not be a problem. Having said that, I do not trust them, and I will be carefully monitoring the situation in the future when all the planes do come back, because I want to make sure that they do what they are told to do. After all, this Parliament makes the laws and not the departments.
Following on from that, I agree with the honourable member for Lilley that she should have some concerns with respect to the question of the extension of the cross-wind runway. I support the extension of the crosswind runway, but with the qualification, and I said this at the Committee hearing, that if it is built-and I doubt that it will be, but it will continue to have my support-the noise abatement measures must be adhered to and the planes should fly out over the bay. There is no need for my constituents in Wynnum and Manly to be concerned about it. I disagree with my friend, the honourable member for Lilley, because if they do the right thing, in my view, none of her constituents will be affected either. But that is a matter of conjecture, and we could argue about that all night.
The other thing I want to do-and I notice that the Chairman of the Public Works Committee, the honourable member for Throsby (Mr Hollis) is in the chamber-is to thank the Committee for having given us the very good opportunity to present our case. We feel that our constituents, particularly those on the south side who have never had a problem, really do need to have their concerns aired in this Parliament and before an appropriate forum such as the Public Works Committee. I do hope that there will never be a parallel runway. If the cross-wind runway is not extended, for God's sake do something else: shift the airport; do whatever is wanted; but do not build a parallel runway.
Mr HUMPHREYS (Griffith-Minister for Veterans' Affairs) (6.20)-It is good to see honourable members representing electorates in Queensland here this evening because I know that they are all interested in this matter. As the honourable member for

3302 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Sandfilling, Brisbane Airport

Fadden (Mr Jull) has mentioned, they are all still here listening intently. Two Ministers are also here, the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr West) and the Minister for Telecommunications and Aviation Support (Mrs Kelly). I am sure my constituents and others listening in Brisbane will be interested in the debate.
I want to thank the honourable member for Throsby (Mr Hollis) and the other members of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for a job well done. I congratulate them on their comprehensive report. They had a very hard task. I was a member of the Public Works Committee, which is a very high-ranking committee which works arduously all the time. I want to congratulate everyone concerned. I have one complaint about the report to put to the Secretary of the Committee, Mr Peter Roberts, who was working for the Committee when I was there. He did not spell my name correctly except in one spot. I hope he gets it right the next time.
I want to say to the honourable member for Moreton (Mr Donald Cameron) that I do not know when I ever told anybody that the noise had gone from my electorate, because it has always been in the electorate of Griffith even when the honourable member held the seat. I do not believe that people are being subjected to aircraft noise pollution today to the extent that they were in the old days.
Mr Donald Cameron-The planes are not running any more.
Mr HUMPHREYS-I will bring that out a little bit later on. The honourable member said that he read the report. If he looks at pages 11 and 12 of the report he will see that when the original decision was being made the evidence given to the Department from the Civil Air Operations Officers Association and the Australian Federation of Air Pilots (AFAP) was to the effect that the runway at the airport should not be built in the way it was. The honourable member for Bowman (Mr Sciacca) also pointed that out. I know that it \Vas not this Government that agreed to build the runway that way and I am not casting any aspersions on the two honourable members opposite.
Mr Jull-We were. told fibs.

Mr HUMPHREYS-That is right, we were told stories. But I would like honourable members to read my dissenting report in those days. I opposed the way the airport was goingto be built and said that it should be a cross-wind runway. I agreed with the AFAP and all the people who gave evidence at that time.
Mr Donald Cameron-Elaine pulled the blanket out from underneath you.
Mr HUMPHREYS-No, she did not. She did not h&ve anything to do with the way the original airport was designed and approved. Dealing with the conclusions and recommendations, I want to say that I fully support the building of a new international terminal in Brisbane. When the Public Works Committee investigated the building of a new international airport everybody thought at that time that we were getting a new international terminal also. The first conclusion of the present report says:
The present international terminal at Brisbane airport is inadequate to cope with the expected increase in international passenger numbers . . .
I say to the honourable member for Throsby that I must take exception there to the term 'expected increases'. The airport is inadequate to cope now. I can assure honourable members of that and I am sure members of the Committee experienced that. The sooner we get a new international terminal in Brisbane the better.
I would like to see the Minister come to grips with what the Committee is recommending so that we have a total review of the master plan before we spend a lot of taxpayers' money in Brisbane. I am not denying that we should build an international terminal but before we spend all of these extra dollars I believe that we should deal with the noise pollution problem. The environmental study did not even mention anything about people. If we continue down that line, as the Department seems intent on doing as it follows the master plan, the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) should be very concerned about the extra noise pollution that would be created in her electorate and also in the majority of the Brisbane electorates if a parallel runway is built. I do not believe that any government or bureaucrat should think along the lines of following

Sandjilling, Brisbane Airport

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3303

the master plan. That would be a disaster. I think that the only way out of it would be to build the cross-wind runway.
I want to quickly speak about cost. We are now spending $44m for an extra 5.5 million cubic metres of sand. I know that the honourable member is a very good mathematician. Let us go back and look at spending $77m originally for 15 million cubic metres of sand. If we had pumped all of the sand up originally honourable members can see how much money we would have saved. We would have been able to have the new international terminal and reduce aircraft noise pollution in the whole of Brisbane, not just in my electorate. I think that is why honourable members are here. We were sold a pup originally with this airport. The Government of the day built that airport but it is our responsibility now, as the Government, to reduce the aircraft noise pollution in the whole of Brisbane.
I am glad to see the Minister for Telecom~ munications and Aviation Support here. I want to thank her for coming up and meeting concerned constituents in all electorates. She is here in relation to that. She is listening to the debate and I know that she will pay great .attention to all the points that are brought forward. I thank her for setting up the meeting of the Committee in Brisbane to deal with the problems associated with the new airport there. I am sure that if we continue to work along the lines that we have over the past with previous Ministers we will be able to reduce the aircraft noise pollution even further. I certainly hope that takes place.
I want to say once again that I do not oppose the building of a new international terminal but I believe it would have been right and proper to deal with the aircraft noise pollution problem first. Next time the Minister spends any taxpayers' money in Brisbane and the Department says that we do not need an environmental impact study in relation to people, she should have another think about it. If we do not ensure that next time we spend some dollars we do not continue to increase aircraft noise pollution we will be doing the wrong thing by the people of Brisbane. As the honourable member for Fadden pointed out, there will be many more international tourists-people

got the figures wrong earlier-and more aircraft movements in and out of Brisbane. I hope that the Minister for Telecommunications and Aviation Support will assure the people in Brisbane that the air traffic controllers and others will abide by the rules and regulations that she has set down so that we can work together to reduce aircraft noise pollution in Brisbane.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra-Minister for Telecommunications and Aviation Support) (6.27)-Everybody wants airports-and wanted them yesterday-but nobody wants them in their own area or wants any planes to fly over their homes. Obviously that is not just a problem of Brisbane but of Sydney, Adelaide and Melbourne as well. It creates problems for us in planning airports. As an interesting sideline, I want to tell honourable members of a recent experience of mine. Last Sunday I went to the opening of a new school in Bankstown. The Bankstown Grammar School is being built on Federal Airports Corporation (FAC) limd at the Bankstown airport. I asked people if they had any problems with noise. They said, 'No, we don't have any problems. We are delighted with the school and the opportunity to get space. We have .a lovely vista from the school'. They were really thrilled to have a school at an airport. They were very positive and I was delighted about that.
The report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works that we are discussing in this debate was very useful. I want to thank the Chairman and members of the Committee for a very constructive [(lport. Having dealt with the noise issue at Brisbane airport I understand the difficulties being faced. Different views have been expressed not only across the floor here but actually amongst my own colleagues and by members of the Opposition.
One useful feature of the report is the agreement that we proceed with the sandfill and that we have a stand-alone international terminal. The honourable member for Bowman (Mr Sciacca) made some comments about the positioning of that terminal but, looking at the master plan, it is difficult to see how the terminal could be placed much closer to the domestic terminal. Even if the international terminal were moved to the general aviation site it would still be a

3304 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Apron Facility, Sydney Airport

considerable distance from the domestic airport so it is very difficult to see how the two could be moved closer together.
I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate the FAC for going ahead with this. It is quite clear that without the formation of the FAC we would not have proceeded with this international terminal. The honourable member for Bowman was complaining about its not proceeding fast enough. I think that it really did take the formation of the FAC for this to proceed. In the Ilext five years $1 billion will be spent on capital works in Australia. It is well and truly needed and it has taken the formation or'the FAC to get that to proceed. I formally congratulate everyone on this.
We have established a task force to work on noise problems primarily for the reasons expressed by honourable members today. It. is an incredibly complex issue. People from the south have different views from those in the north. We recognise the importance of noise problems, particularly for those who have houses in the noise area. That is why consultation is critical. Consultation is also critical between the State Government and the local community. We have representatives from the Federal Government, the State Government and local government as well as local community representatives on this task force.
The task force is still meeting and will be reporting to me next year. One of its terms of reference is to review existing plans for the long-term development of an additional runway and associated taxiway areas. It provides the opportunity for all the issues raised in the House today about noise to be put on the table. Hopefully we can get some sort of consensus. I thank everyone who has put so much work into this report. We can now go ahead with the building of this international terminal, which Brisbane, as the honourable member for Bowman rightly points out, well and truly needs. I congratulate the FAC for getting on with the job.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

DEVELOPMENT OF ADDITIONAL DOMESTIC APRON FACILITY AT
SYDNEY (KINGSFORD-SMITH) AIRPORT
Approval of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr WEST (Cunningham-Minister for Administrative Services) (6.31)-1 move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the committee has duly reported to Parliament: Development of an additional domestic apron facility at Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport.
On 28 November this year the Public Works Committee tabled its report recommending the development of an additional domestic apron facility at Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport. The Federal Airports Corporation (FAC) proposed that the additional domestic apron be developed to counter the current shortfall of apron facilities available for a variety of jets ranging from small corporate jets to wide-bodied aircraft.. This will solve capacity needs following. the deregulation of the domestic aviation industry in November 1990. The facility is to be constructed in a largely undeveloped area in the north-east section of the airport. This area is conveniently located near the existing domestic terminal. The apron will be capable of accommodating six domestic jet aircraft and additional stand-off position for smaller aircraft.
The scope of work includes associated engineering infrastructure and the relocation of some roads and staff car parks near the present entry to the domestic terminal complex. The FAC has advised that the works will cost an estimated $9.6m at May 1989 prices. Australian Construction Services estimate that this project will employ about 40 people and peak at around 60. In order to ensure additional domestic apron space is available by November 1990-when the domestic aviation industry will be deregulated-the Federal Airports Corporation seeks to award a contract as early as possible next year in order to achieve completion by October 1990. I thank the Public Works Committee for its very prompt report and I commend this motion to the House.

Apron Facility, Sydney Airport

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3305

Mr JULL (Fadden) (6.34)-Once again I congratulate the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr West) and the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for bringing this report into the Parliament. The Opposition wholeheartedly supports this work that is being recommended. To a very great extent what is being decided here tonight will determine whether we will have any new players in the deregulated airline industry commencing November 1990. One of the great problems faced by the proposed new players has been the available terminal space. While this is not the time to delve deeply into the contract with the existing airlines on the present terminals, I point out that part of that contract provides that two gates be provided by both carriers to any newcomers.
B~th of the prospective carriers to which I have spoken have said that, frankly, two gates will not be enough and that they will be probably looking for five or six. That is why I was interested to read in your report, Mr Deputy Speaker, that you have taken into account to a very great extent the desires of those proposed new players. In that hard standing area there is provision for A300-600 series aircraft, which is the aircraft type proposed by Compass Airlines, and there is also provision for a number of spaces for MD83 aircraft, which are being proposed by another one of the players, Capitol Airlines.
While we would all hope to see some competition in that airline system by November next year, especially in the circumstances that we are suffering in Australia now, it has been a very great concern that if the proposed airlines do not have access into Sydney and, to a lesser extent, into Melbourne, they probably will not get off the ground. I commend the Minister for Administrative Services on ordering a hasty awarding of the contract for this redevelopment. He has said in his statement that he wants that work completed by October 1990. I think that will give the prospe'ctive players some hope. I also remind the House of a statement within that report that consideration has been given already to a common user terminal facility, because that is going to be important too. We hope that the contract will be awarded and that this work will be under way as soon

as possible. Deregulation roll on, because the Australian travelling public need it.

Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (6.37)-1 want

to make only some brief observations. I do

not know the full nature of the matter which

was referred to the Parliamentary Standing

Committee on Public Works for examination

or the extent to which matters concerning

the totality of developments in relation to

the Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport, about

which we are speaking, have been properly

addressed. I want to indicate my own per-

sonal disappointment that-and without no-

tice, it appears to me-a substantial part of

the trees that were planted around Sydney

airport sometime ago have been largely de-

stroyed by the Federal Airports Corporation

(FAC). I am aware of the argument that

this was done for security reasons, but that

argument was largely advanced after the

action had commenced and after there was

upnubdleirctaakwena.rernewssasthpaetrsothniasllayctsihoonckweads

being to see

it, having regard to comments that are made

about the importance of tree planting in our

community and the promises that have been

made by the Prime Minister (Mr Hawke). I

was devastated to see so many trees de-

stroyed in one fell swoop. This adds nothing

to the amenity of the airport itself and I

would be very surprised if a more construc-

tive approach could not have been taken.

Mr Deputy Speaker, I certainly hope that when the Committee, of which you are the Chairman, is looking at these matters in future in relation to Sydney airport, it might bear in mind the amenity of the community that might be affected by important developments and that it will ensure that there is full and adequate disclosure of this sort of rampant irresponsibility on the part of an organisation like the FAC. I express my horror, in the light of the comments made, by the Prime Minister and the emphasis that has been put on the need for tree planting in our community.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Hollis)-I must say that although the honourable member's comments were a bit outside the terms of the matter before the House, I was loath to interrupt him. Perhaps the matter could be raised in a grievance debate or on the adjournment.

3306 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Higher Education Bill

Question resolved in the affirmative.
BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE
The following Bills were returned from the Senate without amendment or requests:
Grain Legumes Levy Legislation Amendment Bill 1989
Courts and Tribuf)als Administration Amendment Bill 1989
Appropriation Bill (No. I) 1989-90 Appropriation Bill (No.2) 1989-90
INDUSTRY, TECHNOLOGY AND COMMERCE LEGISLATION
AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1989 Bill returned from the Senate with an amendment. Ordered that the amendment be taken into consideration in Committee of the Whole House at the next sitting.
HIGHER EDUCATION FUNDING AMENDMENT BILL (No.3) 1989
Second Reading Debate resumed from 29 November, on motion by Mr Simmons:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr PRICE (Chifley) (6.40)-1 support the Higher Education Funding Amendment Bill (No.3) 1989, which really revolves around the issue of the States interfering in the running of higher education institutions. I want to place on the record my belief that we currently have a very absurd situation: the Commonwealth overwhelmingly provides the capital and recurrent funds to higher education institutions, but it is limited in its ability to govern how they are run. That function is left with the States. In other words, the States-which for their part contribute in a minor way through either funding a very small number of places or providing capital funds, as occurs in my State of New South Wales-have the responsibility for setting up the legislation for these institutions and has the responsibility for supervision of them.. The situation is quite ludicrous and there is a clear case for the Commonwealth to have direct legislative responsibility for these institutions.
There is nothing more absurd, for example, than State members of parliament being

appointed to the councils of these bodiesor, alternatively, State governments making all the appointments to the councils of these bodies-while the Federal Government has absolutely no ability whatsoever to nominate appointees.
Mr Ruddock-Only from the government of the day.
Mr PRICE-I take the point made by the honourable member for Dundas that the appointments are made only from the government of the day. I would have thought that institutions such as higher education institutions ought to be bipartisan and we ought to get the most out of them. As a matter of principle, I want to put my firm view on the record in this place.
There has been a fairly wide-ranging debate about the Bill. Honourable members will recall that the real argument is about the activities of the New South Wales Government which wishes to force institutions not to collect student union fees. In retrospect, I would have much appreciated the opportunity of going to university. I never had that opportunity, although later, as a mature age student, I went to an institute of technology. I paid my student council fees; I never thought of refusing. As a part-time student, I hardly used the services offered. Nevertheless, I never queried the necessity of paying the fees.
Throughout this debate, Opposition speakers have said how outrageous this compulsory collection is. I challenge those Opposition speakers who have invariably benefited from a university education and presumably paid their student fees: when they were paying the fees, did they ever write to the student council and object? Can they produce for the House some evidence which would show that at the time they were students they found this an unconscionable situation, or are they today coming to grips with some newfound ideological position.
I particularly noted that the honourable member for Bennelong (Mr Howard) made a contribution to this debate. Honourable members would be aware that the honourable member for Bennelong actually declined the education portfolio, believing that the needs of students were beneath his expertise. As he informed the House, it was because

Higher Education Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3307

he was the patron of the Australian Liberal education, under the Opposition's proposal,

Students Federation that he intervened. I will deter many working class students. Pay-

think it is ironic that he should intervene in ing the fee will not be such a problem on

a debate when he declined to accept the the North Shore or in the eastern suburbs of

responsibility of the shadow portfolio. I am Sydney, but I can say with some certainty

reminded of a remark made by Mr Menzies that in the western suburbs-the real growth

on 3 October 1941 by way of interjection, as area of Sydney-it will be a real problem.

reported in Hansard at page 709:

The tragedy is that that money will not

I wish honourable members would leave me alone. go to fund new places. In fact, there would

It is a most unpleasant experience to be exhumed. be under the Liberal Party's proposal a

I will take note of that and move on. In this $230m saving that would just go into Con-

wide-ranging debate, honourable members on solidated Revenue. Thus, the two policies

this side have real pleasure in speaking on could not be more starkly contrasting. On

Bills relating to higher education because of the one hand, there is a keen desire by the

the tremendous increase under this GovernGovernment to fund extra places. The way

ment in the number of students attending we do that is by having students pay only

universities and higher education institutions. when they have the earning capacity and are

In 1983, there were about 350,000 such stu'- actually earning the money. The money then

dents, whereas the number is now about . goes to fund more tertiary places.

450,000, an increase of 97,000 students-a tremendous increase. Actually, by 1992 that number is expected to increase to 150,000, so that from 1983 to 1992 there will be an increase of 150,000 students. About 500,000 students will be in universities or higher education institutions.

On the other han~, the Liberals want an up-front charge, which will be an embarrassment for many families to have to pay. This is the part I cannot understand. If up-front charges are to be imposed, families must be given notice that they need to save for it. However, there will be no notice; it will be

What this really means is that the tradi- $1,200; and it will be a saving to govern-

tional aspect of tertiary education being for ment. That $230m will not go to higher

the privileged few has been changed around education: it will go into Consolidated Rev-

by this Government. Of course, we are very enue. It is a real tragedy.

proud of that. Indeed, we want to fund further opportunities, particularly for working class families. To do this, we have introduced a higher education charge. The money raised will go to fund extra places, so that by the turn of. the century we will see really dramatic increases. It is not an upfront

I also want to point out to the House the dramatic increase in retention rates. I seek leave of the House to incorporate in Hansard a chart that demonstrates the increase in retention rates from 1967 to 1988.
Leave granted.

charge; the charge applies once a student has The table read as follows-

the capacity to pay. I must confront my colleague the honour-
able member for Lowe (Dr Woods). The policy of the Liberal Party of Australia should be quite starkly contrasted with the

Table I YEAR 12 APPARENT RETENTION RATES,
AUSTRALIA, 1967-1988 (Percent)

policy of the Australian Labor Party. The

Apparent Retention

Opposition is proposing an up-front charge of $1,200 for each and every year of study.

Rates to Final Year, all Schools

Thus, the parents of students in my electoYear

Males Females Persons

rate will be concerned about whether they 1967 . can afford to make that $1,200 payment. 1968 .

26.5

18.7

22.7

28.5 21.2 25.0

They will think, 'If we cannot do it out of 1969 .

31.1

23.7

27.5

our savings, where will we borrow it from?'. 1970 .

It is a real tragedy that the cost of university

1971 . 1972 .

33.0 25.5 29.3

34.1

26.9

30.6

35.7 28.9 32.4

3308 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Higher Education Bill

Apparent Retention Rates to Final Year,
all Schools

Year

Males Females Persons

1973 .
1974 . 1975 . 1976 . 1977 . 1978 .
1979 .
1980 . 1981 . 1982 .
1983 . 1984 1985 .
1986 . 1987 . 1988 .

35.2

30.8

33.1

34.1

31.6

32.9

34.6

33.6

34.1

34.6

35.3

34.9

34.0

36.6

35.3

33.1

37.3

35.1

32.4

37.2

34.7

31.9

37.3

34.5

32.0

37.8

34.8

32.9

39.9

36.3

.37.5

43.9

40.6

42.1

48.0

45.0

43.5

49.5

46.4

45.6

52.1

48.7

49.4

57.0

53.1

53.4 , 61.8

57.6

Source: Department of Employment, Education and Training, Statistical MO(lOgraph No.3

Mr PRICE-I thank the House. The chart shows that in the Fraser years the increase in retention rates was 2 per cent; under us, it has been 20 per cent. I make the point that it should go higher; we should not be complacent. Staying on at school and the level of education is still the best indicator of what type of job a p~rson gets, or whether that person gets a job at all. So it is very important that we have increasing retention rates, and it is interesting that the Minister announced in the House quite recently that, for 1989, the retention rates have increased yet again. Let me quote the figures to the House: in 1983 it was 36 per cent; in 1989, 61 per cent. A perusal of enrolments shows that in 1983, 98,000 young Australians were enrolled in year 12 and now there are 160,000. The figure has risen by 62,000, which is a tremendous increase in the number of people staying on. If retention rates do not increase, there will be no need to expand the number of tertiary places at universities, and student councils, rather than being dynamic and growing, will be in fact ossified and curtailed. This is a very proud record for the Government that we have. I would also like to show the State breakup of retention rates, and I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a further table that gives the figures State by State.

Leave granted.

The table read as follows-

Table 2
YEAR 12 APPARENT RETENTION RATES, STATES, 1988 (Percent)

State

New South Wales

Victoria. . . .

Queensland. . .

South Australia .

Western Australia

Tasmania . . .

Northern Territory.

.

Australian Capital Territory

Retention Rates
51.3 56.9 66.9 66.6 59.2 37.6 45.0 81.4

Australia . . . . . . .

57.6

Source: DEET, Statistical Monograph No.3

Mil PRICE-The retention rate in New South Wales is 51 per cent,' which needs to be increased. The break-up between public and private schools shows a more dramatic trend. In 1988, 51 per cent of public school students stayed on to year 12; in the Catholic system, 64.2 per cent; and in independent schools, 98.5 per cent, making a total for all schools of 57.6 per cent. I believe we need to increase the retention rate at government schools. I would always argue that we ought not to find fault with the students, irrespective of whether they attended an independent, Catholic or government school; we ought to look at the system to see what changes need to be made there.

I wish to outline to the House just some of the things that the student councils provide. They are counselling, sporting, health and career services and social outlets for young people in higher education. Opposition members have taken some objection and have quoted some of the activities to which they take exception. They want to rig the system. We on the Government side say that if a person is oissatisfied with what a student council is doing, that person ought to participate in elections. I make the point that I always argue when constituents of mine approach me that people ought to join political parties, whether it be the Liberal Party, the National Party, the Australian Democrats or the Labor Party. What Australia needs is greater participation, and with participation comes an opportunity to have an input into the decisions of the organisation. This applies at every level-political, student council or trade union. It is a matter of principle. Without the fees that are collected for the pur-

Higher Education Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3309

poses that I have enunciated, those services cannot be provided.
Any member of this House who has talked to school students who are in years 11 and 12 and then talked to students who then go on to higher education, would be aware of the tremendous change that occurs in them between the two-institutions-senior level at school, and study at universities and colleges of advanced education. They are really saying that some of the pastoral services effectively provided by student councils should not be provided and that the students should be denied them. They are saying that going to one's local general practitioner and discussing one's health problems is as good as going to a specialist who deals with students day in and day out. That is ridiculous. The honourable member for Flinders (Mr Reith) asked, 'Why should they provide food outlets? Students can always go and buy something at a milk bar.' This is occurring at a time when there is a great debate in the community about being conscious of what we eat, having a healthy lifestyle and following good dietary principles. These things can be and are being provided by student councils, but somehow the Opposition takes objection to it.
I conclude on this note: a great deal of hypocrisy has been spoken in this debate by Opposition .members. What they really should be arguing for is greater participation by students in student councils. If students have a particular point of view to advance, that is the way it should be advanced. If we want an enhanced democracy from Australia's future leaders, then we want greater participation by students in higher education, not less. If we sometimes disagree with their wishes, is that not what accepting responsibility is all about? Are they not entitled to have a differing view? I might not agree with some of the things they advocate or seek to do, but I would defend their right to do it. That applies to Liberal Youth controlled student councils as much as it does to the others.
I strongly commend this Bill. I reiterate that, given the burden of financial responsibility the Federal Government has, it is an anachronism that it is State legislation that sets up these institutions. I strongly support the role of student representative councils. I believe that debate is healthy in our society

and that as many students as possible ought to be encouraged to participate actively and advance their particular views. Trying to legislate for particular ideologies, as is being done in New South Wales, is distinctly unhealthy. As the Minister says, we ought to preserve the autonomy of educational institutions to run those institutions as they see fit in the best interests of the students.
Mr Webster (Macquarie) (6.58)-It was very interesting listening to the honourable member for Chifley (Mr Price) talking about the Higher Education Funding Amendment Bill (No.3). He took the opportunity to talk for about three-quarters of his time about other aspects of an earlier Bill and did not take much time to talk about this Bill. The amendment, to which I will come in a moment, is quite precise in that it deals with compulsory unionism. The honourable member for Chifley mentioned that he, like me and my constituents, is very proud to be associated with one of Australia's youngest universities, the University of Western Sydney.
In my own electorate there stands the historic and internationally respected Hawkesbury Agricultural College, which is now a network member of the new university. At the foot of the Blue Mountains, in the electorate of the honourable member for Lindsay (Mr Free) but serving many of my constituents, is the former Nepeari College of Advanced Education, which is also a network campus of the new university. Thanks to these two network members, the new university is characterised by both history and vitality. Indeed, the new university represents the kind of community of learning upon whose shoulders rests both the history and future of our culture, thinking and economy. At the heart of the academic and student communities within the University of Western Sydney is the spirit of free inquiry and interaction. Unfortunately, today we are here to consider a piece of legislation which represents a continuing and fundamental threat to that spirit, free inquiry, free association, dialogue and interaction. That threat is compulsory university unionism.
In rising this evening to comment briefly on the Higher Education Funding Amendment Bill (No.3), or as it ought properly be called, the compulsory student unionism Bill, I wish to introduce my comments with a

33lO REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Higher Education Bill

question: What is the prerequisite for admission to an institution of higher education in Australia today? If you, Mr Deputy Speaker, believed it was a good pass in the Higher School Certificate, you would be wrong. Such academic success is not enough. If you believed it was possession of a scholarship, you would be wrong again. The prerequisite for admission to an institute of higher education is the payment of compulsory union fees and the possession of a receipt from the students' council. This is unacceptable and for the Government to be introducing legislation to legitimate and protect such a situation is outrageous. I do not have to go past my own office to see this system of compulsory unionism in effect. This month my private secretary re-enrolled in a graduate diploma in Asian studies at the New England University. In passing, I note that my office is leading the way amongst offices of members of parliament in the implementation of the Garnaut report in terms of equipping Australia for its Asian relationships in the future. With the re-enrolment papers that my private secretary received came a levy for the students' union. My private secretary is an external part-time student. He will not use any of New England's student facilities and certainly none of the resources of the students' council or union. Nevertheless, he was advised that none of his re-enrolment papers would be accepted or processed, notwithstanding his very successful completion of this year's studies, if his payment for the students' union was not included. The payment amounted to $61.
The Government came into the House yesterday-and is continuing today-and asks us to pass legislation which has the sole effect of legitimating and protecting that kind of union extortion. When we turn to the second reading speech of the Minister for Defence Science and Personnel (Mr Simmons), we find an almost Orwellian example of the use of language to betray the truth. The Minister tells us:
The Bill represents an important measure in the Government's efforts to strengthen and, where necessary, protect the legitimate autonomy of higher education institutions.
I will translate that statement to give it real meaning. It should be read:

The cowardice of university councils in the face of academic and student unions and their willingness to abuse their powers to infringe the right of individual freedom, are central aspects of this Government's management of campuses around the country.
The Minister also says:
The specific purpose of the Bill is to amend the Higher Education Funding Act to protect the rights and responsibilities of higher education institutions to make their own decisions, independent of government intervention, on the provision of services and amenities for their students and the imposition and collection of fees for that purpose.
Honourable members should note the phrase 'independent of government intervention'. The irony is that this Bill is a prime example of government intervention, and I will provide the translation of the Minister's words:
The universities, having abused the powers and freedom conferred on them by the community in their denial of individual rights, face action by certain State governments to uphold those individual rights, and this Labor Government is to neutralise that action in defence of the denial of rights by universities.
This House should be honest about the Bill even if the Cabinet will not be. When I first heard that the Government was to draw up legislation in this regard, I thought it might be about to use its external powers to enforce some provision of an international covenant. This Government has made such use of external powers an essential component of its armoury in its attack on the rights of the States and individual Australians. It did occur to me briefly that perhaps the Government was going to enforce article 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. That article states:
Everyone shall have the right to freedom of association with others, including the right to join trade unions for the protection of his interests.
I thought perhaps that the Government might take up article 8, section 1 (a) of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights which qualifies the right to unionism by reference to restrictions 'which are necessary in a democratic society for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others'. It was naive of me to think that the Government might act on those articles. It simply ignores the latter article and, in regard to the article on freedom of association, by some strange twist of logic it argues that the article in fact requires enforcement of compulsory unionism. In passing, I point to

Higher Education Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3311

one of the great weaknesses in the reference to, and use of, United Nations covenants. They never strengthen the freedoms and rights we already enjoy, but they do provide sufficient scope for autocrats to gradually erode those rights and freedoms under the guise of enforcement of international humanitarian obligations.
This Bill is a simple instance of a unioncontrolled Labor Government legislating to provide unions and institutions subservient to unions with the right to do a wrong. This Bill proclaims the philosophy of university autonomy but is really a means to deny the fundamental right of individual freedom and choice. It has arisen because the Greiner Government is considering taking action to outlaw compulsory unionism in institutions of higher education and because this Government hopes to get the Bill onto the statute books in its last days in the hope of preempting action by the next Peacock coalition government to support and supplement actions against compulsory unionism.
The Australian Democrats mayor may not allow it to pass in the Senate. They are a party of flexible conviction on matters of fundamental liberal rights and social policy. But it makes no real difference. The reality is that this Bill will reinforce the fears and doubts in the community about this Government's attitude to basic rights and freedoms. It will remind them of this Government's basic inclination, which was so evident in Labor's attempts to push through a Bill of rights to control and regulate the everyday rights of its citizens. It will strengthen the swing against the Government which will see a Peacock coalition government put into office in 1990. When the coalition government takes office, this Bill will be on the short list for immediate repeal.
Mr MILDREN (Ballarat) (7.09)-As the Minister for Defence Science and Personnel (Mr Simmons), on behalf of the Minister for Employment, Education and Training (Mr Dawkins), indicated in his second reading speech, the Higher Education Funding Amendment Bill (No.3) represents an important measure in the Government's efforts to 'strengthen and, where necessary, protect the legitimate autonomy of higher education institutions'. In response to this measure members of the Opposition have at least

been consistent in one thing, which is, of course, in their paranoia about the use of the term unionism. Quite frankly, the Opposition, if it were honest, opposes unionism whether it be voluntary or compulsory.
Mr Webster-That is not right. Mr MILDREN-I am talking about reality, The Opposition believes that, in an unequal society, it makes it so much easier for those people who have the balance of power in their hands to be able to dominate the lives of those who are less endowed with power. We know that. It is part and parcel of the Opposition's industrial relations policy. It is the only thing the Opposition has been consistent about since it has been here. On page 21 on the document called Economic Action Plan, which is becoming more discredited by the day, the Opposition claims that it will increase autonomy for institutions, yet it opposed this legislation, which in itself reinforces institutional autonomy. There are times when action has to be taken to protect the autonomy of educational institutions, and this is one. The Government fully recognises that it is the intention of the New South Wales Liberal Government-there is another one of those buzz terms which has lost its meaning-to take action against institutions which agree to collect the fees from students to ensure that the services provided by the students unions are available for the students, whether the students use them or not. The other day when tttis matter was being debated it was of interest to me to listen to the honourable member for Lowe (Dr Woods). Part of his objection was that the students had used some of these fees to support organisations of which he did not approve. He called them radical organisations. I would have thought that one of the characteristics of tertiary education that any democratic society ought to hold dear is-that the students, during the period in which they are coming to grips with the ideas of their civilisation, will be prepared to take measures that sometimes are unpopular in order to examine things at a radical level-radix, meaning root, is the basic use of radical that I am referring to-and not simply just take for granted what they are being given, often by those people in society who have a vested

3312 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Higher Education Bill

interest in ensuring that the intellectual status quo is maintained. Students should take the opportunity to question even the most fundamental values of their society lest that society ossify, lest it become authoritarian, lest the dictatorship of the mind by those who are currently in power should prevail. It is often said that if students are not given the opportunity to become idealists when they are young, they will not become idealists and live lives of idealists later on. That is a tragedy in any society.
I have witnessed educational institutions which have had a real terror of students who question some of the statements of the leaders in their society. It worries me that that should take place, because those students are being brainwashed into accepting the status quo lest they be harassed or discriminated against in those institutions. I am glad to say that the institutions of higher learning in Australia that I know of, that I have experienced, that I hilVe been on the staff of, do not fall into such categories. But I have seen that happen in another country.
This measure is deliberate. It is aimed at protecting the students and the institutions against that deliberate intrusion by the state into the freedom of those institutions to determine measures of this kind for themselves. I hope that members of the Opposition reconsider their position regarding this measure and introspect somewhat to ask what their own motives are and what are the measures which have actuaJly formed the ideas which they have. Are they frightened that students will take unpopular stances? If honourable members recall~ back in the 1970s and particularly in the 1960s the students became the conscience of this country. They brought to the attention of the Australian people the appalling iniquity of the involvement of this nation in the-holocaust in Vietnam. Plenty of people out there demanded that the students go back to their classrooms and attend to the issues of learning their mathematics, French, history and, believe it or not, their philosophy, rather than take a conscientious position.
The student-unions are there for all stu~ dents to take part in. They are part of not just the social life and sporting life of the institutions; they are part and parcel of the way those people can grow up. I am not

frightened that a student might become a thorough reactionary when he is at the university, though I must say that it would sound a little like a contradiction. If that is the direction he or she goes after having deliberated upon it freely in the appropriate academic environment, well and good. If those students stand for and gain control of the student union, then that must be left to the students. It is part and parcel of growing up. We cannot paternalise these students if we want them to become the leaders of this country, to improve this country in the future. This is not about leading this country in occupations such as accountancy, on the Stock Exchange or in business; it is about making this a consummately better country. That again means having people our ageas idealists. We must give young people the opportunity to sort these things out for themselves. The institutions ought to encourage them through participation in their union. Governments should keep out of it and enable them to go ahead.

I exhort the Opposition once again to think seriously about its action. It ill becomes people to show a kneejerk reaction every time they hear the word -union'. They demean themselves as people of intellect in an institution such as this. They should open up their minds, examine what they have said, and give these students an opportunity unfettered by the heavy hand of reaction. It gives me a great deal of pleasure to support this Bill, and I once again plead with Opposition members to reconsider their position.

Question put:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes . . . . Noes . . . .

65 . 44

Majority

. 21

AYES
Baldwin. P. J. Beazley. K. C. Beddall. D. P. Biln,ey, O. N. Blanchard, C. A. Blewelt, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, Robert Campbell, O. Charles, D. E. Charlesworth, R. I. Child, J.

Kerin, J. C.
Kerr, D. J. C. Lamb, A. (Teller) Langmore, J. V.
Lavarch, M. H. Lee, M. J. Lindsay, E. J. McHugh, J. Martin, S. P. Mildre", J. B.
Mihon,P.
Morris, Allan

National Health Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3313

Chynoweth, R. L. Cleeland, P. R. Courtice, B. W. Crawford, M. C. Darling, E. E. Dubois, S. C. Edwards, Ronald Fatin, W. F. Fitzgibbon, E. J. Free, R. V. Gear, G. Grace, E. (Teller) Hand, G. L. Harvey, E. R. Hollis, C. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. C. Jakobsen, C. A. . Jenkins, H. A. Kelly, R. J.

AYES

Morris, Peter Mountford, J. G. O'Keefe, N. P.
Price, L. R. S. Punch, G. F. Saunderson, J. Sawford, R. W. Scholes, G. G. D. Sciacca, C. Scoll, John Scoll, Los Simmons, D. W. Snow, J. H. Snowdon, W. E. Staples, P. R. Theophanous, A. C. . Tickner, R. E. UTen, T.
West, S. i.
Willis,R. Wright, K. W.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Aldred, K. J. Anderson, J. D. Andrew, J. N. Beale, J. H. Blunt, C. W. Braithwaite, R. A. Br~wn, N. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cariton, J. J. Cobb, M. R. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,n. B. Downer, A. J. O. Edwards, Harry Fife, W. C. Fischer, Tim Hall, Steele Halverwn, R. G. Hawker, D. P. M. (Teller)

Klugman, R. E. Jones, Barry

PAIRS

Hicks, N. J. (Teller) Jull, D. F. Lloyd, B. McArthur, F. S. McGauran, P. J. MacKellar, M. J. R. Miles, C. G. Nehl, G. B. Porter, J. R. Prall, M. P. Prosser, O. D. Reith, P. K. Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Smith, W. L. Sullivan, K. J. Webster, A. P. Wilson, I. B. C. . Woods, R. L. Wooldridge, M. R. L.
Fisher, Peter Moore, J. C.

Question so resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time, Message from the Governor General recommending appropriation announced;
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith, Bill (on motion by Mr Humphreys) read a third time,
NATIONAL HEALTH AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1989
[COGNATE BILL:

NATIONAL HEALTH AMENDMENT BILL 1989]
Second Reading Debate resumed from 29 November, on motion by Mr Staples:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- I understand it is the wish of the House to debate the National Health Amendment Bill (No, 2) concurrently with the National Health Amendment Bill. There being no objection, the Chair will allow that course to be followed.
Mr SHACK (Tangney) (7,32)-As you have correctly informed the House, Mr Deputy Speaker, we are debating cognately the National Health Amendment Bill 1989, which has been returned from the Senate, and the National Health Amendment Bill (No, 2) 1989 which was introduced into the House yesterday, 29 November, The Opposition was consulted prior to the decision to deal with this matter cognately and we do not have any objection to that to facilitate the business of the House, However, I want to say something about the extraordinary circumstances surrounding the National Health Amendment Bill (No, 2) 1989, introduced into the House yesterday and debated today.
Mr Deputy Speaker, as one with long experience in this place you would know that it is a time-honoured practice that the Opposition be given a week or two by the Government to consider its stance on legislation, The fact that this Bill was introduced yesterday and is being debated substantially today gives us a very clear window into the desperation of the Government as it tries to get off the pharmacy hook that it now finds itself squirming on,
Having made that point, we welcome the National Health Amendment Bill (No, 2) and will not be opposing it. It proposes changes to the size and composition of the membership of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal (PBRT), Quite frankly, we are delighted that the Government has accepted our arguments in favour of appointing a person with practical experience of community pharmacy to serve on the PBRT,

3314 REPRESENTATIYES 30 November 1989

National Health Bill

It is interesting to note, however, that at the time we on this side of the House put forward this idea it was roundly condemned by the Minister responsible for the pharmaceutical benefits scheme, the Minister for Housing and Aged Care (Mr Staples), who is at the table. I issued a pharmacy position paper on 1 September which contained this proposal. The Minister responded with a media release of the same date in which he said:
The Opposition is again divided over the basic role of Tribunals in remuneration decisions. The implications of this confusion are disturbing and an invitation to industrial blackmail whereby anyone disappointed with an adverse decision can be given the opportunity to abolish or reconstitute the Tribunal that makes the decision.
Here we have a legislative move to reconstitute the Tribunal by adding to its membership and appointing to its number SOmeone experienced in community pharmacy. In the face of that fact, obviously the Minister has had a significant change of heart between 1 September and 28 November on the subject of pharmacy representation on the PBRT, or we are forced to the conclusion that he has a very poor recall of his previous statements. Leaving that aside, what is important is that the Government has finally grasped the fact that the Tribunal will gain from having a member with knowledge and expertise in community pharmacy. As I said at the outset of my contribution to this debate, the Opposition is, therefore, pleased to support this Bill.
In relation to the first mentioned Bill, the National Health Amendment Bill 1989, the Liberal and National parties in this place welcome the fact that the Senate has again agreed to our amendments designed to revoke the 28 August 1989 determination of the PBRT. The announcement of this determination and its subsequent implementation by the Governmenton 1 November 1989 have seen community pharmacy and the pharmaceutical benefits scheme (PBS) thrown into an unprecedented state of tur~ moil. I am aghast to record the fact that at my youthful age I already have nearly 11 years experience in this place, and I have never witnessed a matter that has been handled so badly and so poorly as has what we might describe as the pharmacy dispute.

To date there is no resolution to the problems arising from the 23 per cent cut in pharmacists' gross dispensing remuneration. There is no resolution in prospect; there is no resolution at all. The Government's attempts to smooth things over with a $60m so-called peace package and a few other concessions have been spectacularly unsuccessful. The fundamental reason why the Government has failed to solve this problem is that it has not addressed the fundamental concern, which is that the 28 August determination was, is, and always will be wrong. The fact that it is wrong is evidenced by a range of things, many of which have been canvassed in this place and in the Senate on a number of occasions.
Mr Deputy Speaker, you and other members will be pleased to learn at this stage in the session that I do not intend to rehearse again all of these examples and arguments, but I will refer to one which I think is extremely illustrative of the point. The one I raise is that under the PBRT determination pharmacists were faced with the prospect of paying more for some items than they would receive in reimbursement from the Government. Clearly this was a grossly unjust and inequitable situation but, to give the PBRT its due, it did acknowledge the problem at its further hearing on 18 September. In an effort to face up to this problem, the Government negotiated a $3m to $5m deal with the wholesalers to top up their margins on items costing more than $45 in return for the abolition of the former surcharge imposed on pharmacists. The Minister responsible stated, in his media release of 26 September, that as a result of this move:
It would now not be possible for pharmacists to claim that they would lose money on any high cost drugs . . .
This statement totally ignores the reality that pharmacists still have to pay for many things associated with stocking these drugs, including handling costs, rent, interest and so onall the costs associated with running any business-and that under the PBRT's new remuneration package they no longer have a mark-up or margin from which such expenses can be met.
Leaving that aside, the fact is that the Government and the PBRT then had to acknowledge that there were underlying

National Health Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3315

problems with the 28 August determination and that they had to address some of those problems. But at the same time the Government was still sticking to its line that the Tribunal's decision-or, as the Minister for Housing and Aged Care who is at the table likes to put it, the independent umpire's decision-must be respected. In the light of such declarations, it is interesting to note what has happened in relation to the PBRT's findings on the essential pharmacy allowance. I refer to an exchange between a Moorabbin pharmacist, Mr Leon Hain, anc;l the Chairman of the PBRT at the 18 September 1989 hearing in which Mr Hain asked the Chairman about the Tribunal's criteria for judging eligibility for the essential pharmacy allowance. Referring to the PBRT's 28 August determination, the Chairman is reported on page 86 of the transcript of proceedings as saying:
You see, some people have the view that an essential pharmacy must be isolated out in the country somewhere. We quite deliberately did not do that and we accepted that there can be very close proximity without convenient or proper access and it would still qualiFy. In other words, they could be within a couple of hundred yards, or it could be separated by a train line, for example. It is not just a matter of measuring on the map, as it were, to determine this issue as far as we are concerned.
That was said by the Chairman of the PBRT. Quite clearly, the PBRT had a view on the question of the essential pharmacy.allowance and the eligibility criteria; but in this particular regard, despite the Minister's constant declaration that the umpire's decision should be accepted, he announced on 12 September that he was appointing an expert panel, to develop, amongst other things, eligibility criteria for the essential pharmacy allowance. Further, in an undated letter to pharmacists around the country, the Minister wrote that after 1 October some pharmacists would be entitled to receive an essential pharmacy allowance based on criteria which included being 'no nearer than 10 kilometres, measured by accessible road distance, from the nearest approved pharmacy'. Quite clearly, the letter is at odds with the PBRT Chairman's statement that it is not just a matter of measuring on the map and that close proximity does not necessarily guarantee convenient or proper access to the public. My point is that it is contradictory for the

Minister to act as if the determination of th~ PBRT are inviolate when he has meddled in the essential pharmacy allowance issue. He cannot have it both ways.
It is also interesting that the Minister should persist in this view when the Government quite happily tampers with the determinations of other tribunals such as the Remuneration Tribunal in relation to parlilimentary postage allowances. In fact, at the very same time that the Minister was arguing for the PBRT's findings to be accepted; the' Prime Minister (Mr Hawke) was reported in the media as twisting Caucus members' arms to accept a review of the Remuneration Tribunal's decision on parliamentary salaries. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that a few cracks have developed in the Government's arguments about the PBRT.
I take as another example the admission on 12 November of the Minister for Community Services and Health (Dr Blewett), the more senior Minister in this area, when he said on commercial 'television:
It. would have been difficult, but no doubt the Government simply could have rejected an independent umpire's tribunal.
That totally contradicts all that his junior Minister had said time and time again in this place. The whole debate about pharmacy remuneration has been characterised by contradictions, claims, counterclaims and a very high degree of government misinformation. I want to give honourable members another example. While repeatedly stating that he had an open door policy and was willing to negotiate with pharmacists, the Minister responsible waged a deliberate campaign of denigration of pharmacy, best illustrated by the 'Talking Points to Constituents' document which his office distributed to ALP electorate offices. Say that one is totally willing to negotiate, that one's bona fides are up front and straight as a die and bag them at the other end.
These notes, or 'talking points', include statements that pharmacists had-and I quote variously-an 'inflated idea of what they should be paid', that they were 'greedy and stupid', that they were 'no better than the pilots', that they were 'trying to scare people again' and that 'they should not be believed'. To contrast them with the pilots is an abso-

3316 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

National Health Bill

lute joke. Without commenting at all on the fact, Australia's pharmacy to population ra-

pilots' claim, let me just say that they were tio is at the world level of I:3000 and de-

seeking a 30 per cent increase. Community creasing, which makes it hard for the

pharmacy was trying to protect itself from a Government to sustain its arguments for re-

23 per cent decrease. It is outrageous for the structuring to combat oversupply.

Minister, who pretends that he is open to negotiation, to make that sort of association when there is not that association to be properly made.

Let me make a fundamental point about oversupply, which one would think hardly needs to be made. If one is worried about cost overrun, blow-out of the PBS, or what-

A further contradiction can be found in ever way one likes to describe it, how can

the Minister's claims that he is interested in one blame the poor community pharmacists

giving pharmacies an expanded professional when they do not originate scripts but only

role and that he has been seeking to find fill them? Clearly the Government does not

ways of remunerating them accordingly. understand, has got it completely wrong, or

There is no doubt about the importance of knows the facts but is proceeding down this

an expanded professional role for community course for political reasons.

pharmacy. The logical extension of that professional role, and a remuneration package which underpins and supports it, is to see pharmacists happy for customers and clients to go out their doors with nothing but good advice. So we agree about the expanded role of community pharmacy. But how can the Government talk about the enhanced professional role of community pharmacy when at the same time it is hitting them to leg on their basic, fundamental remuneration packages and pursuing a policy which will drive at least 1,000 of them out of business and force the survivors-this is an important point-to dispense prescriptions on an assembly line basis, with no time

Community pharmacies are just like any other small business. They react to consumer demand, with outlets being developed or expanded in new suburbs and consolidated in older established areas. Further, Australian community pharmacy delivers prescriptions at prices which are half those of other Western countries. The community pharmacy service which Australia currently enjoys is efficient. It is a world leader in terms of computer-based patient monitoring and medication systems. It has a multi-skilled work force of 20,000 and a structure which has produced numerous ongoing patient health information services.

to participate in patient counselling and asThe prospect that all this could be under-

sociated professional activities?

mined by an ill-conceived approach to phar-

Let me turn to another aspect of the Government's claims. Part of the Government's arguments in support of cuts in pharmacy remuneration relates to the number of pharmacies in Australia per head of population. However, in making comparisons between the pharmacy to population ratio in this country and in other countries, the Government has continually set the Australian experience against that of other countries in which the ratio is above the world average.

macy remuneration is something which must not be allowed to happen. Attempts by the Government to buy its way out of trouble on this issue have not won the support of pharmacists as they do not get down to basics. Government attempts do not recognise the fact that the current remuneration formulae, based on the PBRT's findings, are wrong. But, rather than face up to this, the Minister simply continues a campaign of abuse.

It has also added to the distortion by failing Mr Deputy Speaker, you were present

to take account of the fact that in many during Question Time yesterday and would

countries, such as England, the United States have listened as members of this House were

and Canada, there is a substantial system of treated to more abuse when the Minister

alternatives dispensing outlets, such as dispoured out his rage over the pharmacists'

pensing doctors, depot dis!,ensaries, hospitals rejection of the Government's so-called latest

and mail order. If one is going to compare offer. During the tirade the Minister specu-

international circumstances, at least one lated on whether pharmacy leaders would go

should compare like with like. In point of to their members over the next couple of

National Health Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3317

days and ask for more money from them for more advertisements and more action. That is a very interesting question. But the Minister did not mention that if pharmacists contribute towards the cost of an advertising campaign they do so on a voluntary basis. There is no way they can be compelled to do so by the Pharmacy Guild of Australia, the Community and Pharmacy Support Group or any other pharmacy representative group. If they contribute to an advertising campaign to put forward their point of view to the Australian public they do so on a voluntary basis.
One cannot say that about the Government and Australian taxpayers. Australian taxpayers, in sharp contrast, have no such choice. We have already had to foot the bill for an outrageous amount of Governmentinitiated anti-pharmacy advertising. The Government has sought to plant. the idea that its spending .on the PBS constitutes the subsidisation of pharmacists and that pharmacists are doing very well out of this arrangement. In actual fact nothing could be further from the truth.
The Minister is right on one point, though. The PBS does operate on the basis of providing a subsidy. But it is the patients who are subsidised, and not the pharmacists. It is deliberate misrepresentation to pretend otherwise. Pharmacists' receipts from the PBS are not a subsidy; they are reimbursement for the cost of the products they purchase and dispense and the cost of delivering that dispensing service, including wages, rent, stock handling, stock holding, and the cost of a host of other expenses associated with running a small business.
However, patients receive a subsidy when they get their medication for far less than its actual cost. Let me give one example. A seven-day course of a preparation known as Zovirax for shingles and other complaints has a PBS list price of $217.60 but, depending on the status of the patient, it is supplied without charge, for $2.50 or for a current maximum cost of $11. The PBS provides a subsidy to patients, not to pharmacists. Let us look at Roaccutane which is prescribed for teenagers with acne. It has a PBS list price of $154.20 and again costs patients nothing, $2.50 if they are a concessional card

holders or at the moment the current maximum of $11.
All this has been glossed over by the Government in its attacks onpharmacists-attacks which it has made at the taxpayers' expense. Even worse, if the Government continues down its present path the poor old taxpayers can expect to payout a great deal more for this electoral advertising between now and the next election, whenever it is held. However, I say this: the continuing controversy over pharmacy remunerations has not only destabilised the Government-and, of course, the Prime Minister does not like the big pink signs in the windows that read, 'Pharmacy cares, does Hawke?'----,but also, the more serious charge is that it has jeopardised the health care interests of the commlJnity by destabilising the delivery of pharmaceutical services. For this reason, this dispute must be resolved without delay. It is hoped that, in view of this, and the Minister's admission that the PBRT's determination could have be~n rejected, the Government will now seriously consider supporting the Liberal and National Party's consistent stance and our amendment to this Bill, which has been agreed to by the Senate twice. With the 28 August PBRT determination revoked, the way would be clear for a return to square one. We have consistently argued for a return to square one and for the resolution of the pharmacy dispute, which, unlike the pilots dispute, cannot be wiped away by prime ministerial declaration. Given all that has taken place during the intervening weeks, it will not be solved by any method other than by this Minister simply announcing that the Government realises that the finding was wrong, that it has made a mistake in blindly trying to implement the decision, that it will go back to square one and, from that starting point, sit down with the Pharmacy Guild and, if necessary, any other appropriate representatives and start negotiating again.
Quite simply, as I close my contribution in this last debate of this year, I urge the Government to accept the Opposition's arguments on this matter. Just as the Government has now accepted our arguments that the membership of the PBRT should include a person with practical experience in community pharmacy, so it should accept this

3318 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

National Health Bill

Bill as amended by the Senate, revoke the Tribunal's determination, declare to community pharmacy, and the Pharmacy Guild in particular, that the matter has been wrongly handled and invite the Guild to sit down in genuine bona fide negotiations .and start again so that for the Australian public's sake, this debilitating and disgraceful dispute can be solved and quickly remedied.
Mr . LAMB (Streeton) (7.59)-The shadow Minister for health, the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack), said that he had been in this place for some 11 years. I am surprised about that statement, because he exhibits a very shallow understanding of the pharmacy profession, of the issues involved, and of the differences of opinion between the pharmacists, the pharmacy profession, and this Government. His comments show that he sees the dispute as being in the interest of the Opposition; that is, he does not want to see an end to the dispute at all. While there is a difference of opinion and while the. signs are on the window, the Opposition hopes to gain votes at the expense of this Government: so that is the first example of the duplicity from the honourable member opposite, and the Opposition generally. It is not iriterested in a solution.
MrRuddock~On a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker: I ask that the comments that suggest that the individual member identified, the honourable member for Tangney, was guilty of duplicity be withdrawn.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The Chair rules that there is no point of order. The proposition could be based on a political consideration.
Mr LAMB-I was talking about the shadow Minister for health; I do not know the opinion of the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) on this matter. I hope he supports the Opposition, otherwise we would have another example of division within the Opposition's ranks. Perhaps he . does differ with the honourable member for Tangney.
The record shows that the Opposition is no friend of pharmacy. Given a chance, it would hijack the campaign by the pharmacists to receive what they see as a just and reasonable remuneration for participating in

the pharmaceutical, benefits scheme. It would hijack it for its own ends. It is no friend of pharmacy. I have heard many pharmacists say that. When the Fraser Government was in power there was a drop in real terms of pharmacists, remuneration. During this Government's term there has been a long term sustained real increase in pharmacists' remuneration.
What was absent from the Opposition spokesman's contribution was what those opposite would do in government about the pharmaceutical benefits scheme. There was not one word as to how they would recoup the extra money that they sometimes suggest pharmacists should have. Perhaps-I strongly suspect this is true-they would charge pensioners for their pharmaceutical items. We would see an end to free pharmaceuticals for pensioners and we would start to see-a significant $2, $3 or $4 charge for every item. Perhaps we would see an increase for those who receive the concessional rate. Would they do what the Australian Medical Association is suggesting-which some pharmacists suggest-that is, to reduce the number of drugs on the pharmaceutical benefits scheme? Not one word from the leading Opposition spokesman on what I would expect to hear in a debate such as this.
The last months have been tough for me. That is because I am one of two pharmacists in this Federal Parliament. It has not been easy to hear many assertions and many allegations thrown about from all sides. They have been rather painful because they have been so inaccurate and misdirected. It has been difficult. For nearly 30 years I have been a qualified pharmacist. I have had my own business. I understand, first hand, not vicariously, what it takes to run a pharmacy successfully and the skills employed in delivering the pharmaceutical benefits scheme. I am in a unique position with the honourable member for Eden-Monaro (Mr Snow) to see the interests of the taxpayers, who foot the bill, to see the interests of the pharmaceutical profession and, of course, to support the Government's efforts to make sure that pharmacists receive a reasonable, fair and proven remuneration for their efforts.
I think I have been able to contribute greatly in the toing and froing during the debates and in the contributions from phar-

National Health Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3319

macists, their representatives and their representative bodies on this issue. I want to make two matters clear. The first is that this Government has always been anxious to maintain a fair and reasonable remuneration for pharmacists. It has never deviated from that course. Because there is a difference of opinion between a tribunal, which is the proper forum to determine what is fair and just remuneration, and pharmacists, that does not make the government any less sincere about its determination to make sure that a proven, just remuneration goes to pharmacists. That is the core of the dispute. When the Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal brought down its decision, it saddled its decision on both the Government and the pharmaceutical industry. It was not the product or decision of this Government that was handed down by the Tribunal; it was an independent decision, an umpire's decision. It therefore saddled and limited this Government as much as it infuriated the pharmaceutical profession.
A few words have been said about the Tribunal's decision: that this Government should have simply gone out and overthrown the Tribunal's decision by legislation through both Houses. That cannot be done. I repeat: this Government cannot overthrow that Tribunal decision. There was no contradiction between the Minister for Community Services and Health (Dr Blewett) and the Minister for Housing and Aged Care (Mr Staples), who is at the table. They both said the same thing, coming from different points. They both said it could not be done. Of course, we could do it-it is possible-but it would be the wrong way to go.
There are three ways of overthrowing, overturning or changing the Tribunal's decision. The first one is by legislation, which this Government quite properly rejects. That would undermine the authority and the independence of the Tribunal. Why have a Tribunal which can make decisions at arm's length, with all the evidence at its disposalwhich can make a dispassionate judgment on the evidence-if we are going to dismiss its findings? We just cannot go that way. Yet the Opposition, which, when in government, established the Tribunal in 1981, having learnt, after it had lost battle after battle with the pharmacists after doing them in the

eye, that an independent tribunal was needed in order to make decisions at arm's length, is now prepared to ditch the Tribunal and the principles of arm's length decision making for its own short term electoral objectives. We reject that cours~.
I asked many pharmacists what they would like changed about the Tribunal, and not one suggestion came forward. Lately, a few suggestions have come forward, but not one of them has suggested replacing the President of the Tribunal. We have heard plenty of accusations that he was not independent and that he was in the pocket of this Government. But those accusations were made only when the decision was not to their liking. On all other counts the pharmacists accepted the Tribunal's decisions time and time again. I reject totally the accusation that Joe Riordan, President of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal, is not independent.
The second point I make is that one cannot compare this Tribunal with other tribunals. I refer to the suggestion made by the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack) that the Government was prepared to overturn a decision by the Remuneration Tribunal. It was a decision, but it was not a determination. It was a recommendation-a very different thing in law and very different in practice as regards decision making in this Parliament. It was a recommendation that the Government could either accept or, through legislation, reject. The Government decided to change the Remuneration Tribunal's recommendation on parliamentarians' salaries-and the decision was to reduce the salaries recommended. Honourable members opposite are asking and some pharmacists are asking that the Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal's decision be overturned in order to increase the remuneration of pharmacists. One thing is easy for the taxpayer to understand; that is, that my colleagues here are setting an example in relation to reducing salaries, so that there will not be a wages explosion. The Government supports pharmacists receiving fair and reasonable remuneration, as proven through the Tribunal. The decision cannot simply be overturned. The two tribunals cannot be easily compared.

3320 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

National Health Bill

The second way to overthrow the Tribunal's decision would be through the legal system. Pharmacists, through the Pharmacy Guild of Australia, have done that, to their own cost. As a union representative for five years, I have always advocated to my members and academia that they should be very wary of going to the courts and seeking recourse through strict legal argument, which has very little to do with the processes and the niceties of differences of opinion over remuneration. This is because one always loses if one is looking for an overthrow on anything but a technical matter.
Whether or not a decision is overthrown through the parliament,ary process or through the legal process, the matter must still go back to the Tribunal to be reconsidered. If the Tribunal was confident in its initial decision, surely it would bring down the same decision again. The only proper and correct way for that Tribunal decision to be changed is for the Tribunal to change it itself. I have always advocated that. I have urged this Government to find ways-and a way has been found, on the initiative of the Tribunal itself, ,as I suspected would occur, because no tribunal wants to be accused of misinterpreting data or accepting flawed data. The Tribunal needs to know that its decisions will be accepted by all parties. It has now presented to the Pharmacy Guild, to the pharmacists, the opportunity to substantiate its allegations, to present it with further evidence; if the pharmacists cannot put up, they had better shut up. That is the only proper way for the Remuneration Tribunal's decision to be re-examined, explored and reevaluated. I said that to my colleagues. They did not like it, but it is coming about because any resolution has to be permanent and not a short-term political solution. It has to be an enduring solution and the processes by which the Tribunal eventually determines the remuneration to pharmacists have to be proper, sustainable and acceptable. That is not easy for the Opposition to understand because it still thinks that there are votes in this dispute; if the Opposition were a friend of pharmacy, it would argue for a proper remuneration process. <
One of the Bills before the House deals with changes to the Tribunal. Pharmacists have told me that they want a representative

of pharmacy on the Tribunal. At one stage they pointed out to me that when this Government took office, it removed such a person. On examination, I found that that was a myth. Whim the Opposition was in government there was no person on the tribunal to represent pharmacy. This Government has taken the initiative. For the first time, a person will be appointed not to' represent pharmacy, but to be a representative of pharmacy. Quite clearly, to ensure that there is no conflict of interest, that person must not be a practising pharmacist. I point out to the chamber that I am no longer a practising pharmacist and therefore there is no conflict of interest between my comments today and anything I might receive in a business.
That is one of many examples by which the Government has proved itself a friend of pharmacy because it has taken initiatives which mean that pharmacists can have greater confidence in the Tribunal's decisions and deliberations. Of course, there are others. As evidence that the Government wants to maintain fair and reasonable remuneration for pharmacists, I point to the fact that when the pharmacists' claim was stymied by the Tribunal's decision, the Government explored other ways to reward pharmacists for their services-none of which were ever paid for by the Opposition when in government and many of which are professional services not directly associated with dispensing under the pharmaceutical benefits scheme. Such services include professional advice to patients, the public, who come into pharmacies. Such initiatives as the professional practice allowance have never been offered before. The Government took that initiative independently of the Tribunal not in an attempt to buy peace, but in recognition for the first time of the other services which pharmacists provide. The Government has also recognised the limitations on the isolated pharmacy arrangement and has replaced it with the essential pharmacy arrangement so that any pharmacist can apply for the allowance if his pharmacy is five kilometres away from the nearest pharmacy.
The honourable member for Tangney in his contribution made the absolutely fallacious statement that the advice received by the Minister from the pharmacy advisory

National Health Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3321

panel and the decisions by the Government were contrary to the Tribunal's determination. The honourable member mentioned railway lines and other physical barriers which might prevent access to a particular pharmacy, even though the other pharmacy might be fewer than five kilometres away. That eventuality is already provided for. The honourable member for Tangney failed to point out that as well as the strict criterion of distance, there are other criteria by which a particular pharmacy might beconsidered to be an essential pharmacy. It is the job of a professional panel to ascertain such peculiar reasons. They might include railway lines or soine other physical barrier, but could also include things that were not mentioned by the Tribunal, such as the particular needs of an old people's village which does not have ready access to transport.
We should be honest in this debate on all matters and recognise that the Government has taken positive initiatives to recognise the full value of the profession of pharmacy and has attempted to reward pharmacists accordingly. Let us not say that this is a peace making proposal; these are new initiatives on top of what has been proved to be a fair and reasonable remuneration. Many pharmacists come to me and say they will go broke. They have shown me figures in the Tribunal's decision that they believed were wrong. However, the Tribunal has the difficulty, as it always has had, of coming out with a single figure for pharmacists-a single average figure across the system for the remuneration of pharmacists, and that is after taking account in global terms of the cost structures of pharmacies and so on.
However, each individual pharmacy has its own individual cost structure. The pharmacist down the road from my office recently pointed out that he would have to pay a $9,000 increase in his rent. Should the Tribunal change its determination to assist him? Of course, it cannot operate in that way. It cannot differentiate between low rents and high rents or between pharmacists with a different staff profile, and so on. However, the Tribunal can recognise-and I hope it does-one different element of the cost structure: the cost of keeping drugs in the dispensary. I have argued aoout this before with the Minister. His wisdom was such that

he accepted my advice, and the advice of the honourable member for Eden-Monaro (Mr Snow) and the pharmacy profession, that a mark-up component should be restored to the remuneration formula for pharmacists.
We have offered that to the pharmacists; many have agreed and some have rejected the offer. The pharmacists are split on that issue. We have advocated that we would be prepared to go with them jointly to the Tribunal and support that 5 per cent markup if they are prepared to accept the other package. That is on the top of what the Tribunal has determined is fair and reasonable remuneration. I do not mind whether it is 5 per cent or 10 per cent. If I were a practising pharmacist I would prefer 10 per cent; perhaps 5 per cent is reasonable. That question must be worked out between the Government and the pharmacists and incorporated in the Tribunal's decision, so that the overall remuneration is still within the purview of the Tribunal-within its total calculation. However, this will mean that the spread of remuneration takes into account the different drug cost structure between pharmacies.
The last comment I want to make is about restructuring. Way back in February the Victorian branch of the Pharmacy Guild told me that it thought there were too many pharmacies. There has not been a threat by the Government to close down pharmacies. The Guild thought that the oversupply in Australia was perhaps 700 to 800 pharmacies, in very loose terms. The Government responded in May with an arrangement that stipulated that We were not prepared to pay for more than 800 pharmacies. In other words, we did not make up the figure; we put a ceiling on what the taxpayer was prepared to pay to encourage the restructure. Other honourable members wish to contribute to the debate. I have spoken for a bit longer than I wanted to tonight, but as a pharmacist I amvery much involved in this matter. I thank the House for hearing me.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Ronald Edwards)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Dr WOODS (Lowe) (8.19)-1 was very disappointed to hear the honourable member

3322 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

National Health Bill

for Streeton (Mr Lamb), who should know 'ent tribunal which had no association or

something about this matter, talking such pressure from the Government to announce,

nonsense about it. He must walk around three months after it had made a decision

with cottonwool in his ears. At the beginning and just a night before the Pharmacy Guild

of his speech, he claimed that the honourable of Australia was going to consider the matter

member for Tangney (Mr Shack), the in its private meetings, that it would'review

shadow Minister for health, was concerned the matter. The timing of that just escapes

only with prolonging the dispute. The whole the imagination in terms of whether this

of the speech of the honourable member for could be a truly independent tribunal.

Tangney was about resolving the dispute. He was encouraging the honourable member for Streeton and the Minister for Housing and Aged Care (Mr Staples) to indulge in negotiations-to go back to square one. We appreciate that this would mean a loss of face for the Minister; he would have to admit that he was wrong and has been wrong all the time, but the important thing in the end is not to save face for the Minister but to resolve this dispute so that we' can get the pharmacy profession back on the right track.

Without going through the histories of the members of the Tribunal, let me say that I welcome the National Health Amendment Bill (No.2), which increases to four the number of additional members who can be appointed to the Tribunal by the Minister. Very appropriately, and at the Opposition's suggestion, it also provides that one of these additional members should have been engaged in the past in community pharmacy and that this person will be appointed only after consultation with the Pharmacy Guild.

The honourable member for Streeton kept This concern to ensure that community

on introducing the other old red herring, pharmacy is represented and that the Phar-

which is complete nonsense-and I believe macy Guild itself is consulted is admirable.

the honourable member for Eden-Monaro However, the community pharmacies around'

(Mr Snow) has also published this in a local Australia will clearly view this apparent con-

paper-that pensioner charges might be incern for them with a degree of cynicism,

troduced by the Opposition. There has never especially in the light of the Government's

been any evidence of this at all; it is purely support for the 28 August decision of the

a red herring introduced by the Government. Tribunal, which caused pharmacists around

There is no plan-no agenda at all-for in Australia to unite as they had never done

troducing pensioner charges, no agenda at all before.

for introducing concessional rate increases On 28 August the PBRT recommended a

and we have no association with, the proposnumber of things. The first was the abolition

als by the Australian Medical Association of any mark-up that chemists place upon

(AMA) to reduce the number of drugs. Thes,e already prepared items. It is unimaginable

are just red herrings to try to take the heat how any other business would be expected

off the Government which, in the experience to do without any mark-up on products that

of a large number of long standing members it sells, but the Minister for Housing and

here, has mismanaged this matter probably Aged Care and the PBRT thought this was

in the worst possible way.

a wonderful idea for pharmacists. The sec-

The honourable member for Streeton did say something sensible. He said that he wanted reasonable and fair remuneration for the pharmacists. But somehow he then said that a 12 per cent cut last year and a 23 per cent cut this year are both reasonable and fair to pharmacists. The logic of that completely escapes me. He also referred to the independence of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal (PBRT). Anybody who really believes that the PBRT is com-

ond recommendation was to slash dispensing fees by $1.05 per item. Those recommendations, which came in at the beginning of this month, should reduce funding to community pharmacies by around about $120m. Individually, on average, it means slashing the income of pharmacists by 23 per cent. At the same time that other professions and trades around the country are looking at increases in their incomes, the Government expects pharmacists to take a cut in their incomes.

pletely independent expects pigs to fly. I Mr Carlton-That is what the accord has

think it is really surprising for an independdone for pharmacists.

National Health Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3323

Dr WOODS-The accord has indeed done that for pharmacists, and so much for the accord. It is another example of the failure of the accord, is it not?
Estimates indicate that something like 1,000 pharmacies are expected to close because they are no longer viable. If income is cut by 23 per cent, viability is a problem. The average remuneration which the qualified pharmacists, not the shop assistants, would actually receive would be around $15 an hour. This is less than half the rate that the aged Minister for housing and care-I am sorry, the Minister for aged housing and care; I will get it right, the Minister for Housing and Aged Care; he just looks a little more aged than he used to--
Mr Carlton-He has aged over the last few weeks.
Dr WOODS-I cannot imagine why that is, but he certainly looks more aged. That rate of $15 an hour is less than half the rate that the Minister would pay middle range government pharmacists and it is significantly less, of course, than the rate paid to pretty well any other tradespeople. Pharmacists within my own electorate of Lowe have told me that they will lose hundreds of dollars a week and will have to layoff assistants from their pharmacies. In particular, this applies to thousands of female pharmacy staff, who will lose their jobs.
Hundreds of students have suddenly had to re-evaluate their career plans and pharmacists nearing the end of their careers, who had hoped to sell their businesses which they had built up over many years as provision for their retirement, no longer have a business which anybody would buy. In the current climate, who would buy a pharmacy? Just the fact that thousands of female pharmacy staff took a day off and travelled in pouring rain from all over Australia to Canberra to protest about this indicates the strength of feeling about this matter. It was also very interesting to note the complete absence of Government members at the rally of pharmacy staff.
Another matter is that late night pharmacies and after hours services, which obviously have higher overheads, will be one of the first victims of the cuts in remuneration to pharmacists. Quite clearly~ the returns will

not justify the operating expenses. Understandably, .pharmacists are indignant because, on the one hand, the Government does not treat them as professionals-it does not allow them anything for the advice and the counselling which they offer-and, on the other hand, it does not alIow them to act like shopkeepers. Every shopkeeper has a mark-up on his goods, but pharmacists lose out both ways. They do not get a professional fee and they do not get a mark-up. Goodness knows how they are expected to pay their rents, running costs, staff wages and other overheads.
It is unfortunately clear that the implementation of the PBRT will force many pharmacists to reduce the services which they provide-:-many of which they provide free. It will. also mean they will not be able to carry large stocks of drugs, particularly expensive drugs, and patients may have to wait several days for the pharmacist to order them. A drug called Ancotil was brought to my attention by Phil O'Grady, who is a pharmacist in Auburn, near my electorate. He paid $136 to get that drug from the wholesaler and he will be remunerated the princely sum of $133. He incurs a loss of $3 in prescribing this drug, yet the Government expects these pharmacists to survive.
Of course, the .ultimate victims are the customers-the frail, the sick, the elderly, the parents with young children who will not be able to seek advice from the local chemist and, in particular, the pensioners because they make up approximately 85 per cent of the population which uses prescription drugs from community pharmacists. Clearly, another problem is that the implementation of the recommendation will lead to long-term losses, although it might bring short-term gains. The ability, of chemists to give medical advice stops people from going into hospitals, seeing their doctors or going into nursing homes. The pharmacists' services reduce the need for hospitalisation and, quite clearly, improve the quality of patients' lives.
I think even the Ministers who are present would agree that pharmacists have actualIy provided good evidence of increased productivity and, whereas any other group which provided increased productivity would get a wage rise, the pharmacists get a reduction of 23 per cent. That is a great repayment for

3324 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

National Health Bill

being more productive! The Government is talking about associating wage increases with productivity, as is the Opposition, although our idea is that if one increases productivity one gets more for it, not less. I think it would work a little better our way than the Government's way.
The Government justified its initial decision to cut costs 18 months ago by a number of measures, most of which it has had to withdraw, like changes to the authority-only drug list, doubling of dosages per prescription, delisting of frequently prescribed drugs, and that amazing attempt to reduce the professional fee by 10 per cent which was overturned on appeal to the Federal Court. The Government had to withdraw that, as it has had to withdraw most other things and will eventually have to withdraw this entire nonsense about pharmacy remuneration being cut.
The Government justified its initial decision to put 53 drugs on the authority-only list by saying that costs would rise by 43 per cent whereas, in reality, it looked at a very selective time for the market-a time when people under the safety net were stocking up on drugs before the end of the year, while they could get. them for free, rather than waiting until January when they would have had to pay for them. Of course, the prescription rate went up, but the Government was unable to realise that. It has also failed to realise that counselling by pharmacists is vital to the patients to make sure they get the best benefit from their medication. The sum of $700m a year is wasted because of non-compliance with prescriptions, according to a report by the Health Economics and Technology Assessment Corporation. The Government should be addressing that area rather than trying to save $120m-or $60m as it is now, with the latest offer-from the pharmacists in our community.
One area which will suffer is the Webster system-the multi-dosage system to dispense medication-which is clearly under threat because of this recommendation. It is used for about 18,000 nursing home and hostel patients around Australia. Pretty well every nursing home that uses it aCknowledges its success. It involves inserting the prescribed drugs into little blister packs, which is obviously labour intensive and time consuming

and, therefore, expensive for the pharmacists. Most pharmacists who are involved in this are happy to do so as it means they will get more prescriptions coming their way because they are able to offer this extra service and also it ensures that medication regimes are correctly taken and followed up, which improves the health of the patients. Pharmacies will not be able to carry out that extra cost any longer. It means that the Webster system and similar systems will no longer be carried out by their proponents.
The honourable member for Tangney touched upon the document faxed from the Minister's office to all Labor members with suggested replies to queries about the pharmacy dispute. It indicates some of his views about pharmacists, and there have been private comments from him, which I will not repeat here, which confirm these -reports. The letter stated things like:
They have got an inflated idea of what they should be paid. They are doing okay. Look how many of them there are. They are greedy and stupid. They are no better than the pilots.
I am not sure whether that is a complement or not, but either way it is a pretty unpleasant thing to say. Other things were: .
They are trying to scare people again. Don't believe them. Of course, they callously used pensioners and worried people in their campaign'last time.
The recent $60m package that they were offered with great fanfare was really just another bandaid stop-gap attempt to keep the pharmacies quiet in the lead-up to the election. It has not worked because the pharmacists have seen through it. Last Tuesday night another deal was drawn up between the Western Australian Pharmacy Group offering a remuneration of $4.55 per prescription and a 10 per cent mark-up, so the Government did actually accept that a markup is reasonable, as any common sense human being would do. Also, this is only until this independent Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal (PBRT) was urged to have a new inquiry into pharmacists' remuneration. The views around Australia have yet to be affirmed, but perhaps the comments of Jim Jackson, the Community and Pharmacy Support Group Chairman, were pretty clear when he said that the Government was:

National Health Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3325

. . . in relllity skulking lIbout holding secret meetings with a small group of pharmacists in a cynical exercise in political expediency . . . It is apparent that Mr Hawke and Mr Staples will do anything to take the heat off the Government in the lead up to the election.
The coalition position is in fact very clear. On election to government, we will create a body which has a better understanding of the role of community pharmacy. We will develop a formula for the calculation of remuneration based upon allowances or markup, dispensing costs and professional advice, and for the regular adjustment of remuneration in line with changes in the CPI. We have stated that we will remove price controls on items costing less than the maximum contribution, and will seek to process and pay pharmacists' manual and computerised claims without delay. This is something that the Government keeps on promising, but never actually achieves. The coalition will establish an active consultative arrangement between government and pharmacists involved in the supply and delivery of goods and services in the pharmacy area to deal with those matters which actually at present fall outside the scope of the PBRT, or its replacement. Also, we will seek a review into the activities of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC) and the Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing Authority (PBPA) to ensure that they make efficient and effective contributions to the health scheme.
In conclusion, one thing I have to ask the House is: What is the real reason behind all this? Why is the Government going through this? We are talking about a sum of $120m, or thereabouts, in a basic health budget of $8.5 billion, depending on how one does the figures. Why on earth would the Government want to suffer so much, especially now that out of that $120m the Government is giving back $60m1When one considers that at present the options for pharmacists are to accept a cut of $120m or a cut of $60m, it is rather like being offered the chance to be run down by a 5-tonne truck or a 10-tonne truck. Of course, the real reason is that the pharmacists were seen as a soft option. The Government wanted to save money. It had the choice. It could either attack the pensioners, which is probably not a wise political thing to do, or it could attack the large drug

companies, which have plenty of money and muscle and good lobbying power, but that perhaps is not a wise thing to do either. The Government attacked what it thought was the soft target: the soft middle group-community pharmacists. There is no doubt in my mind that that was the reason why the pharmacists bore the brunt of this attack, and 'attack' is the right word for it.
I also believe there is a hidden agenda. As time has gone on we have had clues to this. On many occasions the Minister has said that he wants to reduce pharmacists-the figure varies according to him and .his De~ partment-by some thousands. He probably wants to finish up with a pharmacy group of around 3,000 as opposed to 5,500 at present. There are no savings at all in that for the Government because, although the Minister probably does not realise, it is not the pharmacists who write the scripts; actually the doctors write the scripts. Cutting down the number of pharmacists will not cut down the number of scripts and therefore the amount people pay for them, unless, of course, the Minister turns around and says, 'There are fewer of you earning much more, because there are fewer of you, and therefore the cost per item to the Government should be lowered. Therefore, we will cut your incomes again'. Never mind the fact that, if a doctor is prescribing, twice as many scripts, the Government may need twice as many pharmacists and pharmacists' assistants to do it, and the overheads will be twice as heavy. Clearly, the Government d.oes not worry about things like that. It will actually say that it should therefore reduce the pharmacists' remuneration. It could even go further. It could say, 'We will look to having community pharmacies turned into supermarkets. We will have supermarket-type pharmacies and an assembly line type doling out of pills. We will not have this nonsense about professional advice or safety checks. We will take pot luck on that. We will just have an assembly line churning along and as you walk past you will get the pills passed out to you. That is a much simpler procedure and therefore, I am afraid, you pharmacists will have to take another cut in salary'.
Another point is that, with fewer pharmacies, the Government would have more

3326 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

National Health Bill

control. That is what this Government is about and not just in this area but also, as we saw yesterday, in the education area. It is about centralisation of control within this Government, within this Minister's department. The end result would be that the high regard in which pharmacists are held by the public at present would be lowered. It is a group which is still held in high regard by the vast majority of the public. If it starts to fall from that position, as it would do if pharm~cies became supermarket pharmacies, it would go to incredible depths. Pharmacists may even end up being held in as low regard as politicians, which is somewhere down below real estate salesmen and used car salesmen at present, I think. They would no longer. be professionals; they would become assembly line workers.
It is very clear to any independent observer that pharmacists will win their battle. They will finish up with an independent Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal which will give them a fair and reasonable deal. To put it politely, the treatment they have received from the Government so far has been shabby. There have been a few gestures recently, but what the pharmacy profession needs is far more than that. It needs a realistic offer to restore pharmacy to what it should be: a respectable profession which is repaid in an appropriate way for the contribution it makes to our community.
The first move to do this should be to accept the Senate's amendments and to overturn the Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal's decision, start from square one and hold sensible, considered negotiations with the pharmacy groups to offer them a fair and reasonable remuneration for the wonderful job they do for our country.
Mr NEHL (Cowper) (8.37)-I rise to speak in this debate with some interest. I commend the honourable member for Lowe (Dr Woods) on his contribution to it. Like the honourable member for Lowe, I am very concerned about the situation of pharmacies in Australia. The Minister for Housing and Aged Care (Mr Staples), who is at the table, has embarked on a sort of demolition derby. All he has done is to seek to destroy the Australian pharmacy industry. I would like to put on the record once again some of the pertinent facts about Australian pharmacies.

In the April economic statement the Hawke Government decided to take away $31m from pharmacists' income in 1989-90; a further $96m in 1990-91 and a further $156m in 1991-92. That amounts to a total loss of income for Australian pharmacies of $283m over a period of three years. It will come as no surprise to anybody who knows what pharmacies do in this country and how pharmacists treat the people of Australia that there is greatconcern for themin the community. The Australian Institute of Pharmacy Management estimates that possibly 1,000 pharmacies could close by 1991. If that were to be the case it would be absolutely disastrous-not just for the pharmacies but for the people they serve.
It should be made very clear that in the year 1987-88 the cost of drugs supplied by pharmacists rose by 25.7 per cent and average weekly earnings rose by 5.9 per cent, but the remuneration of pharmacies rose by only 4.4 per cent. If one looks at this over a slightly longer period, over the past two years the consumer price index rose by 17.4 per cent and average weekly earnings rose by 13.1 per cent, but again pharmacy remuneration rose by only 4.5 per cent. If one examines the logic of these figures, showing that costs are rising and remuneration is going down in relative terms, it. is quite impossible for pharmacists to carryon.
Over the last five years the cost of goods supplied by pharmacists in meeting scripts rose by 101 per cent. The cost oflabour over that five-year period rose by 87 per cent. However, the average pharmacy remuneration from scripts rose by only 44 per cent. They are simple figures but they demonstrate and illustrate quite clearly that Australian pharmacies are not doing well at all. Obviously some pharmacists in some circumstances are doing well. The honourable member for Lowe referred to the demonstration, the rally, by thousands of women from around Australia outside this Parliament House. They stood in the pouring rain because of their concern not only about the people they serve but about their jobs. There are 35,000 people employed in pharmacies around Australia, and a great many of them are mightily concerned because they-.-know that their jobs are at risk. I think it is very fair to say that the people of Australia know

National Health Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3327

that when they visit their friendly family chemists they will get some compassion, some care and some concern.
I would like to bring to the Minister's attention the concern of one of the pharmacies in my electorate at Port Macquarie. I refer the Minister to his press release of 26 September 1989, which has the reference number PS140j89, with a headline 'Wholesalers agree to drop surcharges on high cost drugs'. The press release said:
'It would not now be possible for pharmacists to claim that they would lose money on any high cost drugs because of wholesaler surcharging,' Mr Staples said.
The Minister said that there would be no reason for pharmacists to claim that they could not stock high cost drugs.
Well, I have news for the Minister: he was wrong then and he is still wrong. I would also like to refer to a note I have from the pharmacist in Port Macquarie to whom I referred earlier. His note says:
My Pharmacy dispenses medication to the Port Macquarie Private Hospital. Many of these medications are required urgently in life saving situations. On the \5.11.89 we were required to dispense a NHS
Authority item called Zoladex (one + 5 x Repeats,
Regulation 24) i.e. dispense 6 x Zoladex for the supposed immense financial return of $4.20-
which is the very generous dispensing fee, soon to be $3.50-
Following several urgent long distance phone calls-
all, of course, at the expense of the pharmacist-
. . . we obtained the 6 x Zoladex for a cost price to me-
that is, the pharmacist-
of $2223.60.
If the Minister would like confirmation, I have a copy of the invoice from Australian Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd. It is quite clear that the six Zoladex cost $2,223.60. The pharmacist concerned then rang the Department of Community Services and Health in Canberra, to be informed by one of the Minister's officers that his national health scheme (NHS) recovery price on dispensing this script would be a grand total of $2,176.62. So for the privilege of purchasing drugs worth over $2,200 he would have sustained a loss of $46. Added to this, he would have to wait six to eight weeks at the very least to be paid under the NHS. As well as

the $46 loss on dispensing the drugs, the pharmacist has to pay whatever interest rate his bank is charging him. Goodness knows, we all know that under the complete destruction of the Australian economy and soaring interest rates, he is probably paying somewhere between 22 per cent and 25 per cent interest on his overdraft.
I must say that I find it totally wrong that the Minister can expect the pharmacists of Australia to fork out their money, wait six or eight weeks to be paid, and then make a loss on the transaction. Pharmacists do it, and they do it unfailingly, because they are concerned and caring and compassionate and it is a lifesaving situation. But it is wrong. It is not right that the Minister should say to any pharmacist in Australia, 'Right, you do the business. You run your business. You pay your staff, pay your rent, pay your electricity, pay your overdraft, and make a loss because we will not do the right thing by you'. I say to the Minister that when he says that there is now no reason for pharmacists to claim that they could not stock high cost drugs, he is wrong, wrong, wrong. All the pharmacists want is fair and reasonable treatment. It is not a great deal to ask. But they are not getting it. They have not got it from the Hawke Labor Government. They will not get it from the present Government. I say without hesitation to the pharmacists of Australia and to those millions of people that they serve so very well that with a coalition government after the next election-mark my words, there will be a coalition government after the next electionthey will receive what they want. They want fair and reasonable treatment, and we will give it to them in government after the next election.
Mr WRIGHT (Capricornia) (8.46)-I rise to support the proposals put before the House particularly as they relate to the additional members that should be allowed on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal. I was quite surprised when the shadow spokesman, the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack), on behalf of the Opposition, argued against this because this has been one of the issues that has constantly been brought to my attention by members of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia.
Mr Shack-We are in favour of it.

3328 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

National Health Bill

Mr WRIGHT-The honourable member is now, but he was critical to start with. I was here when he was speaking. He was making some critical comment as if this were an innovation. In fact, the honourable member made the point that it was only introduced yesterday. Does he realise that to bring down this legislation and ensure that it can work for any further deliberations by the Tribunal, we have to get it through? In bringing down this legislation, the Minister for Housing and Aged Care (Mr Staples) is ensuring that someone who is directly engaged in community pharmacy shall have a say at the Tribunal level. I believe all members would support that.
I do not rise to debate that aspect. I rise to answer some of the comments that have been made and to try to get some clarity into this issue. I have been involved in it now for inany months. One ought to hark back to the May period when the Minister involved and responsible for pharmacy in this country, the Minister for Housing and Aged Care, put a proposition to the Guild that I would think any reasonable person would accept. The proposition had, as components, a mark up, a variable dispensing fee that would ensure that those who were in small pharmacies received a reasonable remuneration and those in large pharmacies received, again, fair payment. However, we saw at that time that the Guild, for whatever reason, rejected it. It chose to go to the Tribunal. It knew at that time that by going there the decision would be binding; it would be final. Despite that finality, the Government in its wisdom has seen fit, as has the Tribunal, to undertake a review.
I appeal to those who are involved in pharmacy in this country to take part in that review. I have a release which has been sent to me by the Pharmacy Guild of Australia. It starts by saying:
The Pharmacy Guild has called on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal to immediately restore a gross margin of $4.55 for pharmacists dispensing medicine.
That is the offer that this Government, through our Minister, made 48 hours ago. That is the offer that this Government, after consultation with pharmacists right across this nation, believed was fair. It is an offer that was rejected by the Guild.

Mr Snow-That is right. Mr WRIGHT-I hear the interjection coming from the honourable member for Eden-Monaro in supportive ways. One starts to wonder about the mentality of those who are leading the Guild. As a member of the Labor Caucus, I was elected to be on a special Caucus committee to sit down and talk with the Guild about what it thought was fair remuneration. After a number of meetings in my own electorate, I then sat with the Pharmacy Guild heads of this nation and we argued through what was fair. We talked around the parameters of $4.20, $4.50 and $4.60 as being fair gross remuneration. Twenty-four hours later they came back to that committee and asked not for $4.50 or $4.60, but $6.30. One starts to wonder why. I really believe that what it is all about is politics. I believe there are people in that Guild who have at heart the future, the general quality of life and the importance of integrity in the profession of the pharmacy industry. But there are those who are playing politics. I substantiate my claims by a release that was put out by the Guild and regrettably taken up by a local member of the Guild-in fact, a central Queensland representative of the Guild-Wayne Daniels. I might say that he is a personal friend. I have known him for 25 years and I respect him. I have already spoken to him about his using this information without double checking. What the Guild has done, setting aside the pharmacy debate as regards remuneration, is come back and totally misconstrue and distort a proposition involving. the Health Insurance Commission (HIC), which administers Medicare. It is in the process of designing a new computerised payment system to modernise and streamline the pharmacy system. This has not been done by adopting a fait accompli approach where the HIC says, 'This is what you shall do'; It has been done by consultation. The Queensland guild knows this and the Australian national guild knows it but, for whatever reasonand I do not know the reason except that there is some sort of political motivationthe Pharmacy Guild has put out a release saying that this proposition is little more than Big Brother watching you, or the introduction of the Australia Card by backdoor

National Health Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3329

means. It knows that that is not true but it is saying it and one wonders why. The new computerised system will connect all pharmacies with the central system and will allow direct claims to be made by the pharmacy. It will eliminate all the double handling and unnecessary separate billing. It will also enable pharmacies to check immediately on the entitlement status of each script.
That is important because an assessment has been made by the Auditor-General that, over a period, there could be some sort of fraudulent component in the system that could be quantified at something like $30m. Yet, instead of the Guild coming out and saying, 'This is part of our discussions; this is the consequence of our sitting down and deliberating with the Government, through the HIC, as to how we can clean up the system', the Guild is running round trying to make out that a Big Brother mentality is overtaking this country. It has made the outlandish claim that, somehow, everybody's health information will be tied up with taxation information and it has been linked up with some sort of re-entry of the Australia Card. When the Guild does that, one must say that it is suspect and that the reason it is doing it is suspicious.
I can only hope that those who are fair dinkum and really want to ensure the best possible deal for the pharmacists, and more importantly their clients, will, most importantly, be part of the review that the Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal is advocating. Ireiterate that that is the offer that was made by the Minister for Housing and Aged Care. He offered the $4.55 gross, which included a 10 per cent mark-up and which now the Pharmacy Guild of Australia is asking for. But the Minister put a rider on it. He asked them to present evidence before the inquiry and, for whatever reason, they refused. Other members of this Parliament have sat down with Guild members and they have repeatedly told us that the database of the first inquiry left much to be desired. Here is their opportunity now to present evidence to a new inquiry, a renovated inquiry, to argue out their case-and they have said no.
I hope that common sense will prevail because people in my electorate want to take

advantage of the $80,000 amalgamation fee. Pharmacists throughout central Queensland want to take advantage of the $1.05 special payment as an essential pharmacy. People in my electorate want to take advantage of being paid as professionals under the new $46m professional payment that the Minister was proposing. Yet, because of the Guild, almost a barrier is being built and I believe that the barrier has been built not because the elements are concerned about remuneration for pharmacists but because they are concerned about politics. That has been backed up by the sort of political signs put up in pharmacies all Over this country. I call out to those who are fair dinkum, to those who really want to do the right thing by their clients and their industry, to get involved in their Guild.
It seems to me that, in the past, the Pharmacy Guild has run the show. It has not gone back to its 5,600 members; it has made the decisions and I doubt very much whether it bothered to contact even one-tenth of those members when it came to its rejection of the original May offer. I doubt-I would like it challenged; Mr Matthews might like to say publicly-whether he went back to the majority of his members, or to any of his members, to talk through the proposition that Minister Staples put up only 48 hours ago when he offered the $4.55 gross, which included this 10 per cent mark-up.
I believe that pharmacists ought to have the 10 per cent mark-up. I believe that they ought to get fair remuneration because, after all, they are running a pharmaceutical scheme on behalf of the community and the Government. But they are not to be involved in a rip-off and that is what seems to be the attitude of some. There seem to be those who have a cash register mentality and that is all they are worried about. The other side of this is their politics and they will do and say anything to score politically. So I appeal to those responsible members of the Guild to sit down and think through what the Minister has offered and do the correct thing for their clients, their patients and the customers that they serve in this country.
Mr STAPLES (Jagajaga-Minister for Housing and Aged Care) (8.57)-in replyIn summing up I would like to make a number of points but, first of all, I express

3330 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

National Health Bill

my appreciation to the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack) and the Opposition for realising the urgency of getting the National Health Amendment Bill (No.2) 1989 tlirough this House as quickly as possible and, in that process, obviously truncating the normal forms and the business of the House; for allowing extra time for this Bill to remain on the table; and for facilitating the processes of this Bill in the Opposition's party rooms.
I would like to turn to some of the issues the honourable member for Tangney raised in his speech. I mention the issue of the constitution of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal (PBRT). Obviously, the Government is quite happy to have a person who has had pharmacy experience on the Tribunal. Obviously, it would be very difficult, and probably improper, to have on the Tribunal someone who is a practising pharmacist and involved in a business because of the conflict of interest; I think most people would understand that.
One of the issues that the honourable member for Tangney raised related to the 28 August determination, which he described as wrong. Of course, that has been said many times by many people, but I would say that the honourable member is relatively short on real justification. If there is justification to be had, the Tribunal has given pharmacists, or any other person for that matter, an opportunity to indicate clearly and in factual terms where that determination is wrong. It is not good enough for people to say that it is wrong; there has to be a much higher level of justification than that.
It is important for the House to note, in considering the passage of this legislation, that on two occasions the PBRT's decision has been put through the Federal Court of Australia. On both occasions, obviously, it was not rejected, although some elements of the judge's decisions have to be taken up. It is certainly quite clear that the Tribunal's decision, by whatever analysis, is fair and reasonable.
I would also like to address the question that the honourable member for Tangney raised regarding surcharges. What is important in this regard is that the Government has been given information-in fact the same

information that was supplied to the Tribunal-by the distributors in a letter which clearly indicated that the level of surcharge was less overall than the level of discounts that applied to pharmacy. Of course, the Government cannot be responsible for the 5,600-odd pharmacies around Australia and their individual financial situations, in terms of both stock management and the payment processes that they go through.
Quite clearly, the Tribunal has taken the distributors' point and the Government, in fact on the direction of the Tribunal, has been willing to make adjustments for high cost drugs-that is, those over $45-to make sure that no problems are associated in that way.
The honourable member for Tangney referred to the essential pharmacy allowance and again mentioned the Tribunal. I am not sure whether he is just trying to make an issue out of this or whether he simply does not understand the determination and recommendation aspects of the Tribunal. The honourable member for Streeton (Mr Lamb) made the position very clear. I thank him for his contribution to the overall debatenot only the debate in the House but also the debate in the community.
Quite clearly, the Tribunal in its determination set the fee for the essential pharmacy allowance. It also set some guidelines, but basically it was up to the Government. The Government developed the guidelines into criteria, as it was in its power to do. The Government did this in consultation with pharmacy. Included in the interim guidelines was the matter of distance which the honourable member for Tangney referred to specifically. He mentioned 10 kilometres. The Tribunal, in setting the guidelines, said that special cases may apply because of 'physical barriers such as railways, roads, islands or whatever. Those criteria still exist: the Government did not change any of the criteria. There is to be a meeting tomorrow of the committee that will assess the applications. A number of pharmacists are members of the committee which will determine whether an essential pharmacy allowance should be paid in special circumstances.
The honourable member for Tangney and a number of honourable members opposite

National Health Bill

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3331

who have contributed to the debate have to be very careful when they talk about the Tribunal's independence, the Government's interference in the determination, et cetera, because they are confusing a tribunal which has the power to make a determination-in other words, something that cannot be revoked simply at the whim of governmentwith a tribunal that makes a recommendation. The power for the Tribunal to make a determination exists in legislation brought into the Parliament of Australia by those opposite. They gave power to the Tribunal to determine rather than recommend pharmacy remuneration.
That needs to be put squarely in context. It is in contrast to the proposals that the Opposition would put before the Parliament now which would allow Parliament to intervene in that process. It was set up in 1981 in that way specifically to ensure that pharmacy remuneration was not subject to the whim of government, political pressure or whatever. For the first time since the pharmaceutical benefits scheme (PBS) was introduced, pharmacy remuneration was to be set by an independent tribunal and that would be it, subject obviously to the whole legislation being overthrown by the Parliament or it being challengedand overthrown in the court. There is a very big difference between a determining tribunal and one that recommends. In the case of pharmacy the Tribunal determines; as I understand it, in the case of members of parliament the Tribunal recommends, and hence the decision is subject to the deliberations, if you like, of the executive government and the Parliament.
I think the honourable member for Tangney also spoke about the fact that phar': macists could not be blamed for the cost blow-out, and in some respects that is true. No-one is blaming the pharmacists for the cost blow-out, as it is put, but the fact is that for a number of reasons a cost blow-out has occurred in the pharmaceutical benefits scheme. The point has been made by a number of people about the issuing of prescriptions. That, of course, is a very important element and one the Government is addressing in a number of ways through PBS education, and it will continue to develop that aspect in the near future. The point also needs to be fairly acknowledged by those

opposite that, because of the rapid increase in the pharmaceutical benefits scheme over the last couple of years, and particularly in view of the increases that will occur in the future, pharmacy has gained considerably, and its own figures show it. That is particularly because of the 25 per cent mark up that has applied up until 1 November.
The honourable member for Tangney said that the issue must be resolved, but he does not provide any solution at all. Again, in his speech to the Pharmacy Guild of Australia the other night he offered no solutions. He made a lot of nice statements and I am sure everyone was very fond of them. However, pharmacy is very well aware of the history of the honourable member's Party in government and knows how it suffered under his Government up until 1983. Before the pharmacists go any further they will be very keen to hear about the real dollars-not just about what is fair and reasonable. We will not see those for a long time to come because, as the Minister for Community Services and Health (Dr Blewett) clearly outlined today, the Opposition does not have a policy and, even when it does get a policy, it will not let it out for a long time.
The Guild's position is also interesting when we consider the cost of the so-called blow-out of the PBS. Mr Matthews, the President of the Pharmacy Guild, in a speech the other night at the same dinner at which the honourable member for Tangney spoke, suggested that the ways in which the cost could be contained are to increase significantly the PBS budget or to ask the user to pay more or to re-examine the list of available benefits. They are not very good solutions to the issue. What we are talking about in terms of pharmacy remuneration is basically that we have a tribunal that is there to set remuneration, and I think that process should be allowed to occur. If we do not do that we will certainly go back to the law of the jungle.
The honourable member for Streeton made some very important contributions to this debate. I was a little concerned while he was speaking about the comments made across the chamber by the honourable member for Mackellar (Mr Carlton)-I do not know whether they were recorded in Hansard; I doubt it-referring to the independence of

3332 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

National Health Bill

the Tribunal. Many other speakers have referred to that matter. When people make comments such as that, in Parliament or in public, it is important that they substantiate them or have the grace at least to keep such opinions to themselves. If they cannot substantiate such comments they should not make those sorts of allegations against a properly constituted tribunal. It is a very serious allegation to make against what is, in effect, almost a court situation, a justice situation. The Opposition would propose that the PBRT decision be overturned.
Dr Woods-Come on, Peter. Mr STAPLES-The honourable member for Lowe took a good 20 minutes; I will take mine. I think that quite clearly shows the Opposition's inability to govern, because that would just throw the whole issue back into a political bunfight. What this Government has been able to achieve is the due process of law, and that is the way in which the issue will be resolved-not simply by a lot of huffing and puffing all around the country, but by due process. The honourable member for Lowe made a speech which lasted for about 20 minutes. I think that he should check his greens to see whether he has made slips of the tongue, or else he should check his facts, because he made quite a number of statements and quoted statistics that are simply inaccurate. I will not go into all the details. I will read what he said later, because I think he got some of his percentages and cents, cents and per cents and a whole lot of other things mixed up there. One thing he said was that there had been a 10 per cent reduction in the dispensing fee. Maybe it was a slip of the tongue, but I think he will find that it was a 10c reduction. He spoke about a 43 per cent increase. Mr Rocher-Ten cents in the dollar is 10 per cent. Mr STAPLES-There we go. One cannot beat that. A 10c reduction in a dispensing fee of $2.54 is nowhere near 10 per cent. I suspect that that is probably the level of mathematical rectitude that has been evident over there on many occasions. The problem is that honourable members opposite either do not understand how this process comes about or they do not want to understand.

The Opposition talks about the Government cutting the number of pharmacists. The Government does not make that decision. It did not make a decision in Budget to cut the number of pharmacists; it was not a fiscal attack of the Government. That is why the PBRT is there-to determine what is the proper fee to be paid. It is not a decision of government to decide such a fee.
The honourable member for Lowe also spoke about supermarkets, production lines and all the rest of it. Without going into it any deeper, I think he has totally misrepresented a concept which this Government does not have any control to implement anyway. He is again trying either to misrepresent the facts or he is simply confused. The honourable member for Lowe also made suppositions on the numbers, but I do not think that is really worth referring to.
The honourable member for Cowper (Mr Nehl) in his contribution clearly failed to grasp the concept that it is not a government decision but a decision of the PBRT. He also made reference to the cost of goods having risen by 101 per cent and the cost of .labour. Of course, those figures are there, but what the honourable member does not quite understand is that pharmacists receive, because of the 25 per cent mark-up, a very substantial flow-on from that increase in the cost of goods. In terms of the cost of labour, that area was adjusted by the PBRT. I think the figures really do speak for themselves. In terms of the growth in pharmacy remuneration, over the period from 1982-83 to 198889, there was a 93.7 per cent increase in pharmacy remuneration compared to the consumer price index (CPI) over that period of 52.2 per cent and average weekly earnings of 48.9 per cent. I have never said that that is equivalent to pharmacy profits or anything like that, but if we want to talk about pharmacy incomes, the Guild Digest also shows over the period from 1982-83 to 1987-88 an average increase of income of 83.6 per cent compared to the CPI of 41.8 per cent.
We also need to put into context the position of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia today. It put to the Government last Friday a claim to settle the issue, as it would call it. Basically, its claim involved $5.05 per script which, in 1990-91, will be $125 million over and above the $60 million package that

National Health Amendment Bill 30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3333

the Government decided on a number of weeks: ago. That is a 40 per cent increase over the next two years. The Government's package of $60 million was, on average, about a 12 per" cent increase over the next two years.
A 23 per cent cut has been talked about and a whole lot of other statistics have been thrown around in regard to this issue, both in this House and outside it, but we have to get a bit of reality back into the issue and realise that we have to deal through a proper process. That proper process is the PBRT, whose hearing on this issue concluded the other day. It would have allowed the Pharmacy Guild to properly present its case. The Guild made a lot of assertions and some very wild claims. It has now had the opportunity to prove them in front of the PBRT in the proper way.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Debate (on motion by Mr Staples) read a third time.
NATIONAL HEALTH AMENDMENT BILL 1989
Consideration of Senate's message resumed from 26 October.
Senate's message-
The Senate' returns to the House of Representatives the Bill for "An Act to amend the 'National Health Act /953', and for related purposes", and acquaints the House that the Senate does not insist upon its Amendment No. 1 disagreed to by the House of Representatives and has agreed to the Amendment and consequential Amendment made by the House in place thereof, and insists upon its Amendment No.2 disagreed to by the House of Representatives.
The Senate desires the reconsideration of the Bill in respect of Amendment No.2.
Motion (by MrStaples) put:
That the House insists on disagreeing to the amendment insisted on by the Senate.
The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr Ronald Edwards)

Ayes . . . .

62

Noes . . . .

44

Majority

18

AYES
Baldwin, P. J.
Beazley, K. C. Beddall, D. P. Bilney, G. N. Blanchard, C. A. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, Robert Campbell, G.
Charles, D. E. Charlesworth, R. I. Chynoweth, R. L. Cleeland, P. R. Court ice, B. W. Crawford, M. C. Dubois, S. C. Duffy, M. J. Falin, W. F. Fitzgibbon, E. J.
Free, R. V. Gear, G. Grace, E. L. (Teller) Hand, G. L. Harvey, E. R. Hollis,C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. Jakobsen, C. A.
Jenkins, H. A. K.erin, J. C. Kerr, D. J. C.

Lamb, A. H. (Teller) Langmorc, J. V. Lavarch, M. H. Lee, M. J. Lindsay, E. J. McHugh, J. Martin, S. P. Mildren, J. B. Milton, P. Morris, Allan Morris, Peter Mountford, J. G. O'Keefe, N. P. Price, L. R. S. Punch, G. F. Saunderson, J. Sawford, R. W. Scholes, G. G. D. Sciacca, C.
Scott, John Scott,' Los Simmons, D. W. Snow, J. H. Snowdon, W. E. Staples, P. R.
Theophanous, A. C. Tickner, R. E. Uren, T.
West, S. J. Willis,R: Wright, K. W.

NOES
Aldred, K. J. Anderson, J. D. Andrew, J. N.
Beale, J. H. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N. A.
Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Carlton, J. J. Cobb, M. R. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Downer, A. J. O. Edwards, Harry Fife, W. C. FischerI Tim Hall, Steele
Halverson, R. G. Hawker, D. P. M. (Teller) Hicks, N. J. (Teller) Jull, D. F.

Lloyd, B. McArthur, F. S. MacKellar, M. J. R.
Miles,C. G. Millar, P. C. Nehl, G. B. Porler, J. R. Pratt, M. P. Prosser, O. D. Reith, P. K. Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Shack, P. D. Sharp, J. R. Shipton, R. F. SinclairI I. McC. Smith, W. L. Sullivan, K. J. Webster, A. P. Wilson, I. B. C. Woods, R. L. Wooldridge, M. R. L.

Klugman, R. E. Jones, Barry

PAIRS

Fisher, Peter Moore, J, C.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.
INCOME TAX ASSESSMENT AMENDMENT BILL 1989
Message received from the Senate acquainting the House that the Senate insists upon its amendment disagreed to by the House of Representatives,

3334 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Income Tax Assessment Bill

Ordered that the message be taken into consideration forthwith.
Mr PETER MORRIS (Shortland-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Treasurer) (9.27)-1 move:
That the House insists on disagreeing to the amendment insisted on by the Senate.
I do not want to delay the House. I will simply say that, for thereasons outlined on the last occasion that the Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill 1989 was before the House, the Government will not accept the amendment proposed by the Senate. I remind honourable members opposite that this is a Budget Bill and counsel them to think very carefully about the implicatio~s of their actions. I request that they reconsIder their attitude to the Bill.
Mr ROCHER (Curtin) (9.27)-The amendment to the Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill 1989 which is under consideration refers to page 4, clause 4 of the Bill and calls for section 10 therein not to apply to public hospitals, public benevolent institutions or public universities. The reasons why we moved the amendment in the first place and supported our colleagues in the other place when they last sent it back to this place for. consideration were advanced on 27 November. At that time, as the Minister for Industrial Relations and the Minister Assisting the Treasurer (Mr Peter Mor~s) mentioned, he gave reasons for not acceptmg the amendment, which included a $50m revenue loss if the amendment was carried.
I remind the House that the amendments apply to employers with annual payroll deductions for group tax purposes of $5m or more. This measure is intended to bring forward the collection of those remittances. One would be hard pressed to suggest that there was any total effect on the revenue involved in this measure because, if the amendments were allowed, that money would be collected in the course of time. Money would be collected once a month instead of bi-monthly, so the $50m would be collected.
Mr Braithwaite-They just can't wait to get their hands on it.
Mr ROCHER-That is right. They need to bring the money forward. In bringing that money forward, if the Minister's estimate <;>f $50m is correct, it means that those publIc

hospitals, public benevolent institutions and public universities have to raise that money by some other means. As distinct from t~e corporations who will be affected by this measure insisted upon by the Treasurer (Mr Keating), these public utilities-I des~ribe them in that way for the sake of brevltydo not have the option of raising more equity. Therefore, they can only exercise some economics in their own operations or borrow. It is more likely than not that they will be forced to borrow. Public institutions across Australia will be borrowing $50m because they have to remit these deductions. earlie.r, as that money will be no longer avaIlable m their normal cash flow.
It is a shameful grab for money. For the reasons I have advanced, it also imposes a cost in the form of interest on public institutions. The Minister mentioned his reasons earlier on. I will talk about another one. The Minister at the outset said-and this seemed to be the main justification for the Government's intransigence-that the pay as you earn money to be remitted to the Australian Taxation office is not money which belongs to a group employer and that, therefore, the status of the employer, that is, the public hospital, the public benefit institution .or .the public university, is not a matter of prmclp~e regarding the timing of remittances. ThiS Government has not many principles in the collection of taxes. But that is not the point I want to make. The Minister says that the money deducted does not belong to the group employer. Well, at that stage it does not belong to the Government either, and it does not belong to the Commissioner of Taxation. It does not belong to them; it belongs to the taxpayers whose salaries have been subjected to the deductions which make the remittances possible and necessary. If it belongs to anyone, it belongs to the taxpayers until they are assessed.
We have this spurious argument, which is typical of the Government, in that it regards money deducted as its own before a taxpayer is assessed. In fact, a good proportion of those deductions might very well be refundable. The money is not the property of the Government; it is not the property of anyone other than the taxpayer. To advance that sort of argument is nonsense but it is to be expected from the Governmeht. In the ab-

Parliament House Advisory Panel 30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3335

sence of the honourable member for Wentworth (Dr Hewson), who cannot be here tonight, 1 convey to the Committee that we intend to oppose the motion to disallow the amendments and to go along with the collective wisdom, of our colleagues in the Senate on this matter.

Question put:

That the motion (Mr Peter Morris's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr Ronald Edwards)

Ayes . . . .

61

Noes . . . .

43

Majority

18

AYES
Baldwin.P. J: Beazley, ,K. C. Doddall, D. P. Bilney, G. N. Blanchard, C. A.
Blewell, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown. Robert Campbell, G,
Charles, D. Ii. Charlesworth, R. J.
Chynoweth, R. L. Cleeland, P. R. Courticc, B. W. Crawford, M. C. Dubois, S. C. Duffy, M. J. Fatin, W. F. Fitzgibbon, E. J.
Free. R. V. Gear,G. Grace, E. L. (Teller) Hand, G. L. Harvey, E. R.
Hollis, c.,
Howe~ B. L. Humphreys, B, C. Jakobsen, C. A. Jenkins, H. A. Kerin, J. C. Kerr, D. J. C.

Lamb, A. H. (Teller) Langmore, J. V.
Lavarch, M. H. Lee. M. J. Lindsay, E. J.
McHugh, J. Martin, S. P. Mlldren, J. B. Milton, P. Morris, Allan Morris, Peter Mountford, J. G. O'Keefe, N. P. Price, L. R. S. Punch, G. F. Saunderson, J. Sawford, R. W.
Scholes, G. G. D. Sciacca, C. Seoll, John Seoll, Los Simmons, D. W. Snow, J. H. Snowdon, W. E. Staples, P. R. Thcophanous, A. C. Tickner, R. E. West, S. J. WiIIis,R. Wright,K. W.

NOES
Aldred, K. J. Anderson, J. D. Andrew, J. N. Beale; J. H. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Carlton, J. J. Cobb, M. R. Connolly, D, M. Cowan, D. B. Downer, A. J. O. Edwards, Harry Fife; W. C. FischerI Tim Hall, Steele HalverWn, R. G. Hawker, D. P. M. (Teller) Hicks, N. J. (Teller)

Lloyd, B. McArthur, F. S. MacKellar, M. J. R. Miles, C. G. Millar, P. C. Nehl, G. B. Prall, M. P. Prosser, G. D. Reith, P. K.
Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Shack, P. D. Sharp, J. R. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair. J. McC. Smith, W. L. Sullivan, K. J. Webater, A. P. Wilson, J. B. C. Woods, R. L. Wooldridge, M. R. L.

Jull, D. F.
Klugman, R. E. Joncs, Barry

NOES PAIRS

Fisher, Peter Moore, J. C.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE ON TENURE OF APPOINTEES TO COMMONWEALTH TRIBUNALS
Mr JOHN SCOTT (Hindmarsh)-On behalf of the Joint Select Committee on Tenure of Appointees to Commonwealth Tribunals, 1 present the report of the Committee, incorporating dissenting reports, together with the minutes of proceedings and evidence received by the Committee.
Ordered that the report be printed. Mr BEAZLEY (Swan-Leader of the House)-by leave-I move:
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr Fife-1 seek an assurance from the Leader of the House that we will be able to discuss this matter on 21 December when we come back.
Mr BEAZLEy-It will get some time on either 21 December or 22 December.
Debate (on motion by Mr Fife) adjourned.
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ADVISORY PANEL
Mr WEST (Cunningham-Minister for Administrative Services)-Mr Deputy Speaker, 1 ask leave of the House to amend notice No.6, Government Business, relating to the proposed Parliament House Advisory Panel in the terms of the amended motion circulated to honourable members.
Leave granted. Mr WEST-I thank the House. 1 move:
(I) That a Parliament House Advisory Panel be established, to advise the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives on proposals for significant works in Parliament House. (2) That the following provisions apply to the Panel:
(a) the Panel shall consist of 8 members, as follows: (i) the President or a person appointed by the President to represent the President, and one other person appointed by the President,

3336 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989 Parliament House Advisory Panel

(ii) the Speaker or a person appointed by the Speaker to represent the Speaker, and one other person appointed by the Speaker,
(iii) the Minister designated by the Prime Minister as the relevant responsible Minister or a person appointed by the Minister to represent the Minister, and one other person appointed by the Minister,
(iv) the Leader of the Opposition in the House of Representatives or a person appointed by the Leader to represent the Leader, and
(v) a chairman who is an eminent member or former member of either House of the Parliament, appointed by the President and the Speaker after consultation with the Minister and the Leader of the Opposition;
(b) members shall be appointed to the Panel within 15 days after this resolution has been agreed to by both Houses of the Parliament, and shall hold office until the expiration of 15 days after the first meeting of the House of Representatives after the second general election occurring after this resolution has been so agreed to;
(c) members of the Panel, other than those appointed under paragraph (b), shall be appointed within 15 days after the first meeting of the House of Representatives after a general election of the House, and shall hold office until the expiration of 15 days after the first meeting of the House after the next ensuing general election;
(d) a member of the Panel other than the President, the Speaker, the Minister and the Leader of the Opposition may resign the member's office by writing addressed to the President and the Speaker, and the consequent vacancy shall be filled by the President, the Speaker, the Minister or the Leader of the Opposition, as the case requires;
(e) a member of the Panel appointed by the President, the Speaker, the Minister or the Leader of the Opposition may be removed from office, and the consequent vacancy filled, by the President, the Speaker, the Minister or the Leader of the Opposition, as the case may be;
(f) if the chairman is not present at a meeting of the Panel the Panel may elect a Il}ember to act as chairman for the purposes of that meeting;
(g) the quorum of the Panel shall be 4 members;
(h) questions before the Panel shall be decided by a majority of members present and voting, including the chairman or member acting as chairman, and if the votes on a question are

equally divided the chairman or member acting as chairman shallhave~ casting vote; and
(i) the President and the Speaker may determine allowances for expenses and fees to be paid, out of an appropriation provided by the Parliament, to members of the Panel, other than the President, the Speaker, the Minister and the Leader of the Opposition, in respect of their service as members of the Panel, and a copy of each such determination shall be laid before each House of the Parliament within 5 sitting days of that House after the determination is made.
(3) That all proposals made to or by. the President or the Speaker, or the President and the Speaker, for works in Parliament House, which are designated by the chairman, in accordance with guidelines determined by the Panel, as significant works, be referred to the Panel.
(4) That a copy of guidelines determined in accordance with paragraph (3) be laid before each House of the Parliament within 5 sitting days of that House after the guidelines are determined.
(5) That the Panel provide to the President and the Speaker a report on each proposal referred to the Panel, and draw attention to any aspects of the proposal the Panel considers significant, particularly having regard to the effect of the works referred to in the proposal on the architectural and aesthetic integrity of Parliament House.
(6) That it is expected that, in considering a proposal, the Panel will obtain and have regard to appropriate advice.
(7) That the President and the Speaker attach to each report provided to them a statement indicating:
(a) the action required to give effect to the proposed works referred to in the report;
(b) whether that action is the responsibility of the President or the Speaker or of thePresi-, dent and the Speaker; and
(c) whether it is intended that that action be undertaken.
(8) That a copy of each report and attached statement be laid before each House of the Parliament within 15 sitting days of that House after the provision of the report to the President and the Speaker.
(9) That a message be sent to the Senate acquainting it of this resolution and requesting that it concur and take action accordingly.
The motion deals with arrangements which have been agreed with the Presiding Officers on protecting the design of the new Parliament House. Honourable members will recall my announcement in June this year of the Government's decision to take action to protect the design integrity of the building. I discussed the Government's intention with

Parliament House Advisory Panel 30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3337

the Presiding Officers. A series of consultations has resulted in arrangements embodied in the motion which both the Government and the Presiding Officers regard as acceptable and workable.
It is now well over a year that this building has been operating as our parliament. In that time we have seen two million or more Australian and overseas visitors walk through its many public areas-some with curiosity, others with appreciation and many with obvious pride. Their pride is directed towards something we saw a lot of last year-an awakened knowledge of and confidence in our abilities as Australians to achieve the very best in the world with our own resources and through our own people.
We as members of this 'Parliament have a trust as significant as almost any other we hold as the embodiment of Australia's political democracy. That trust is to the people of Australia to ensure we preserve what we have built here on Capital Hill. Since the decision to embark on this ambitious project was first taken 11 years ago, both Houses of Parliament have worked hard to ensure the outcome that we and all Australians enjoy. Both Houses of Parliament have approved the designs and the development of those designs for the building and its distinctive landscaped precincts. They have not been the decisions of governments or bureaucrats or architects or anyone else-only the decisions of this and previous Parliaments.
It was the design approved by the Parliament which has been built; and it is that design we now hold in trust on behalf of the people of Australia. We m:ust, of course, recognise that the building is two things: it is first a functioning Parliament and as such like any other operating entity it must grow and adapt to the changing requirements of the Parliament; secondly, it is a significant asset in our national heritage and as such its design must be protected to ensure its value as a national heritage asset is neither diminished nor destroyed.
It was the Government's belief that, together with Parliament, it had a responsibility. to maintain and protect the high professional standards set and attained during the design and construction of this building. It was thisbelief which led to the

Government seeking to provide for an expert panel to advise Parliament on proposed changes to the building. It has also been the Government's belief that no body of people or organisation other than the Houses of Parliament themselves should be able to decide on works that might have a significant impact on the design of the building and its precincts.
Since June, I have been discussing the Government's intentions with the Presiding Officers. We have now reached agreement on the form in which the building can beSt be protected while ensuring its dual role as a functioning Parliament and a premier national asset is met. To these ends I am today moving this motion establishing a Parliament House Advisory Panel to advise the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives on proposals for significant works in Parliament House. It is intended that once passed by this House the resolution should then be considered by the Senate ..
The motion provides for an eight-member panel to be chaired by an .eminent former or current parliamentarian to be selected by the Presiding Officers in consultation with me as Minister responsible for the Ministerial Wing. The members are to be the Presiding Officers and myself, or our representatives, together with one additional member appointed by each of us and one member appointed by the Leader of the Opposition.
In accordance with guidelines determined by the panel and laid before both Houses, the chairman of the panel is to designate for the purposes of determining the panel's considerations which works proposals have a potentially significant impact on the design of Parliament House. Reports from the panel on such proposals are to be made to the presiding officers who within 15 sitting days of either House are to table those reports together with statements on intended actions.
The terms of this motion are such as to expect the panel both to have obtained and have regard to appropriate advice in its consideration of works proposals. In this way, expert professional advice can be obtained on the potential effects of the works involved on the design of the building. The motion recognises that the effects of works on the

3338 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Notices

architectural and aesthetic integrity of Parliament House will need to be considered.
As originally intended by the Government, the Houses of Parliament remain as the bodies ultimately responsible for and able to take decisions on works proposals with a potential to make a significant impact on the architectural and aesthetic integrity of Parliament House. I commend the motion to honourable members.
Mr BEALE (Deakin) (10.04)-The Opposition supports this motion and concurs with what the Minister has had to say. The reason why we have had an amended motion before the House tonight is that the wording of the original motion raised some questions for the Opposition~ I want to pay a tribute to the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr West) for the way in which he has accommodated us.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
ADJOURNMENT Motion (by Mr Beazley) put:
That the House do now adjourn.
Question resolved in the affirmative. House adjourned at 9.50 p.m. until a date
and hour to be fixed by Mr Speaker or by t~e Chairman of Committees, in accordance with the resolution agreed to this day.
NOTICES The following notices were given: Mr West to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report: Oakleigh Multi-User Army Reserve Depot, Victoria
Mr West to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report: Puckapunyal Redevelopment, Stage I, Victoria
Mr West to move-
That, in accordance with the provIsions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report: Dedicated Computer Centre for the Australian Taxation Office at Bruce, ACT.

Mr Beazley to move-
That the standing orders of the House be amended as set out hereunder:
(I) That standing order 25 (Standing Orders Committee) be omitted.
(2) That, after standing order 28A, the following new standing orders be inserted:
General purpose standing committees "28B. (a) General purpose standing committees
shall be appointed at the commencement of each Parliament as follows:
(i) Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs;
(ii) Standing Committee on Environment, Recreation and the Arts;
(iii) Standing Committee on Employment, Education and Training;
(iv) Standing Committee on Community Affairs; (v) Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs; (vi) Standing Committee on Industry, Science and
Technology; (vii) Standing Committee on Transport, Commu-
nications and Infrastructure; and (viii) Standing Committee on Finance and Public
Administration. (b) A standing committee appointed pursuant to paragraph (a) shall be empowered to inquire into and report on any matter coming within its area of responsibility either on its own initiative or on reference by the House or a, Minister. (c) Each committee appointed under subparagraphs (a) (i) to (iv) and (vi) to (viii), inclusive, shall consist of 12 members and the committee appointed under subparagraph (a) (v) shall consist of
to members, with membership of each committee
reflecting the proportion of Government to Oppositioil members in the House, namely, 6 Government and 4 Opposition for a committee of 10 members and 7 Government and 5 Opposition for a committee of 12 members. Each committee may be supplemented with up to 3 members for a particular inquiry. Government members are to be nominated by the Government Whip or Whips and Opposition members are to be nominated by the Opposition Whip or Whips.
(d) Every nomination of a member to a committee shall be forthwith notified in writing to the Speaker.
(e) Each committee shall elect a Government member as its chairman.
(f) Each committee shall elect a deputy chairman who shall act as chairman of the committee at any time when the chairman is not present at a meeting of the committee and at any time when the chairman and deputy chairman are not present at a meeting of the committee the members present shall elect another member to act as chairman at that meeting.

Notices

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3339

(g) For a standing committee of 12 to 15 members, 6 members of the committee shall constitute a quorum of the committee including 4 Government members, and for a committee of 10 or II members, 5 members of the committee shall constitute a quorum of the committee including 3 Government members.
(h) Each committee shall have power to appoint sub-committees consisting of 3 or more of its members and to refer to any sub-committee any matter which the committee is empowered to examine.
(i) Each committee shall appoint the chairman of each sub-committee who shall have a casting vote only and at any time when the chairman of a subcommittee is not present at a meeting of the subcommittee the members of the sub-committee present shall elect another member of that sub-committee to act. as chairman at that meeting.
(j) The quorum of a sub-committee shall be a majority of the members of that sub-committee.
(k) Members of the committee who are not members of a sub-committee may participate in the public proceedings of that sub-committee but shall not vote, move any motion or be counted for the purpose of a quorum.
(I) Each committee or any sub-committee shall have power to send for persons, papers and records.
(m) Each committee or any sub-committee shall have power to move from place to place.
(n) Any sub-committee shall have power tq adjourn from time to time and to sit during any sittings or adjournment of the House.
(0) Each committee or any sub-committee shall have power to authorise publication of any evidence given before it and any document presented to it.
(p) Each committee shall have leave to report from time to time.
(q) Each committee or any sub-committee shall have power to consider and make use of the evidence and records of the relevant standing committees appointed during previous Parliaments.
(r) Each committee shall have power to confer with a similar committee of the Senate.
Standing Committee on Standing Orders and Procedure
"28c. (a) A Standing Committee on Standing Orders and Procedure shall be appointed at the commencement of each Parliament to inquire into and report on the practices and procedures of the House generally with a view to making recommendations for their improvement or change and for the development of new procedures.
(b) The committee shall consist of 8 members,S members to be nominated by the Government Whip or Whips and 3 members to be nominated by the Opposition Whip or Whips.
(c) The committee shall elect a Government member as its chairman.

(d) The committee shall elect a deputy chairman who shall act as chairman of the committee at any time when the chairman is not present at a meeting of the committee and at any time when the chairman and deputy chairman are not present at a meeting of the committee the members present shall elect another member to act as chairman at that meeting.
(e) The committee shall have power to appoint sub-committees consisting of 3 or more of its members and to refer to any sub-committee any matter which the committee is empowered to examine.
(f) The committee shall appoint the chairman of each sub-committee who shall have a casting vote only, and at any time when the chairman of a subcommittee is not present at a meeting of the subcommittee the members of the sub-committee present shall elect another member of that sub-committee to act as chairman at that meeting.
(g) The quorum of a sub-committee shall be a majority of the members of that sub-committee.
(h) Members of the committee who are notmembers of a sub-committee may participate in the public proceedings of that sub-committee but shall not vote, move any motion or be counted for the purpose of a quorum.
(i) The committee or any sub-committee shall have power to send for persons, papers and records.
(j) The committee or any sub-committee shall have power to move from place to place.
(k) A sub-committee shall have power to adjourn from time to time and to sit during any sitting or adjournment of the House.
(I) A sub-committee shall have power to authorise publication of any evidence given before it and any document presented to it.
(m) The committee shall have leave to report from time to time.
(n) The committee or any sub-committee shall have power to consider and make use of the evidence and records of the Standing Committee on Procedure or the Standing Committee on Standing Orders and Procedure appointed during previous Parliaments.
Selection Committee
"280. (a) A Selection Committee, to consist of II members of whom 6 members shall be Government members, shall be appointed at the commencement of each Parliament to arrange the timetable and order of business prior to 12.30 p.m. on each sitting Thursday pursuant to standing order 101.
(b) Private Members' business which is to be accorded priority, the order of consideration and the times allotted for debate on each item shall be approved by a majority of the members present at a meeting of the committee and in accordance with general principles adopted by the House after report by the committee.
(c) The Selection Committee may determine the order of precedence and times allotted for consideration of committee and delegation reports and pri-

3340 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Notices

vate Members' business and shall report its determinations to the House in sufficient time for its decisions to be published on the Notice Paper of the first sitting day of each week.
(d) Reports of the committee made pursuant to paragraph (c) shall be deemed adopted when laid upon the Table and shall be printed in Hansard.
(e) Five members of the committee, including 3 Government members, shall constitute a quorum of the committee.
(f) For the purpose of private Members' business in this and any other standing order, a private Member is any Member of the House other than the Speaker or a Minister.". (3) That, after standing order 102, the following new standing orders be inserted: Committee and delegation reports
"102A. Following the presentation of petitions each sitting Thursday, parliamentary committee and delegation reports may be presented and orders of the day called on for the resumption of the debate on motions moved in connection therewith in the order determined by the Selection Committee. Statements on committee and delegation reports
"102B. Upon presentation of a report of a parliamentary committee or delegation pursuant to standing order I02A, the member presenting the report and other members of the committee or delegation may, subject to any determination of the Selection Committee, each be accorded priority in making a statement to the House for a period not exceeding 10 minutes at the conclusion of which a specific motion in connection therewith may be moved without notice by the Member presenting the report whereupon the debate on the question shall then be adjourned until a future day to be determined by the Selection Committee. Precedence to motions regarding committee and delegation reports
"!o2e. Following the presentation of reports pursuant to standing order. I 02A, the resumption of proceedings on motions relating to committee and delegation reports shall have precedence until 11 a.m. according to the order of priority and times allotted for debate determined by the Selection Committee, each Member speaking for a period not exceeding !O minutes or any lesser period determined by the Selection Committee. Whenever-
(a) consideration of any question has not concluded at the time appointed by the Selection Committee or when precedence expires at 11 a.m. and the debate is interrupted; or
(b) there is no Member rising to speak to a motion prior to the expiry of the time allotted for it or before 11 a.m., whichever first occurs-
and the Selection Committee has determined that consideration of the matter should continue on a future day, the resumption of the debate shall be

made an order of the day for a future day under private Members' business.".
(4) That standing order 104 be amended to read: Precedence to government and private Members' business
"104. Government business shall, on each day of sitting, have precedence of private Members' business except that, on each sitting Thursday, private Members' busin~ shall have precedence of government business from the conclusion of consideration of committee and delegation reports but commencing no later than 11 a.m. with debate concluding no later than 12.30 p.m.
At the conclusion of consideration of private Members' business, the Speaker shall put forthwith and successively, without further debate or amendment, any questions on which a division had been called for earlier in the day, and which had been deferred pursuant to standing order 193.".
(5) That, after standing order 104, the following new standing orders be inserted: Private Members' business-Procedure
"104A. In the period during which private Members' business is accorded precedence pursuant to standing order 104, notices and orders of the day relating to private Members' business shall be called on by the Clerk in the order in which they appear on the Notice Paper. When the time allotted by standing order 104, or by the Selection Committee, for an item of business has expired, or if no other Member is then rising, consideration shall be interrupted by the Chair and the question before the Chair shall be put:
Provided that, where the Selection Committee has determined that consideration of a matter should continue on a future day, at the time fixed for interruption, or if no other Member is then rising:
(a) the Chair shall interrupt proceedings; (b) if the House is in committee, the Chairman
shall report progress; and (c) the Speaker shall fix the next sitting Thurs-
day for the further consideration of the matter. Priority will be given to notices by private Members of their intention to present bills. Upon the respective notice being called on by the Clerk, the Member in whose name the notice stands shall present the bill and may speak for a period not exceeding 5 minutes in support thereof. The bill shall then be read a first time and, notwithstanding the provisions of standing order 218, the next sitting Thursday shall be appointed for the Member to move "That this Bill be now read a second time". If the motion for the second reading of any private Member's bill is agreed to by the House, further consideration shall be accorded precedence of other private Members' business and the Selection Committee may allot times for consideration of the remaining stages of the bill.

Notices

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3341

Withdrawal of private Members' business "1040. Any private Members' business not called
on, or any private Members' business the consideration of which has been interrupted pursuant to standing order 104A and not re-accorded priority by the Selectioll Committee on any of the next 8 sitting Thursdays, shall be removed from the Notice Paper by the Clerk.". (6) That standing order 106 be amended to read: Grievance debate
"106. Notwithstanding standing order 105, the first order of the day, government business, on each sitting Thursday shall be a question to be proposed by the Speaker, at the conclusion of consideration of private Members' business, "That grievances be noted" to which question any Member may address the House or move any amendment.
If consideration of the question has not been concluded at 1.45 p.m., the debate thereon shall be interrupted and the Speaker shall put any questions then before the House, and after resolution of those questions, shall forthwith call on Members' statements pursuant to standing order 106A.". (7) That, after standing order 106, the following new standing order be inserted: Statements by Members
"106A. At the time indicated in stl)nding order 106, a Member, other than a Minister, may be called by the Chair to make a statement for a period not exceeding 90 seconds. The period allowed for these statements shall not extend beyond 2 p.m.". (8) That standing order 107 be amended to read: Discussions of matter of public importance
"107. A Member may propose to the Speaker that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion. The Member proposing the matter shall present to the Speaker not later than 12 noon on each sitting day a written statement of the matter proposed to be discussed; and if the Speaker determines that it is in order, he shall read it to the House. The proposed discussion must be supported by 8 Members, including the proposer, rising in their places as indicating approval. The Speaker shall then call upon the Member who had proposed the matter to speak. (9) That standing order 109 be omitted. (10) That standing orders 112, 113, 115, 118, 119, 120, 127, 129, 130 and 132 be amended to read: Petition to be lodged with Clerk
"112. Every petition shall be lodged with the Clerk by 12 noon on the Wednesday previous to the Thursday at which it is proposed that it be presented. To bear Clerk's certificate
"113. Every petition when presented must bear a certificate signed by the Clerk or Deputy Clerk that it is in conformity with the standing orders.

To request action by House and be legible "115. Every petition shall request action by the
House, shall be fairly written, typewritten, printed or reproduced by mechanical process, without interlineation or erasure and shall be free of any indication that a Member may have sponsored or distributed the petition. To be signed by persons themselves
"118. Every petition shall be signed by the patties whose names and addresses are appended thereto, by their own hand, and by no one else:
Provided that persons unable to write shall affix their ma~ks in the presence of a witness, who shall as such affix his or her signature and address, and the address of the petitioner. To be signed on same sheet
"119. Every petition shall contain the signature and address of at least one person on the sheet on which the petition is inscribed. Signatures not to be transferred
"120. Every signature and address shall be written upon the petition or upon sheets containing the prayer of the petition, and not pasted upon or otherwise transferred thereto. Member to affix name and electoral division and the number of signatories
"127. Every Member lodging a petition with the Clerk for presentation to the House shall clearly affix his or her signature and electoral division at the beginning thereof, together with the number of sig~ natories. Clerk to announce particulars of petitions lodged
"129. The Clerk shall make an announcement as to the petitions lodged for presentation to the House, indicating in the case of each petition the Member who lodged it, the identity and number of the petitioners and the subject matter of the petition, and any Ministerial responses to petitions previously presented. The terms of the petitions presented and responses given shall be printed in Hansard.
No discussion upon the subject matter of a petition shall be allowed at the time of presentation. Petitions deemed to have been received: Other questions on presentation
"130. Every petition presented shall be deemed to have been received by the House unless a motion, moved forthwith, that a particular petition be not received, be agreed to.
The only other questions entertained by the House on the presentation of a petition shall be (a) That a particular petition be printed;or (b) That a particular petition be referred to a committee. Petitions referred to Ministers-Minister's response
"132. A copy of every petition lodged with the Clerk and received by the House shall be referred by the Clerk to the Minister responsible for the administration of the matter which is the subject of

3342 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Papers

the petition. A Minister may respond to a petition by lodging a response with the Clerk for presentation to the House, such response being announced at the end of the petitions announcement.". (II) That standing orders 133, 135 and 139 be amended to read: Notice of motion-how ginn
"133. Notice of motion shall be given by a Member by:
(a) delivering a fair copy of its terms to the Clerk at the Table; or
(b) stating its terms to the House during the period of Members' statements made understanding order 106A and delivering a fair copy of its terms to the Clerk at the Table.
The notice must be signed by the Member and seconder and show the day proposed for moving the motion.
A notice of motion given by a Member in accordance with paragraph (a) which expresses a censure of, or want of confidence in the Government, or a censure of any Member, shall be reported to the House by the Clerk at the first convenient opportunity. Order of notices
"135. Subject to the provisions of standing orders 28D, lOS, 133 and 211 the notices shall be entered by the Clerk on the Notice Paper, in priority of orders of the day, in the order in which they were received:
Provided that: (a) general business notices shall be entered on the Notice Paper in such an order that, as far as possible, priority shall alternate between Opposition and Government Members; and (b) 2 notices received from the same Member shall not be placed consecutively in priority of a notice received from another Member during the same sitting. Terms of notice altered "139. A Member who has given a notice of motion may alter its terms by notifying the Clerk in writing within such time as will enable the alteration to be made in the Notice Paper.". (12) That standing order 193 be amended to read: When dil'ision may be taken "193. A division shall not be proceeded with unless more than one Member has called for a division. If one Member only calls for a division, that Member may inform the Speaker that he wishes his dissent to be recorded in the Votes and Proceedings and in Hansard and his dissent shall be so recorded: Provided that, on sitting Thursdays, any division called for in the House before 12.30 p.m. on a question, other than a motion moved by a Minister, shall stand deferred until 12.30 p.m. ~'., (13) That standing order 211 be amended to read:

Initiation of bills "211. (a) A bill (unless received from the Sen-
ate) shall be initiated by a motion for leave to bring in a bill specifying its title, by an order of the House, on the calling on of a notice of presentation, or in accordance with the provisions of standing order 291.
(b) Notice of intention to present a bill shall be given by a Member by either:
(i) delivering a fair copy of its terms to the Clerk at the Table; or
(ii) stating its terms to the House during the period of Members' statements made understanding order 106A and delivering a fair copy of its terms to the Clerk at the Table.
(c) A notice of intention to present a bill shall specify its title and the day for presentation, and shall be signed by the Member and, at least, one other Member.
(d) The standing orders shall, to the necessary extent, be applied and read as if a notice of presentation were a notice of motion.". (14) That standing orders 347 and 348 be amended to read: Report and minutes presented
"347. The report of a committee, together with the minutes of the proceedings, shall be presented to the House by a member of the committee, and the report may be read. Consideration set down
"348. Subject to the provisions of standing order 102B, upon the presentation of a report, the report may be ordered to be printed with or without the documents accompanying it, and its consideration may be set down for a subsequent sitting when a specific motion without notice is connected therewith may be moved.".
PAPERS The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 30 November 1989:
Defence Housing Authority Act-Statement pursuant to section 10 (3) relating to a joint venture between the Defence Housing Authority and Delfin Property Group Limited for the development of land at Holsworthy, NSW, approved by Minister on 29 November 1989.
Fisheries Act-Notices-Nos. 204A, 212A. Treaties-Text of-
Which have been signed for Australia and which require further action by Australia before the treaty can enter into force for Australia. I) Protocol amending the Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of the Republic of Singapore for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income of II

Papers

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3343

February 1969. Signed at Canberra 16 October 1989. (2) Agreement between Australia and the Kingdom of Thailand for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income. Signed at Canberra 31 August 1989. (3) Protocol amending the Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of the French Republic for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income of 13 April 1976. Signed at Paris 19 June 1989. (4) Treaty on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between Australia and the Kingdom of Spain. Signed at Madrid 3 July 1989. (5) Treaty between Australia and the Republic of Portugal on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters. Signed at Lisbon 4 July 1989. (6) Treaty between the Government of Australia and the Government of Canada on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters. Signed at Ottawa 19 June 1989. (7) Agreement between Australia and the Independent State of Papua New Guinea for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income. Signed at Canberra 24 May 1989. (8) Final Acts of the Plenipotentiary Conference of the International Telecommunication Union. Signed at Nice 30 June 1989. To which Australia has become a party by signature(9) Exchange of Notes constituting an Agreement to further extend the operation of Article 18 (3) of the Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of the Republic of Singapore for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income of II February 1969. Signed at Canberra 16 October 1989. Entry into force 16 October 1989, the date of the Note in reply. (10) Exchange of Notes constituting an Agreement to amend the Schedule to the Agreement between the Commonwealth of Australia and Japan for Air Services of 19 January 1956. Signed at Canberra 15 June 1989. Entry into force 15 June 1989, the date of the Note in reply. (II) Trade Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria. Signed at Canberra

6 August 1989. Entry into force 6 August 1989 pursuant to Article 8. (12) Treaty on Development Co-operation between the Government of Australia and the Government of Papua New Guinea, and Exchange of Letters. Signed at Canberra 24 May 1989. The Treaty entered into force when Notes were exchanged at Port Moresby I September 1989 pursuant to Article 11.1. The Letters entered into force on 24 May 1989, the date of the Letter in reply. (13) Protocol between the Government of Australia and the Government of Thailand concerning the Financing of a Railway Project in Thailand. Signed at Canberra 31 August 1989. Entry into force 31 August 1989 pursuant to Article 5. (14) Protocol between Australia and Sweden further amending the Treaty concerning Extradition of 20 March 1973. Signed at Canberra 11 May 1989. Entry into force 10 June 1989, thirty days following signature, pursuant to Article 3.1. (15) Exchange of Letters constituting an Accord between the Government of Australia and the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics relating to Co-operation in Civil Aviation. Signed at Moscow 5-12 July 1989. Entry into force 12 July 1989, the date of the Letter in reply. (16) Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of the United States of America concerning Defense Logistic Support. Signed at Sydney 4 November 1989. Entry into force 4 November 1989 pursuant to Article XX.I. (17) Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of the United States of America concerning Defense Communications Services. Signed at Canberra 6 November 1989. Entry into force 6 November 1989 pursuant to Article IX. I. Which Australia has accepted or to which Australia has acceded(18) Amendment done at Rome, November 1983, to Article I (a) of the Plant Protection Agreement for the Asia and Pacific Region of 27 February 1956, as amended. Instrument of acceptance deposited for Australia 24 October 1989. The Amendment is not yet in force. (19) Agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of the German Democratic Republic concerning the Treatment of War Graves of Members of the Armed Forces of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in the German Democratic Republic, done at Berlin 27 April 1987. Instruments of accession deposited for Australia at London and Berlin 11 October 1989. Entry into force for Aus-

3344 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Papers

tralia II October, 1989 pursuant to Article 6 (2). (20) Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property,

done at Paris 14 November 1970. Instrument of acceptance, subject to reservation to Article 10, deposited for Australia 30 October 1989. Entry into force for Australia 30 January 1990.

Answers to Questions

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3345 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Interest Cover of Non-Financial Companies
(Question No. 2065)
Mr Langmore asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 3 October 1989:
(I) What has been the interest cover, being the ratio of earnings before interest and tax to interest paid, of non-financial companies in each year since 1970-71.
(2) What are the implications of the fall in nonfinancial corporate interest cover for corporate financial stability.
Mr Keating-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The interest cover of non-financial companies in each year since 1970-71 was: 1970-71,7.41; 197172,6.73; 1972-73,6.56; 1973-74,5.72; 1974-75,4.26; 1975-76, 4.40; 1976-77, 4.53; 1977-78, 4.26; 1978-79, 4.34; 1979-80, 4.17; 1980-81, 3.94; 1981-82, 3.01, 1982-83, 2.61; 1983-84, 3.12; 1984-85, 3.09; 1985-86, 2.74; 1986-87,2.57; 1987-88,2.72; 1988-89,2.72.
The above figures have been estimated by the Economic Planning Advisory Council (EPAC) and are based on published and unpublished Australian Bureau of Statistics data covering private corporate trading enterprises. The EPAC series defines interest cover as company income before tax plus interest paid plus depreciation divided by interest paid. EPAC's estimates have been used in preference to other series because published information on interest cover for non-financial companies is not available on a consistent basis prior to 1975-76.
(2) Interest cover is a very broad measure and inevitably there are a range of factors that will determine the financial stability of corporations. For example, in assessing a company's capacity to meet its external liabilities, not only will its level of income be relevant but also the level/value of its assets. Ultimately it remains a matter for lenders to Australia's corporations to assess the levels of risk (and associated returns) that they are willing to accept.
Foreign Exchange Dealings
(Question No. 2107)
Mr Langmore asked the-Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 October 1989:
(I) What has been the daily average value of foreign exchange dealings in the Australian dollar in each year since 1980-81.
(2) What proportion of the annual value of exports has this daily average been in each year since 1980-81.

Mr Keating-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Data on average daily foreign exchange dealings in $A in Australia on a consistent basis are available back to financial year 1984-85:

$Am

1984-85

3,663

1985-86

6,566

1986-87

12,284

1987-88

17,082

1988-89

22,121

(2)These figures as a proportion of the annual value of exports (goods and services) are:

1984-85 1985-86 1986-87 1987-88 1988-89

per cent 11 17 28 34 41

Diplomatic Representation in South Pacific Forum Countries
(Question No. 2116)
Mr Hollis asked the Minister representing the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, upon notice, on 25 October 1989:

Is the Minister able to say which countries have accredited representatives to those members of the South Pacific Forum which are not members of the United Nations.

Mr Duffy-The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Yes. Based on the most current information available, the following lists those countries which have accredited representatives to South Pacific Forum members which are not members of the United Nations:

Cook Islands France, Nauru, New Zealand.

Note: The New Zealand Ministry for External Relations and Trade regards an diplomatic missions in Wel1ington as being automatically accredited to Rarotonga.

Federated States of Micronesia Australia, China (People's Republic of), Japan,
Israel, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, United States.

3346 REPRESENTATIVES 30 November 1989

Answers to Questions

Republic of Kiribati
Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Canada, Chile, China (People's Republic of), Fiji, France, Germany (Federal Republic of), Great Britain, Greece, India, Israel, Japan, Korea (Republic of), Malaysia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Portugal, Solomon Islands, United States, Western Samoa.
Republic of the Marshall Islands
Australia, Israel, Japan, Kiribati, Federated States of Micronesia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, United States.
Nauru
Australia, Belgium, Chile, China (Republic of), Fiji, Federated States of Micronesia, France, Great Britain, India, New Zealand, Tuvalu, United States, Western Samoa.
Niue
New Zealand.
Note: The New Zealand Ministry of External Relations and Trade regards all diplomatic missions in Wellington as being automatically accredited to Alofi.
Tonga
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Chile, China (Republic of), Denmark, Fiji, France, Germany (Federal Republic of), Great Britain, Greece, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Spain, Turkey, United States, USSR.
Tuvalu
Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Canada, Chile, China (Republic of), Great Britain, Greece, India, Israel, Japan, Kiribati, Korea (Republic of), Malaysia, Netherlimds, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Turkey, United States.
Visit to Australia of Ms Carla van Zon
(Question No. 2122)
Mr Prosser asked the Minister representing the Minister - for Foreign Affairs and Trade, upon notice, on 26 October 1989:
(I) What was the purpose of the visit to Australian of Ms Carla van Zon.
(2) Did the Government contribute towards the cost of the visit, if so what sum.
Mr Duffy-The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade has provided the following answer to the honourable member's questions:
(I) Ms van Zon, who is President of the Dance Federation of New Zealand and a freelance dance administrator, visited Australia under the auspices of the Australia New Zealand Foundation. The purpose of the visit was to enable her to develop links with the Australian dance community, particularly those members of the community using indigenous work as their artistic focus. Visits sponsored by the Founda-

tion inter alia included those which bring together practitioners in cultural fields. There is a particular emphasis placed on younger persons.
(2) The cost of the visit was $4,241.00 which was paid by the Australia New Zealand Foundation.
Review of Immigration Detention Centres
(Question No. 2133)
Mr Ruddock asked the Minister representing the Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 30 October 1989:
(I) Did the Institute of Criminology undertake a review of the Minister's Department's immigration detention centres; if so, did the review cost $100,000.
(2) If such a review has been undertaken, has it been completed; if so, (a) has the report been made publicly available, (b) if it has been made publicly available, (i) when and (ii) to whom was it made publicly avaiiabIe,(c) if it was not made publicly available, why not and (d) if it contained recommendations, have they been implemented.
Mr Holding-The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The Institute of Criminology was engaged to undertake a consultancy on the future of immigration detention centres; the consultants were paid a fee of $59,875.
(2) The consultant's report has been completed;
(a) it has not been made publicly available at this stage. However, it is available under FOI;
(b) not applicable;
(c) it is not usual to publish such reports because of publication costs. Also see (a) above;
(d) the report contains recommendations which are under consideration and will be the subject of a detailed submission to Governmenton the future provision of immigration detention facilities.
Funding for One World or None Campaign
(Question No. 2145)
Mr N. A. Brown asked the Minister representing the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, upon notice, on 2 November 1989:
Did the Government provide $300,000 through the Australian International Development Assistance Bureau to the Australian Council for Overseas Aid towards its current One World or None Campaign; if so, will the Minister provide a breakdown of how those funds are being applied in support of the program.

Answers to Questions

30 November 1989 REPRESENTATIVES 3347

Mr Duffy-The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The Government did provide $300,000 to the Australian Council for Overseas Aid towards its One World or None Campaign. The following is a breakdown of how these funds were spent to the end of September 1989:
$ Salaries
Co-ordinators (3 full-time, 4 part-time) plus secretarial assistance . . . . . . 104,839 Operating expenses

Accommodation . . . . . . . . .

Travel-includes staff travel, and meet-

ings of National Committee and

Working Group . . . .

Telephone . . . . . . .

Mailing and Freight

Materials (including stationary)

Promotion/Advertising

Overseas Visitors

Research

.

Local Initiatives .

Total . . . .

Outstanding Funds

7,749
22,249 5,270 23,431 78,657 25,120 6,887 17,143 2,500 293,845 6,155


