House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 197, 1994 Tuesday, 8 November 1994
THIRTY-SEVENTH PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SEVENTH PARLIAMENT
FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD
Governor General His Excellency the Hon. William George Hayden, Companion of the Order of Australia,
Governor General of the Commonwealth of Australia
House of Representatives Officeholders Speaker-The Hon. Stephen Paul Martin Deputy Speaker-Mr Harry Alfred Jenkins Second Deputy Speaker-Mr Allan Charles Rocher Speaker's Panel-Mr John Neil Andrew, the Hon. James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Mr Eric John Fitzgibbon, Mr Colin Hollis, Mr Garry Barr Nehl, Mr Neville Joseph Newell, the Hon. Nicholas Bruce Reid, Mr Leslie James Scott, Mr James Henry Snow and
Mr Warren Errol Truss Leader of the Houst; ..The Hon. Kim Christian Beazley Leader of the 9pposition-Mr Alexander John Gosse Downer Deputy Leader of the Opposition-Mr Peter Howard Costello Manager of Opposition Business-The Hon. John Winston Howard
House of Representatives Party Leaders Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Hon. Paul John Keating Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Hon. Brian Leslie Howe Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-Mr Alexander John Gosse Downer Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-Mr Peter Howard Costello Leader of the National Party of Australia-Mr Timothy Andrew Fischer Deputy Leader of the National Party of Australia-Mr John Duncan Anderson

Members of the House of Representatives

Member
Abbott, Anthony John Adams, Hon. Godfrey Harry Aldred,. Kenneth James Anderson, John Duncan Andrew, John Neil Andrews, Kevin James Atkinson, Rodney Alexander Baldwin, Hon. Peter Jeremy Beale, Julian Howard Beazley, Hon. Kim Christian Beddall, Hon. David Peter Bevis, Hon. Archibald Ronald Bilney, Hon. Gordon Neil Bishop, Bronwyn Kathleen Bradford, John Walter Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brereton, Hon. Laurence John Brown, Hon. Robert James Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Eoin Harrap Campbell, Graeme Charles, Robert Edwin Chynoweth, Robert Leslie Cleary, Philip Ronald Cleeland, Peter Robert Cobb, Michael Roy Connolly, David Miles Costello, Peter Howard Crawford, Hon. Mary Catherine Crean, Hon. Simon Findlay Crosio, Hon. Janice Ann, MBE Cunningham, Barry Thomas Deahm, Maggie Dobie, Hon. James Donald Mathieson Dodd, Peter George Downer, Alexander John Gosse Duffy, Hon. Michael John Duncan, Hon. Peter Easson, Mary Elliott, Hon. Robert Paul Evans, Hon. Martyn John Evans, Richard David Conroy Fatin, Hon. Wendy Frances Ferguson, Laurie Donald Thomas Filing, Paul Anthony Fischer, Timothy Andrew Fitzgibbon, Eric John Forrest, John Alexander Free, Hon. Ross Vincent Gallus, Christine Ann Gear, Hon. George Georgiou, Petro Gibson, Garrie David

Division
Warringah, NSW Lyons, Tas Deakin, Vic Gwydir, NSW Wakefield, SA Menzies, Vic Isaacs, Vic Sydney, NSW Bruce, Vic Swan, WA Rankin, Qld Brisbane, Qld Kingston, SA Mackellar, NSW McPherson, Qld Dawson, Qld Kingsford-Smith, NSW Charlton, NSW Mitchell, NSW Stirling, WA Kalgoorlie, WA La Trobe, Vic Dunkley, Vic Wills, Vic McEwen, Vic Parkes, NSW Bradfield, NSW Higgins, Vic Forde, Qld Hotham, Vic Prospect, NSW McMillan, Vic Macquarie, NSW Cook, NSW Leichhardt, Qld Mayo, SA Holt, Vic Makin, SA Lowe, NSW Parramatta, NSW Bonython, SA Cowan, WA Brand, WA Reid, NSW Moore, WA Farrer, NSW Hunter, NSW Mallee, Vic Lindsay, NSW Hindmarsh, SA Canning, WA Kooyong, Vic Moreton, Qld

Party
LP ALP LP NP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP LP LP ALP LP ALP Ind ALP NP LP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP ALP LP NP ALP NP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

Members of the House of Representatives-continued

Member
Gorman, Russell Neville Joseph Grace, Edward Laurence Griffin, Alan Peter Griffiths, Hon. Alan Gordon Hall, Hon. Raymond Steele Halverson, Robert George, OBE Haviland, Christopher Douglas Hawker, David Peter Maxwell Henzell, Marjorie Madeline Hewson, Dr John Robert Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Holding, Hon. Allan Clyde Hollis, Colin Home, Robert Hodges Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Hon. Brian Leslie Humphreys, Hon. Benjamin Charles Jenkins, Harry Alfred Johns, Hon. Gary Thomas Jones, Hon. Barry Owen, AO Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Carl Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Hon. Roslyn Joan Kemp, Dr David Alistair Kerr, Hon. Duncan James Colquhoun Knott, Peter John Langmore, John Vance Latham, Mark William Lavarch, Hon. Michael Hugh Lawrence, Hon. Carmen Mary Lee, Hon. Michael John Lieberman, Hon. Louis Stuart Lindsay, Hon. Eamon John, RFD Lloyd, Bruce McArthur, Fergus Stewart McGauran, Peter John McHugh, Hon. Jeannette Mack, Edward Carrington McLachlan, Ian Murray, AO McLeay, Hon. Leo Boyce Martin, Hon. Stephen Paul Melham, Daryl Miles, Christopher Gordon Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Allan Agapitos Morris, Hon. Peter Frederick Moylan, Judith Eleanor Nehl, Garry Barr Neville, Paul Christopher Newell, Neville Joseph Nugent, Peter Edward O'Connor, Gavan Michael

Division
Greenway, NSW Fowler, NSW Corinella, Vic Maribyrnong, Vic Boothby, SA Casey, Vic Macarthur, NSW Wannon, Vic Capricornia, Qld Wentworth, NSW Riverina, NSW Melbourne Ports, Vic Throsby, NSW Paterson, NSW Bennelong, NSW Batman, Vic Griffith, Qld Scullin, Vic Petrie, Qld Lalor, Vic Fadden, Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, NSW Canberra, ACT Goldstein, Vic Denison, Tas Gilmore, NSW Fraser, ACT Werriwa, NSW Dickson, Qld Fremantle, WA Dobell, NSW Indi, Vic Herbert, Qld . Murray, Vic Corangamite, Vic Gippsland, Vic Grayndler, NSW North Sydney, NSW Barker, SA Watson, NSW Cunningham, NSW Banks, NSW Braddon, Tas Ryan, Qld Newcastle, NSW Shortland, NSW Pearce, WA Cowper, NSW Hinkler, Qld Richmond, NSW Aston, Vic Corio, Vic

Party
ALP ALP ALP ALP LP LP ALP LP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP LP NP ALP Ind. LP ALP ALP ALP LP LP ALP ALP LP NP NP ALP LP ALP

Members of the House of Representatives--continued

Member
O'Keefe, Hon. Neil Patrick Brice, Hon. Leo Roger Spurway Prosser, Geoffrey Daniel Punch, Hon. Gary Francis Pyne, Christopher Maurice Quick, Harry Vernon Reid, Hon. Nicholas Bruce Reith, Peter Keaston Rocher, Allan Charles Ronaldson, Michael John Clyde Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sawford, Rodney Weston Sciacca, Hon. Concetto Antonio Scott, Bruce Craig Scott, Leslie James Sharp, John Randall Simmons, Hon. David William Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahon Slipper, Peter Neil Smith, Silvia Joy Smith, Stephen Francis Snow, James Henry Snowdon, Hon. Warren Edward Somlyay, Alexander Michael Staples, Hon. Peter Richard Sullivan, Kathryn Jean Swan, Wayne Maxwell Tanner, Lindsay James Taylor, William Leonard Theophanous, Hon. Andrew Charles Tickner, Hon. Robert Edward Truss, Warren Errol Tuckey, Charles Wilson Vaile, Mark Anthony James Wakelin, Barry Hugh Walker, Hon. Francis John, QC Williams, Daryl Robert, AM, QC Willis, Hon. Ralph Woods, Harry Francis Wooldridge, Dr Michael Richard Lewis Worth, Patricia Mary

Division
Burke, Vic Chifl.ey, NSW Forrest, WA Barton, NSW Sturt, SA Franklin, Tas Bendigo, Vic Flinders, Vic Curtin, WA Ballarat, Vic Berowra, NSW Port Adelaide, SA Bowman, Qld Maranoa, Qld Oxley, Qld Hume, NSW Calare, NSW New England, NSW Fisher, Qld Bass, Tas Perth, WA Eden-Monaro, NSW Northern Territory Fairfax, Qld Jagajaga, Vic Moncrieff, Qld Lilley, Qld Melbourne, Vic Groom, Qld Calwell, Vic Hughes, NSW Wide Bay, Qld O'Connor, WA Lyne, NSW Grey, SA Robertson, NSW Tangney, WA Gellibrand, Vic Page, NSWj Chisholm(Vic Adelaide, SA

Party
ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP ALP ALP NP ALP NP ALP NP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP ALP NP LP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP LP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS
ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia; Ind.-Independent
Heads of Parliamentary Departments
Clerk of the Senate-H. Evans Clerk of the House of Representatives-L. M. Badin
Parliamentary LibrarianPrincipal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Templeton Secretary, Joint House Department-M. W. Bolton

SECOND KEATING MINISTRY

Prime Minister
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Housing and Regional Development
Leader of the Government in the Senate and Minister for Foreign Affairs
Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate and Minister for Defence
Treasurer
Minister for Finance and Leader of the House
Minister for Industry, Science and Technology and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Science
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Multicultural Affairs
Minister for Employment, Education and Training
Minister for Primary Industries and Energy
Minister for Social Security
Minister for Trade
Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister for Transport
Attorney-General
Minister for Communications and the Arts and Minister for Tourism
Minister for the Environment, Sport and Territories and Manager of Government Business in the Senate
Minister for Human Services and Health and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Status of Women

The Hon. Paul John Keating The Hon. Brian Leslie Howe Senator the Hon. Gareth John Evans QC Senator the Hon. Robert Francis Ray The Hon.. Ralph Willis The Hon. Kim Christian Beazley Senator the Hon. Peter Francis Salmon Cook
Senator the Hon. Nick Bolkus
The Hon. Simon Findlay Crean Senator the Hon. Robert Lindsay Collins The Hon. Peter Jeremy Baldwin Senator the Hon. Robert Francis McMullan The Hon. Laurence John Brereton The Hon. Michael Hugh Lavarch The Hon. Michael John Lee Senator the Hon. John Philip Faulkner
The Hon. Carmen Mary Lawrence

(The above ministers constitute the cabinet)

Second KeatingMinistry~ontinued

Minister for Resources

Minister for Development Cooperation and Pacific Island Affairs

Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs

.Minister for Schools, Vocational Education and Training

Minister for Consumer Affairs

Minister for Family Services

Assistant Treasurer

Minister for Justice

Minister for Small Business, Customs and Construction

Minister for Administrative Services

Special Minister of State, Vice-President of the Executive Council, Assistant Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Public Service Matters

Minister for Veterans' Affairs

Minister for Defence Science and Personnel

Parliamentary Secretary to the Attorney-General

Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Employment, Education and Training and Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for the Environment, Sport and Territories

Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social

Security

.

Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Industry, Science and Technology

Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Transport

Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Primary Industries and Energy

Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister and Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Human Services and Health

Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasurer

Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Housing and Regional Development

Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Defence

The Hon. David Peter Beddall The Hon. Gordon Neil Bilney The Hon. Robert Edward Tickner The Hon. Ross Vincent Free The Hon. Jeannette McHugh Senator the Hon. Rosemary Anne Crowley The Hon. George Gear The Hon. Duncan James Colquhoun Kerr Senator the Hon. Christopher Cleland Schacht The Hon. Francis John Walker QC The Hon. Gary Thomas Johns
The Hon. Concetto Antonio Sciacca The Hon. Gary Francis Punch The Hon. Peter Duncan The Hon. Warren Edward Snowdon
The Hon. Janice Ann Crosio MBE The Hon. Eamon John Lindsay RFD The Hon. Neil Patrick O'Keefe Senator the Hon. Nicholas John Sherry The Hon. Andrew Charles Theophanous
The Hon. Robert Paul Elliott The Hon. Mary Catherine Crawford The Hon. Archibald Ronald Bevis

vi

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AND TORRES S1RAIT ISLANDER AFFAIRS-Mr Gibson (Chair), Mr Brown, Mr Cleeland, Mr Dodd, Mr R. D. C. Evans, Ms Henzell, Mr Nehl, Mr Nugent, Mr L. J. Scott, Mr.Wakelin.
BANKING, FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION-Mr Simmons (Chair), Mr Abbott, Mr Bradford, Mr Braithwaite, Mr Cunningham, Mr M. J. Evans, Mr Jull, Mr Latham, Mr Price, Mr S. F. Smith, Mr Somlyay, Mr Woods.
COMMUNITY AFFAIRS-Mr A. A. Morris (Chair), Ms Deahm, Mr Dobie, Mr R. D. C. Evans, Ms Fatin, Mr Haviland, Mr Newell, Mr Quick, Mr Ruddock, Mr B. C. Scott, Mrs S. J. Smith, Ms Worth.
EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION AND TRAINING-Mr Fitzgibbon (Chair), Mr Adams, Mr Bradford, Mr Charles, Mr Chynoweth, Mr Griffin, Mr Neville, Mr Quick, Mr Ronaldson, Mr Sawford, Mrs S. J. Smith, Mr Wakelin.
ENVIRONMENT, RECREATION AND THE ARTS-Mr Langmore (Chair), Mr Cameron, Mr Chynoweth, Mr R. D. C. Evans, Mr Grace, Mr Home, Mr Jenkins, Mr Lloyd, Mr McLeay, Mr Newell, Mr Truss, Mr Wakelin.
HOUSE-The Speaker, Mr Beale, Ms Crawford, Mr Fitzgibbon, Mr Hollis, Mr Nehl, Mrs Sullivan. INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY-Mr Griffiths (Chair), Mr Charles, Mr Cleary, Mr Cobb, Mr
Cunningham, Mrs Easson, Mr M. 1. Evans, Mr Ferguson, Mr Lieberman, Mr A. A. Morris, Mr O'Connor, Mr Reid. LEGAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS-Mr Melham (Chair), Mr Cadman, Mr Duffy, Ms Fatin, Mr Holding, Mr Latham, Mr Pyne, Mr Sinclair, Mr Slipper, Mr Staples, Mr Tanner, Mr Williams.
LIBRARY-The Speaker, Mr Ferguson, Mr Filing, Mr Fitzgibbon, Mr Forrest, Mr Jones, Mr Ronaldson. MEMBERS' INTERESTS-Mr Grace (Chair), Ms Deahm, Mr Dobie, Mr Elliott, Mr Lloyd,Mr Reid, Mr
Sawford. PRIVILEGES-Mr Sawford (Chair), Mr K. 1. Andrews, Mr Brown, Mr Cleeland, Mr Holding (nominee of
Leader of the House), Mr Lieberman, Mr McGauran, Mr McLeay, Mr Simmons, Mr Somlyay (nominee of Deputy Leader of the Opposition). PROCEDURE-Mr Brown (Chair), Mr Filing, Mr McLeay, Mr Melham, Mr Nehl, Mr Price, Mr. L. J. Scott, Mrs Sullivan. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Home (Chair), Mr Fitzgibbon, Mr Forrest, Mr Griffin, Mr Hall, Mr Haviland, Mr Slipper. SELECTION-Mr Jenkins (Chair), Mr Filing, Mr Grace, Mr Halverson, Mr Hawker, Mr Hicks, Mr McLeay, Mr Nehl, Mr Sawford, Mr Snow, Mr Tanner. TRANSPORT, COMMUNICATIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE-Mr P. F. Morris (Chair), Mr Adams, Mr Cameron, Mr Campbell, Mr Hollis, Mr Knott, Mr McArthur, Mr Mack, Mr O'Connor, Mr Pyne, Mr Sharp, Mr Swan. Pursuant to resolution LONG TERM STRATEGIES (Formed 13 May 1993): Mr Jones (Chair), Mr Adams, Mr Dobie, Mr R. D. C. Evans, Mr Haviland, Ms Henzell, Mr McArthur, Mr O'Connor, Mr Snow, Mr Staples, Mr Truss, Mr Wakelin. TELEVISING OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES (Formed 4 May 1993): The Speaker (Chair), Mr Cameron, Mr M. J. Evans, Mr Hicks, Mr Knott, Mr Price.
ix

JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN SECURITY INTELLIGENCE ORGANISATION-Mr Gorman (Presiding Member), Mr Campbell, Mr Dodd, Mr B. C. Scott, Senator Coulter, Senator Minchin, Senator Zakharov.
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-The Speaker (Chair), the President, Mr Cameron, Mr M. J. Evans, Mr Hicks, Mr Knott, Mr Price, Senator Coates, Senator Knowles.
CORPORATIONS AND SECURITIES-Mr S. F. Smith (Chair), Mr Beale, Mr Humphreys, Mr Sinclair, Mr Tanner, Senator Cooney, Senator Gibson, Senator McGautan, Senator Neal, Senator Spindler.
NATIONAL CRIME AUTHORITY-Mr Cleeland (Chair), Mr Duffy, Mr Filing, Mr Quick, Mr Vaile, Senator Jones, Senator Loosley, Senator Spindler, Senator Troeth, Senator Vanstone.
NATIVE TITLE-Senator C. V. Evans (Chair), Mrs Gallus, Mr Knott, Mr Latham, Mr Nehl, Mr Quick, Senator Campbell, Senator Chamarette, Senator Ellison, Senator Reynolds.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr L. J. Scott (Chair), Mr Beale, Mr Brown, Mrs Easson, Mr Fitzgibbon, Mr Griffin, Mr Haviland, Mr Somlyay, Mr Taylor, Mr Vaile, Senator Cooney, Senator Forshaw, Senator Gibson, Senator Neal, Senator Woods.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Hollis (Chair), Mr J. N. Andrew, Mr Braithwaite, Mr Gorman, Mr Halverson, Mr Humphreys, Senator Bums, Senator Calvert, Senator Devereux.
JOINT COMMITTEES
ELECTORAL MATTERS (Formed 18 May 1993)-Senator Foreman (Chair), Mr Cobb, Mr Connolly, Mr Griffin, Mr Melham, Mr S. F. Smith, Mr Swan, Senator Chamarette, Senator C. V. Evans, Senator Lees, Senator Minchin, Senator Tierney.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS, DEFENCE AND TRADE (Formed 18 May 1993): Senator Loosley (Chair), Mr Atkinson, Mr Campbell, Mr Duffy, Mr Ferguson, Mr Fitzgibbon, Mr Gibson, Mr Grace, Mr Halverson, Mr Hawker, Mr Hicks, Mr Hollis, Mr Jull, Mrs Kelly, Mr Langmore, Mr Lieberman, Mr Price, Mr Simmons, Mr Sinclair, Mr Taylor, Senator Bourne, Senator Brownhill, Senator Chapman, Senator Childs, Senator Crichton-Browne, Senator Denman, Senator Harradine, Senator Jones, Senator Margetts, Senator Reynolds, Senator Teague.
MIGRATION (Formed 18 May 1993)-Senator McKiernan (Chair), Mr Ferguson, Mr Holding, Mr Ruddock, Mr Sinclair, Mrs Sullivan, Mr Woods, Senator Cooney, Senator Short.
NATIONAL CAPITAL AND EXTERNAL TERRITORIES (Formed 27 May 1993)-Mr Chynoweth (Chair), Mr Cameron, Mr Jenkins, Mr Langmore, Mr McLeay, Mr Sharp, Senator Bell, Senator Coates, Senator Colston, Senator Crichton-Browne, Senator Macdonald, Senator Reid.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEES
CERTAIN FAMILY LAW ISUES (Formed 18 May 1993)-Mr Price (Chair), Mr K. J. Andrews, Ms Henzell, Mr L. J. Scott, Mr Williams, Senator Brownhill, Senator Carr, Senator Neal, Senator Reid, Senator Spindler. (To report by 30 June 1995.)

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk of the Senate-H. Evans Deputy Clerk of the Senate-A. Lynch Clerk-Assistant (Table)-C. J. C. Elliott Clerk-Assistant (Corporate Management)-J. Vander Wyk Clerk-Assistant (Procedure)-P. O'Keefe Clerk-Assistant (Committees)-R. Laing
Usher of the Black Rod-R. Alison
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Deputy Clerk of the House-I. C. Harris
First Clerk Assistant-B. C. Wright Clerk Assistant (Procedure)-1. C. Cochran First Assistant Secretary (Committees and Corporate Services)-M. W. Salkeld
Clerk Assistant (Table)-J. W. Pender Serjeant-at-Arms-D. Elder
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Templeton Chief Hansard Reporter-B. A. Harris
Assistant Chief Reporter (House of Representatives)-V. M. Barrett Assistant Chief Reporter (Senate)-M. A. R. McGregor
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-M. W. Bolton
x

REPRESENTATIVES

2757

Tuesday, 8 November 1994
Mr SPEAKER (Hon. Stephen Martin) took the chair at 12.30 p.m., and read prayers.
FAMILY LAW REFORM BILL 1994 [No.2]
Consideration resumed from 13 October.
Second Reading
Mr DUNCAN (Makin-Parliamentary Secretary to the Attorney-General) (12.31 p.m.) -I move:
That the bill be now read a second time.
On 30 June a draft of this bill was introduced into this House to enable exposure for public comment and consultation on the principles and policies with major institutions involved in family law, namely, the Family Court of Australia, the Family Court of Western Australia, the Family Law Council and the family law section of the Law Council of Australia, as well as with numerous community bodies interested in the topic.
Those consultations were most productive in identifying some weaknesses with the original bill. The government thanks those who gave of their time and expertise to advance the quality of this legislation. Although there was broad agreement with the significant change of approach in dealing with matrimonial breakdown, there remain some differences of view with the detail of the provisions now before this House.
Every member of this parliament receives more representations on dissatisfaction with, and perceived inequities arising out of, the operation of the Family Law Act 1975 and its companion child support legislation than probably any other issue. People suffering significant emotional trauma and anguish as a result of the family breakdown naturally turn to their local member for help to reopen the matter to achieve 'justice'. Those approaches often raise feelings of despair in us when the opportunities to assist are, of course, inevitably limited.
Most of those who seek our assistance believe that their partner has been responsible for their traumatic situation. Further, most of

them believe that the law and the legal system is assisting that partner to exploit the breakdown to their own advantage. The report of the recent joint select committee on family law found that that view was erroneous. To the contrary, the committee found that, as a general rule, the act itself was an effective vehicle for the administration of family law matters in Australia. Nevertheless, the committee made 120 recommendations for reform of that law within the existing framework of the act.
Family law is the field in which more citizens will have direct contact with the law of the Commonwealth than any other aspect of the law. It is for this reason that the government announced, on its election, that family law reform was a major priority. The government's initiatives in mediation and other alternative dispute resolution mechanisms in family law are a strategic aspect of its efforts to reduce the need for court action.
The Family Law Act 1975 was one of the great social and legislative reforms of the Whitlam government and is not yet 20 years old. Despite this, it has been the subject of two broad ranging parliamentary joint select committee inquiries resulting in a very large number of recommendations for reform. As well, particular aspects of the act have been examined and recommendations for reform made by bodies such as the Family Law Council and the Australian Law Reform Commission. Many of the recommendations for reform by those non-parliamentary inquiries have been given effect to in recent years.
The government's response to the recent joint select committee report accepted the major thrust of its recommendations. By implementing those recommendations which the government accepts, the parliament should go a long way in providing a simpler, fairer and speedier family law justice system for all Australians.
The purpose of this bill is to give effect to those recommendations relating to part VII of the Family Law Act dealing with children, and to clarify and extend the alternative dispute resolution mechanisms available in family law. The government also intends to introduce a further bill this sitting dealing

2758

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

with recommendations of the joint select committee on matrimonial property, prenuptial financial agreements and some other miscellaneous issues. I anticipate that this further bill will be passed by the parliament early next year to enable the commencement of all the amendments together in the second half of 1995.
Once amended by this bill the act will emphasise the importance the government places on methods of dispute resolution other than litigation by categorising counselling and mediation as primary dispute resolution. Couples whose relationships have broken down will thus be encouraged to seek a settlement of their differences through these mechanisms.
The government is already committed to significant funding of a range of programs for marriage and family skills-marriage counselling, family mediation and family skills, and breakdown prevention-marriage education. In 1993-94 grants for these purposes totalled $20.7 million. In addition to the funding already provided, a large number of the joint select committee recommendations had budgetary implications either for additional funding of existing programs or for the establishment of new programs.
A modest start to implementation of these recommendations was made in the recent budget. Further consideration will be given to implementation of the remaining recommendations in future budgets. As family law is one of the main areas where Australians come into contact with Commonwealth laws, particular consideration will be given to the level and priority of family law funding in the context of a justice statement that the Prime Minister (Mr Keating) proposes to make early next year.
I am particularly pleased that a start was made on the provision of funding for mediation. This is favoured as a means of enabling separating parties to solve their differences themselves rather than leaving the problem in the hands of lawyers and judges. Community based mediation services have been funded for some years-and this is continuing and will be expanded.

The additional funding in this year's budget is a seeding allocation to enable mediation services to be provided in a number of alternative ways and evaluated on a consistent basis to ensure that the services being provided are both effective and appropriate. This funding follows the completion of a successful pilot of mediation in the Family Court. It provides funding to both court annexed and community based mediation. This will enable government to access a range of options as to where the emphasis for the delivery of mediation services should be placed in the future.
Counselling provided for by the act has been extended to recognise and make provision for mediation services in family law to be delivered by community based organisations and approved individuals possessing the necessary qualifications for delivering mediation services. This bill makes significant changes to the existing provisions relating to counselling. It provides a wider scope for community based counselling than has been available in the past.
The bill also extends the ambit of counselling. The limitations in the current definition of marriage counselling prevented counselling of some family issues or concerns being handled by these community based bodies. The bill now includes a definition of family and child counselling which will enable community based bodies to engage in a much broader range of counselling than before; in particular, counselling in relation to children whether the parties are married or not.
A significant departure in this bill from the approach recommended by the joint select committee is in the relationship between children and their parents. The committee recommended that the existing terminology of guardianship, custody and access should be retained. That terminology suffers from connotations of proprietorial rights in children, delivering them as the spoils of victory to the parent gaining custody.
The government was not convinced of the select committee's view that a change in terminology and approach was unnecessary and sought from the Family Law Council a report on the operation of the Children Act 1989 in the UK. This act has moved away

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2759

from the existing approach in Australia. I thank the council for its prompt and incisive report which was tabled in this House on 3 May.
It is over a century since legislators removed the notion of husbands having 'property or ownership' in married women. Surprisingly, some adults still adhere to this 'property' notion in respect of their offspring, particularly as a basis of power vis-a-vis the other parent. Dr Don Browning, Professor of Ethics and Psychological Studies at the University of Chicago, in May of this year, whilst addressing an International Year of the Family seminar in Melbourne, said, 'Parents had become too selfish and tended to put their own needs ahead of those of their children.' Many of the representations that parliamentarians receive seem to bear out that view. This bill seeks to redress that proprietorial attitude in a number of important ways.
In December 1990 Australia ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. That convention contains a number of basic rights in the raising and development of children towards adulthood. The objects clause to the new part VII of this bill gives recognition to such rights by specifying a number of such rights that should be observed in any agreements or decisions concerning children.
Further, the bill clarifies a general community misconception that parents have rights in respect of children. The bill gives legislative recognition to the common law principle, enunciated in the UK case of Gillick v. West Norfolk and Wisbech AHA and adopted by the majority of the High Court in Secretary of the Department of Health and Community Services v. JWB and 5MB-known as Marion's case-that:
... the principle of law is that parental rights are derived from parental duty and exist only so long as they are needed for the protection of the person and property of the child.
The bill is drafted on the basis of parental responsibilities for the care, welfare and development of children. Also the provisions are drafted to enable parties to understand the legislative approach and feel confident in negotiating and agreeing between themselves a proper basis for discharging all those re-

sponsibilities in an atmosphere where the child feels love from the parents and is free from the traumatic circumstances that seem to characterise many marital breakdowns at present.
It is consistent with the government's aim to encourage the use of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms and the bill, therefore, aims to assist parents to agree arrangements for their children rather than having solutions imposed upon them. Division 4 of part VII of the bill contains provisions for parenting plans and encourages their use. Such plans are registrable in the court and will be enforceable.
Where agreement is unable to be achieved, division 5 of part VII now provides for a significantly changed range of court orders in respect of the relationship between the parents and the child. It provides for residence, contact and special purpose orders. Unless a special purpose order is made removing a parent's requirement to undertake some or all of the responsibilities for the care, welfare and development of a child, those responsibilities are to be exercised jointly. This is a major departure from the present law under which the custodial parent exercises daily care and control of the child.
Division 7 of part VII repeats, with only minor modification, a number of the existing maintenance provisions and the location and recovery of children provisions to reflect these changes in terminology. Division 11 of part VII introduces into the act new provisions for dealing with family violence. It also addresses inconsistency between state and territory restraining orders and contact orders under this act. These provisions give effect to the agreement that has been reached in the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General on this issue.
The bill re-enacts a number of other provisions of the present act without modification to make the changes in terminology complete for that part of the act dealing with children. I commend the bill to the House, and I present the explanatory memorandum to the bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Dr Wooldridge) adjourned.

2760

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

SOCIAL SECURITY (PARENTING ALLOWANCE AND OTHER MEASURES) LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL 1994
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 7 November, on motion by Mrs Crosio:
That the bill be now read a second time.
upon which Mr Ruddock moved by way of amendment:
That all words after "That" be omitted with a view to substituting the following words: "whilst not declining to give the Bill a second reading, the House condemns the Government for:
(1) its inability to solve the unemployment crisis;
(2) the continued failure to provide adequate assistance to low income families;
(3) its harsh treatment of older single women with limited employment experience, including the abolition of the widow B pension;
(4) financially disadvantaging groups of unemployed low income earners by way of changes to the job search/newstart allowance income tests;
(5) the public confusion created by the introduction of the home child care allowance regime, and the subsequent confusion which will result from the parenting allowance, partner allowance and wife pension changes; and
(6) its failure to provide additional home child care support to low income families, principally the unemployed".
Mr WAKELIN (Grey) (12.45 p.m.)- When we adjourned last night I was making some interesting observations about the shifting political demographics in Australia. Of those electorates with the highest family income levels, about 60 per cent are represented by Labor and 40 per cent by the coalition. That is a fundamental shift. It would be quite a challenge for the government to explain how it is representative of the lower socio-economic groups when 60 per cent of the 74 highest income earning seats in the House of Representatives are held by the Labor Party.
That brings me back to the subject of the legislation before us, the parenting allowance. In my comments yesterday I made the point that in the last 20 years we have moved from a situation where 13 per cent of those over 16

years of age were reliant on the government in one form or another for their allowances to the situation now where the number is 33 per cent and probably nearer 35 per cent.
I was also commenting on the role of the employer in the unemployment equation. Unemployment, as everyone including the Prime Minister (Mr Keating) agrees, is the greatest cause of poverty in this country. My electorate of Grey is among the lower 10 per cent of income earners in the country by electorate. I have come to the conclusion that, by giving employers greater encouragement, we can do far better than we have done in the past to overcome the evil of unemployment.
In the electorate of Grey, 22.5 per cent of the labour force are self-employed or employers. The people of Grey are certainly willing to have a go, take risks and use their initiative to earn that extra dollar. I am not going to dwell on and whinge about the barriers to employers and business. I am simply stating that if we were to encourage business more there would be a far better outcome for us as a nation. There can be no doubt that for those in small business, be they business owners or managers, the cards are certainly stacked against them.
The electorate of Grey suffers particularly from distance. Representing as it does 92 per cent of the land mass of South Australia, it relies very much on transport. One of the government's favourite revenue raisers is fuel excise and its impact on people in regional Australia is quite out of proportion to the effect on those who live in more urbanised parts. The great difficulty that this government has is in trying to explain to regional areas how that taxation measure is fair, how it encourages business and how it encourages regional investment. We are trying to find the real reason for family income being so low in many of these regional centres and why the federal government needs to introduce schemes such as the parenting allowance.
In effect, the parenting allowance is only disguising the government's failing of not allowing Australian families to create their own wealth. If we put the barriers too high, if we put too many impediments in the way of business, particularly in the regions, we

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2761

will prevent this nation from reaching its potential and we will force people into the social welfare net. In the last 20 years that net has trebled, and during that period we have had something like 14 or 15 years of Labor government.
If families have the option to take on a job or to start up their own business, they are able to contribute to the country's wealth and build a future for themselves instead of-and I keep coming back to this-relying on the federal government for income support. That is the dilemma; that is the trick that we have played on ourselves. Whilst I am an avowed opponent of the government, I certainly feel that I am part of this nation; and I am certainly part of an alternative government.
Given the circumstances as they stand, I applaud the moves to extend income support for low income families. We must ensure that the Australian community and government support them through the rough times. However, I am not convinced that the government has gone anywhere near far enough beyond the welfare approach or that it has attempted to address the root cause of unemployment and, by Australian standards, the poverty problems. I emphasise again: we need much more than new government allowances. To put it simply, we need jobs. We need a government which will help Australia create jobs. Sadly, after 11 years, it is clear that this government is able only to recycle people through its various programs.
Mrs Crosio-The statistics don't say that. Mr WAKELIN-But it is true, unfortunately. I do not underestimate the genuineness of the parliamentary secretary and her belief in what the government is doing but after 50 labour market programs over the last 11 years and 26 major economic statements we still have nearly a million people unemployed. With rising interest rates, with a current account deficit which this government seems incapable of turning around and which certainly the Prime Minister is reluctant to acknowledge, and particularly with the situation in regional Australia where we know the political battlefield will be more acutely tested this time, it is time that the government acknowledged that there are more deep rooted

issues than just providing government allowances.
Mr QUICK (Franklin) (12.54 p.m.)-I welcome the opportunity to speak today on this very important bill. The Working Nation document introduced with the last budget by the Prime Minister (Mr Keating) represents a series of the most significant reforms in Australia's recent history. The Social Security (Parenting Allowance and Other Measures) Legislation Amendment Bill that we are currently debating is a valuable and essential component of that series of reforms. Working Nation, in all its detail, represents this government's preparedness to involve itself in the implications that the market and the economy have over all Australians but, more particularly, over the unemployed, the long-term unemployed and the low income families spread throughout Australia.
Through the Working Nation document, this federal Labor government has shown that it will not forget the casualties of the international recession, who without real assistance would be the first to be left behind as the economy quickly picks up. We had stark evidence of that when the last recession hit us. This Labor government has ensured that real assistance is provided to unemployed and low income people through training for employment and subsidies to employers and real income support to the individuals and families who need it most. Australians have shown by voting for the Labor government over the last 11 years that they do not want to share the fate of those in England, who in their millions have experienced the engineering of the Conservative Party, where class division is seen as acceptable by the wealthy and privileged and the rest have to suffer and bear it.
It is for this reason that I am really proud to stand on this side of the House. The opposition with its fundamentalist views of the economy has the belief that somehow, by some act of faith, the markets will sort themselves out. It still clings to an old-fashioned notion of a self-equilibrating economy. That theory, that irresponsible notion, reflects the true attitude of the Liberal opposition towards most Australians. The Liberals believe that if

2762

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

there is a group left behind following an international recession that is the hard, cruel world of economics. Personally, I think that attitude is deplorable, and Working Nation ensures that that type of ideology is left where it belongs: in opposition. This federal Labor government is quite prepared to make the hard decisions required to provide fairness and equity to all Australians, and that places us in stark contrast to those opposite.
It is interesting to note that when those opposite are confronted with the inevitable changes to the social security system as we refine and improve it-these changes which are beneficial to a great number of Australians and their family members-they always seem to manage to dredge up the examples quoted by the previous speaker of the Peters of this world. They like to attempt to deflect what is really their party's uncaring concern for low income families and their long-term inability to put forward really effective strategies to deal with this vital issue.
The shadow spokesperson moved an amendment condemning this government for -and I will only mention some of these ridiculous assertions-its inability to solve the unemployment crisis. This statement flies in the face of overwhelming evidence that this is not really so. This government has put in place a whole range of measures which have seen a massive increase in the number of people gaining jobs in the past 12 months400,000 in fact with, and I am quite proud to say, 90,000 of these going to the long-term unemployed, the people that we left behind when there was a growth in the economy and employment after the last recession.
He also stated that this government shows its continued failure to provide adequate assistance to low income families. Since we have been in government, a sum of $6 billion has been transferred in family payments, particularly to low income families and families on incomes up to the extension of the income test for the family allowance. To also state that we are financially disadvantaging groups of unemployed low income earners by way of changes to the jobsearch and newstart allowance income test is ludicrous. We have now put in place case management structures,

which will enable these financially disadvantaged groups of low income unemployed people to re-enter the work force; to wit, the 90,000 that are now off the long-term unemployed queue and are back into full-time employment.
We should contrast these benefits that we have introduced with what the opposition proposed in its manifestos at the last election. I will not go into the detail of those because we hear them dragged up every time those opposite start to condemn us. It is no wonder that we are sceptical of the feigned indignation of the shadow minister and his proposed amendments.
This important bill implements five white paper announcements. First of all, it will ease the income test for recipients of jobsearch, newstart or sickness allowances, giving the income test procedures more flexibility. In an age where part-time employment opportunities have grown dramatically there need to be more opportunities for unemployed people to seek this style of work. Currently, there are guidelines that restrict in a clear-cut way the amount of income earned. This more flexible approach will provide a greater incentive for unemployed people to seek part-time work and still receive the security of social security benefit. I believe this reform is a positive recognition of the type of participation we now have in the employment sector and the type of direction a component of our economy has taken.
In recognition that all adults should be receiving individual incomes, individuals will now be income tested accordingly. The partner income test is an important component of the changes to income testing. Previously a whole family was income tested and, in the majority of the cases, only the male of the family would seek employment. The employment of the male could exclude opportunities for his wife or partner to work. The new partner allowance means that both partners of an unemployed couple will gain financially from working additional part-time hours. This will give people the opportunity to participate first of all in part-time work and then hopefully to be part of the 90,000 who are now in the full-time work force. I think this will give

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2763

them an ideal opportunity and a real incentive to participate. As we have noted in the last several months, the participation rate is increasing as people gain confidence, and having this flexibility will ensure that more people will participate and then enter the work force.
The new parenting allowance will be made available to low income families where one parent receives a benefit or low income and the other partner cares for the children. The critical reform here is that it will address a long standing complaint about the lack of incentives for unemployed families to seek full-time work. The parenting allowance will allow additional income to continue to go to the parent who remains the primary child carer not employed in the work force. In addition, the home child-care allowance will be paid to the primary child carer and not be subject to a family income or assets test. It is interesting to note that an education payment will be made available to recipients of a wife pension, a partner allowance, a parenting allowance, a widow allowance or a mature age partner allowance.
I am also pleased to see that the government has introduced the widow allowance. As I have noted in my electorate of Franklin, many middle aged women are showing real concern over the lack of adequate recognition of their position at their time of life. There are many women whose husbands have suddenly passed away and who have been automatically placed on a benefit like jobstart or newstart. Many of these women are placed in this position at a time in their lives when they have little or no recent work experience and are then challenged to try to enter the work force. These women are finding it very difficult to find employment without adequate skills and training. I honestly believe that these women deserve special recognition and more flexibility in the way they report to the Department of Social Security in relation to income. As I said, I am pleased the reform in this area achieves that end.
I think it is important to note that this government has shown a real preparedness to continually reform the social security system. It does not just put the act in place and not

refine it. We also show a preparedness to encourage people back into the work force by providing safety nets for those people who are unemployed or are on low incomes and to provide real equality and fairness with income throughout our community. This reflects in no small way the real commitment that we have shown to this nation.
The Social Security (Parenting Allowance and Other Measures) Legislation Amendment Bill 1994, long though the title may be, is a very important step in the series of reforms provided through the Working Nation document. I have no doubt whatsoever that this is a correct and indeed morally responsible initiative that one would expect a federal government whose emphasis is on fairness and equity to introduce into this House. I commend the bill to the House.
Mrs MOYLAN (Pearce) (1.06 p.m.)- I was very interested yesterday to listen to the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social Security (Mrs Crosio) make the second reading speech of the Social Security (parenting Allowance and Other Measures) Legislation Amendment Bill and acknowledge the effect that poverty has on women in Australia. As a group, women are the poorest people in Australia today.
What intrigued me as I listened yesterday and reread the Hansard this morning was the language of this bill. The government is maintaining that the bill continues major reform-reform which has arisen from the government's white paper Working Nationof Australia's income support system for unemployed people. In terms of the content and the language of the bill, I wondered how I might feel, when I tried to work my way through the maze that this bill is, if I were amongst the poorest of Australian people, if I were unemployed, if I were an income support recipient with children under 16, if I were the partner of a low income earner or if I were a partner with a low personal income and dependent children under 16. I think the Australian public deserves more than this. It takes more than just changing titles on certain provisions to make real gains and real headway in making adequate provision for the poorest group of people in our community.

2764

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

Personally, I was horrified. I was horrified at the language. I doubt that very many Australians out there would begin to have any understanding of either the parliamentary secretary's speech or the language of this bill in its totality. Quite frankly, if I were an Australian person out there trying to work my way through the bill, I would be horrified. I would be horrified at the complexities and at the number of changes. The public can see through this. The government has sought to make what are essentially just name changes to certain sections, complicating the manner in which this bill is set out. In effect, it is giving no real gains and making no real changes to the lives of those people who are affected by unemployment and other difficulties.
Those people would be confused by the extent of the changes. They would be confused and concerned at what was available and whether or not they were eligible. One of the problems of this bill is that people who were formerly eligible do not know whether they still are. I have received many letters, as have many other members in this place, from people in my electorate who are distressed. The bill originally sought, in giving the parenting allowance to the caring partner, to acknowledge the role of the carer. In the majority of cases that role falls to the mother, yet I have had letters from women in my electorate who would be glad if they could access just some of the benefits. I am referring to women who are on a low income threshold in partnership with their husbands, who are perhaps self-employed in a one-man business. Their husbands may be carpenters, plumbers or other tradespeople.
A letter I received from one of my constituents states that she now qualifies for nothing and her husband no longer gets the spouse rebate against the family income. So they were total losers. Yet these are people who are operating on very low income levels.
It is very nice of the government to acknowledge the caring role of a lot of women and to make that payment available to them, but this bill has been ill thought out and so, where women are in the situation of sharing the responsibility for small family businesses,

where they are earning only a small income, it is of no benefit to them whatsoever.
The members of our community who have to confront the changes encompassed in this bill have already been severely disadvantaged. They are already under severe stress from the circumstances in which they find themselves. To have to go down to the local DSS office or to have to complete the kinds of forms that are required to qualify for the changed arrangements in this bill is daunting for many of those people. They are not in the situation, as are the parliamentary secretary and the minister, of having a bevy of advisers .to advise them on how best to go about thls. They are just ordinary, everyday people who are not accustomed to the legal jargon of the bill. There is very little consideration given to helping those people through the process.
The difficulty is that it is not only the everyday out-there people, ordinary Australians-they are not so ordinary, in my viewwho have difficulty understanding this bill. Back in May this year, when I was filling in for the member for Berowra (Mr Ruddock) as shadow social security minister, I had to take the Working Nation paper through the parliament. At that time we did ask a question of the Prime Minister (Mr Keating) about one aspect of these allowances. He was unable to answer the question and was very confused about the provisions. So even our Prime Minister had difficulty with one aspect of the Working Nation paper and that part is incorporated in this bill. I will come back to that shortly.
The people who, unfortunately, have to administer this legislation out there in the real world-that is, the people in the DSS offices-also have difficulty. I received a letter in the mail this morning from one of my constituents. I quote from it because it represents a fairly common scenario, at least in my electorate. People go down to the DSS office and find that the DSS officers, the people who have to deal with the realities of this legislation, do not fully understand th~ le~isla tion are very confused and leave thelr chents very confused as well. My constituent said:
I am writing to you to inform you of my concerns and disappointment with regard to the treatment I

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2765

have received from the Department of Social Security.
From my dealings with officers of the department I have found that they work extremely hard. They do not have an easy job, but they are very often just not up to the task. One could not expect them to be. If the Prime Minister does not understand his own legislation, how can he expect his staff out there administering it to understand it? I am not wanting to take any pot shots at DSS staff, because in my electorate we have found them extremely helpful; they go out of their way to try to resolve problems. My constituent said that she was very concerned about the difficulty she had. I will not read all of the personal detail, but she goes on to say:
As a newly bereaved widow at forty years of age I suddenly found that my private affairs were no longer private. I will list some instances of my dealings with the Department of Social Security below.
\. I was expected to complete a review document on a regular basis. These documents can be quite confusing, distressing and time consuming to someone who is experiencing grief especially with continual reference to partner &/or spouse.
2. On one occasion after much waiting and button pressing on the phone I eventually got through with a query about my sole parent payment but made the unfortunate mistake of referring to it as "my widows pension." I was very rudely and abruptly told, quote;
"You are too young to be a widow. As far as we are concerned you are a sole parent, the same as if you were unmarried, divorced or separated."
3. I was told by a department employee soon after my husband died that the department reserves the right to inspect my home at anytime to ensure that I am not sharing it with a defacto.
4. More recently I was contacted by the Department of Social Security threatening to stop my Additional Family Payment because I failed to notify them of my six day absence from the country in July. [This was a rushed decision to attend a conference in Singapore.] I was told that if I left my son in the care of my 'current partner' the matter could be rectified. However I do not have a 'current partner', which I was told means separated husband or defacto, so I left my son in the care of my husband's parents-his next of kin in my absence. Apparently this wasn't good enough. I totally resent the fact that a defacto partner who has no relationship to my son is considered to be a more appropriate caregiver than his grandparents.

Another point raised on this issue was the fact that had my payment not been drawn during my absence I would not have been contacted. It seems it's 'the luck of the draw.'
I received yet another assessment form last week and again there is continual reference to my partner. Although my husband passed away some 21 months ago I still find it particularly painful to be expected to complete forms referring to his income, maintenance payments and authorisation to speak to him about my payment. I believe that there are many young widows and widowers with young families who resent being treated in an officious and tactless manner at a most devastating time of their lives. Surely the wording of documents could be modified or a new document prepared to take into account the feelings of the bereaved, and personnel given some training on how to deal with these matters.
When this kind of legislation is foisted onto an unsuspecting public, it is confusing not only to them and to the staff who have to administer it but also to the highest authority in the land-the Prime Minister. We would do the public a great service if we learnt to speak plain language, if we learnt to couch these bills in a much simpler way and probably made less changes than we currently do.
Yesterday in the parliament my colleague the shadow Minister for Social Security, the honourable member for Berowra (Mr Ruddock), pointed to the confusion that has arisen in the last year. He said:
It is perhaps indicative of this government's legislative performance that it has introduced this legislation to effectively subsume the home childcare allowance into another payment before the legislation to fully implement the home child-care allowance has been passed through the parliament. We are not even up to that yet. The Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No.3), which we debated when we were last here, seeks to abolish the with-child dependent spouse rebate-the payment which the home child-care allowance is replacing. The home child-care allowance is still in the Senate awaiting resolution.
The new home child-care legislation has been put to the House, but it has not yet been tidied up, and now we have the government making another change. Most of this change is a nonsense. It is not addressing the real issues that it is intended to address. It is not helping anyone. One subsumes the other.

2766

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

The rhetoric has been, 'We are going to beat our chests and we are going to do this you-beaut thing for the Australian public, and we are going to give you more money and improve your lot.' But when we get down to it, when we pull this bill apart and analyse it, it delivers nothing but confusion, angst and anxiety to the people that it is designed to serve. I see that as a very retrograde step.
This bill also addresses the issue of unemployment benefits. As I mentioned before, the taper system was the subject of a question I asked the Prime Minister this year about this situation because the government had changed the way in which the income test for unemployment was to be administered. Yes, there were some benefits there but they went to those unemployed people lucky enough to be at the highest end of the part-time earning arena. So people earning $100 or less in part-time income actually became worse off. We were looking at penalising the worst off in our community to improve the lot of the slightly better off. Again, I see that as retrograde legislation. It is ill thought out, ill conceived, confusing and a nonsense. My question to the Prime Minister was:
As a result of the changes to social security under the white paper, unemployed persons who earn less than $100 per week in addition to their benefits will be worse off than they are currently. Why is this government introducing a system that financially disadvantages those unemployed persons who are trying to help themselves and unable to find substantial part-time work?
The Prime Minister became incredibly confused. It would take me some time to read his full answer because he simply got right off that question and onto a different topic altogether by saying:
What will happen now is that a breadwinner, a husband, can earn $230 a week above the benefit. As a consequence, not one dollar will come from the spouse's benefit. When earnings go beyond $230, 70 per cent will come off the spouse's benefit so that the family income will rise. This is the benefit of changing the taper arrangements. That is why 118,000 families will be $59 a week better off.
I would suggest that the Prime Minister had quite a lack of understanding of his own legislation, and he finished off-

Mrs Crosio-It's not his legislation.
Mrs MOYLAN-It is his government's legislation, if you want to get pedantic.
Mrs Crosio-You think that everyone should know everything about everything.
Mrs MOYLAN-In his answer to the question he implied that everyone should know everything about everything, and he knew nothing about nothing. He had to be pulled down in his seat in the end. He did a complete wobbly, which we see very frequently in this place.
Mrs Crosio-If it is in Hansard, why don't you give the date?
Mrs MOYLAN-The date was May this year; it was not so long ago.
Mrs Crosio-This is November. What is the bill we have before us?
Dr Wooldridge-You talk about 1985.
Mrs Crosio-We are talking about the bill before the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jenkins)- Order! Those at the table will not have a private discussion.
Mrs MOYLAN-We are talking about the second reading speech for a bill before the House which provides the legislative mechanism for Working Nation to operate. The Prime Minister ended by talking about us as an opposition. He said:
They are so little interested in the unemployed ...
He is incredibly good at telling us all of our mistakes. My mother always used to say that when you start criticising people you had better take a look at yourself in the mirror because you are probably criticising other people for your own faults. The Prime Minister said:
They are so little interested in the unemployed, they do not even know about the interaction of the tapers, the separation of the payments, and the fact that one member of a couple can earn more now without affecting the income of the other until he or she gets over a certain amount of money. Then a diminished taper comes in.
He finished up by saying:
For God's sake, read the book. It might explain it to you.

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2767

He certainly was not successful in explaining it to anyone in the House on that particular day. This bill makes strategic changes to the income test for unemployed people but, as my colleague the member for Berowra pointed out yesterday and has previously outlined, it is a case of robbing Peter to pay Paul. We have seen no overall improvement in outcomes from this bunch of gobbledegook-and that is all it is-and we have managed to confuse a whole nation with the detail.
A program name change does not provide enhanced services for benefits, and this is certainly the case in the instance of this bill. In this case, a program name change has clearly been used to further disadvantage large sections of our community. Official figures suggest that one in six Australian children, 675,000, are growing up in households without a breadwinner.
Will these amendments help to overcome the poverty barrier and improve the standards of nearly 300,000 children still living in poverty, despite the former Prime Minister's guarantee that there would be no child living in poverty in this country? Will they reduce the stress in these families? I suggest to honourable members that they will not. I suggest that it is unlikely because of the difficulty people will have in understanding and accessing the benefits that may be available.
The complexity of the Social Security Act is becoming an all too familiar pattern, as we see with other acts. We have seen it with superannuation, which today is still failing to deliver to Australians any realistic hope that they will have a decent retirement fund, despite all the money that is being directed to that area. So this social security bill is just another one of these bungling attempts by the government to make changes, and it fails to deliver on that. (TIme expired)
Mr MARTYN EVANS (Bonython) (1.26 p.m.)-I rise to address this series of measures in the Social Security (Parenting Allowance and Other Measures) Legislation Amendment Bill. While there are a number of measures that are related and are before the House simultaneously, it is very much the

case that this social security package of legislation is an important component of the government's overall strategy, exemplified by the Working Nation document earlier this year and now coming through this House in a series of legislative packages. Contrary to the comments we have just heard from the previous speaker, the honourable member for Pearce (Mrs Moylan), and others on that side of the House these packages are designed very much to improve the lot of those Australians who, at this stage, do not have full time employment or, alternatively, are in a low-income paid employment position.
It is very much a part of the government's overall Working Nation strategy, with the important focus that that package has on the training, on the up-skilling and on the needs of individual people. In a sense, that overall program represents very massive changes and reforms to the system of not only providing training and management for those who are looking for work in this country but also providing for their families and for those who have the responsibility of caring for the young families of those particular people.
It is very much a program which delivers real and significant reforms in those areas. Often these kinds of reforms are complex. That is certainly the case, and I do not think anyone would deny that. The reality is that, in these days, if one is to provide real and meaningful reforms which actually affect the day-to-day income and lives of individual Australians in the kind of complex and technological society in which we live, it is often essential to have very complex legislation and programs behind that. Unfortunately, that is a necessity of the 1990s.
But the reality is that we should not shy away from important improvements and reforms in these areas of social security and income benefit support simply because of the complexities of those programs. The opposition had a very simple answer at the last election to ensure that these programs were not that complex-it was simply going to discontinue payment of benefits after a fixed period. I believe the suggested fixed period was some nine months. That would certainly have simplified the understanding of those

2768

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

programs for the people who fell off the end We can no longer assume that a spouse never

of that list at the end of nine months. I would takes up paid employment but, instead, often

certainly agree that that would be one outworks very hard in the home as the respon-

come of those kinds of program changes. sible carer of children. While that kind of

But that is not the sort of simplicity which the people of Australia are looking for. That

situation was the norm some decades ago, it is no longer the case now.

is a simple answer to a very complex probIt is essential that our social security legis-

lem. While I accept that these changes are, of lation, our employment legislation and our

necessity, quite complex in the language used packages to ensure that people have adequate

and in the way in which they are expressed in training meet those needs. So, yes, we have

legislation, the important component is that some complex changes in this area, but they

they deliver real and meaningful change at the are designed to address the changes we have

level of individuals, at the level of families seen in not only our society but also the

and at the level where it really counts: out in society right across the OECD. Indeed, recent

the Australian community. So that is a necesOECD reports have drawn attention to the

sary price that we, as members of parliament, need to use the social security system to top

have to pay in coming to grips with the up payments to families with low incomes to

complexities of this legislation if we are to ensure that these families are able to obtain a

deliver that kind of program change to the decent and acceptable standard of living. I am

community.

sure that all members of this House would

Indeed, the whole Working Nation strategy is very large and complex, but that is what it is-a strategy. It is a series of measures which are designed to achieve a result in the community to address the kind of situation we now face. The reality is that participation rates in employment have grown substantially over recent years as people have gained increasing confidence in the ability of the economy to deliver employment. They have rejoined the queue in the sense of looking for work-be that part-time or full-time workbecause of their increasing confidence in the economy's ability to deliver that work.

want to see this happen for low income families, but so far only this government has been able to provide the policy initiatives to underpin this.
We have also seen some very dramatic changes in those family structures, and the social security legislation changes which we have before us today seek to address in part those changes to the family. By splitting the benefit from a single payment to a family to one where each partner in that family receives a benefit component, the government is addressing the changes in society which have occurred. The government is also doing something else that is very important: it is

That increase in the participation rate and providing incentive for individuals within

the increase in the number of available posithose families to earn increased amounts of

tions for people have been quite dramatic in money through part-time work.

recent years. We have seen changes in employment growth, which is an achievement of which this government can be very proud.

While we all very much have the ideal in our minds of ongoing full-time employmentand that is certainly an ideal which we as a

But we are looking at changes here which community and a government should strive to

are very much also part of a global pattern. achieve-we have to accept the reality that at

The reality is that the global economy has the moment there is a trend towards part-time

changed quite dramatically. It is essential that employment and casual employment, and that

our employment strategies and our social is often very much in the interests of those

security strategies match those global changes. who take part in it. It is something which

It is no longer the case throughout the OECD people are accepting quite willingly these

that we can assume a family consists of a days. In some cases, some individuals find

single breadwinner and a person at homethat to be a preferable arrangement. It suits

usually the mother-with dependent children. their family circumstances, it allows for job

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2769

sharing between partners and it allows for the taper scales affect the payment of their ben-

sharing of child rearing tasks. Obviously, this efit.

is sometimes more in tune with the needs of families in the 1990s than the old social security system was in the past.

So, far from it being difficult for people to understand some of these changes, the reality is that they often organise their lives around

But, if we are going to do that, we have to those benefit payment schedules so as to

recognise that the payment system must ensure that their family receives the maximum

change. If we are going to provide support for payment. That, of course, is only a reasonable

the partner who is looking for employment, and appropriate thing to do for a family in

we also have to provide support for the that situation. I am not being critical in that

partner who is caring-often on a full-time context, but I think it is very important that

basis-for dependent children under 16. I we should not offer people disincentives to

believe that the incorporation of a minimum earn additional part-time income because that

payment within the home child-care allowis a very important part of ensuring that that

ance-which it has-for the spouse or partner family is empowered, that that family has

who stays at home is a very important step income to support itself and does not become

forward. It certainly provides partners who part of a dependency culture which we would

stay at home with a clear understanding that all want to avoid.

their role in society is very much valued, and the substantive payment from the government through the social security system underpins that caring role.

That is the very important distinction between this government's social security and employment policies and those of the opposition, because this policy could have achieved

It also ensures that substantial benefits are able to be drawn if either partner in the family seeks additional part-time work. That is where those discussions about the changes to the tapering of payments and the cut-off point for benefits are very relevant. Far from simply being a case of changing the name of

those objectives-and I suspect this is where the opposition was taking us at the last election, down a path of reducing benefits in order to provide incentive. That is not the way that this government would choose, under any circumstances, to proceed with this matter.

a benefit, this is a very significant reform in the way in which those benefits are paid and, very importantly-and I would have thought this was a point that the opposition would

The alternative-a very clear alternative in our minds-was one of increasing the benefit arrangements and gearing the benefit arrangements in such a way that we could increase

want to identify and congratulate the governthe income of low income families and those

ment on-the way in which that provides looking for work on a full-time basis to

incentive for people to secure additional work ensure that, without a benefit cut, we could and to ensure that they benefit from that still provide incentive to work. And that is

additional work when they undertake it.

why these changes have been recommended

The present arrangement is very much one in which every dollar earned above a modest

to the House by the Minister for Social Security (Mr Baldwin).

amount, a certain threshold value, causes a We are looking at a situation where the

loss of dollar for dollar income support. That developing world is able to take advantage of

seriously diminishes the incentives for people technological change and, through capital

to increase their earnings since they will investment and the payment of lower wages,

genuinely be no better off if they earned that able to influence the world economy in a way

money than they would have been had they which creates greater disparities than have

not. The Department of Social Security existed in the past on income levels. It is

statistics clearly reflect the way in which certainly the case that a lot of pressures on

people tend to group their income around our economy are coming from the developing

those cut-off points and with considerable countries-through Indonesia and through

attention to the way in which the income South-East Asia, for example, in our part of

2770

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

the world-where very massive capital investment in factories, particularly in the areas of textiles and clothing, can result in imports at a very competitive price but based on high technology and low wage rates. That is a very dangerous combination for our economy and one which, of course, we have been striving to meet.
But that also puts significant pressure on income disparities between the various sectors of our economy. That is where the social security system, through the kinds of changes which we have today, can be modified to address that pressure. Otherwise, the alternative, which the opposition has placed before us, is one of reducing benefits-a change which we very much reject.
As the leader of a parliamentary delegation, I have recently seen examples of industries in Indonesia, where very substantial investments had been made in those textile factories to produce a technology very similar to that which is operating in parts of Australia. Indeed, my colleague the honourable member for Corio (Mr O'Connor), who is to speak shortly in this debate, commented upon the similarity of those plants to some which he has seen in his own area.
The wage rates in those plants were very much lower. That continues to place pressure on our economy in a way that we need to address, not through reductions in wages, not through reductions in benefits, but through upskilling of our work force through the white paper on employment which has guaranteed that we will place a focus on training, on education and on knowledge based industries, which will ensure that the work force in this country is able to meet that challenge by improving the technological base of our economy, by improving the productivity of our economy, and without cutting wagesJmd benefits, which is the alternative solution.
The changes that we have seen in this parenting allowance are but one example of the measures in this bill. Indeed, they have been highlighted by other speakers. But the reality of this case is that the government is putting $250 million in additional program expenditure principally through the parenting allowance. Anyone who comes into this

House and claims, as some members opposite have, that this is nothing more than a change in the title of these bills or a change in the name of an allowance really needs to look very closely at the way in which this package fits into the overall measures which the government announced earlier this year and the way in which funding is being channelled through these programs-not only the parenting allowance but also the Working Nation statement-to ensure that substantial additional funds flow to low income families throughout Australia.
Those changes and the others that are part of this bill-changes which go some way towards improving incentive, ensuring that low income families are not disadvantaged by working more or by gaining additional employment and ensuring that each partner knows his or her income source and has a guaranteed understanding of his or her role in the family and the way in which the government supports that role through the payment of the home child-care allowance and the component which will be rolled into the overall benefit-form a very important contribution to the development of not only social security in this country but also, through the integrated system which is this government's approach, improvements in the working health of our nation.
Mr BRADFORD (McPherson) (1.41 p.m.) -The honourable member for Bonython (Mr Martyn Evans) may have convinced himself about the relative merits of the Social Security (parenting Allowance and Other Measures) Legislation Amendment Bill, but I do not think he has convinced anybody else. He talked about the relative merits of simplicity and complexity. Having walked into the chamber, I found that the government had already distributed three pages of amendments to the legislation that it has just put before the House. One wonders why it can never get these things right. One can be sure that, as soon as the legislation takes effect, there will be a whole lot of other unintended consequences that it comes rushing in here to change.
We have made the point in this debate so far that the home child-care allowance has so

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2771

many anomalies in it that it is no wonder the government has had to rush in to change it. I cannot help reflecting-an increasing number of people in Australia are beginning to reflect on it-on why the exercise was necessary in the first place. There was a very good mechanism to achieve the purpose in existence at the time. The dependent spouse rebate worked perfectly well-it achieved a particular purpose-but the government decided that the terminology was politically incorrect. Therefore, it went to all this trouble to change the whole arrangement.
The Prime Minister (Mr Keating) got up before the election and, with great flourish, made a statement about how the government would support the stay at home parent-most often the stay at home mum-and provide a fantastic new amount of money for this purpose. But he did not spell out then-there has been an awful lot of obfuscation since the fact that the taxpayer in the family would fund it. So a family like mine, and thousands of families across Australia, now finds that we are exactly $10 per month better off. Forget the $30 per week that we were promised.
The truth really came out when I found that my tax had been reduced to effectively pay this amount of money that my wife now gets via the Australian Taxation Office and the Department of Social Security. So we have gone to all this trouble. Imagine how many more public servants have been employed to process all this. We have not yet received our payment, because they keep sending us letters asking us for more information about our bank accounts and how much interest we are getting on them. Every time that we send something, we receive another letter asking us for more information.
None of this information was required in the tax return under the old system. There were virtually no questions about eligibility for the dependent spouse rebate. It was all very simple. So out of simplicity we now have absolute confusion and complexity. To what end? Again, for the government to make some sort of token statement about wanting to support the stay at home parent.

I support the amendment to the second reading motion for this bill. The government deserves condemnation for its failure to address the problem of unemployment in any real and meaningful way. I have spoken in this place on many occasions about tokenism. This government is really very good at tokenism. Its schemes, initiatives and statements come out one after the other. In the end, it never really solves any of the fundamental problems.
The problems that it is trying to solve most often are the ones that it created in the first place. We never really get anywhere. The solutions to unemployment-I will not go through them; I do not have time today-are very much simpler than the government likes to think. All of the schemes that it has cooked up, the complex arrangements and all of the programs that it has in place, are not going to do anything at all in the long run to create real jobs or a real solution to unemployment.
The government's solution has been simply to throw more money at the problem. That is why we have a problem balancing the budget. We keep getting further and further behind. We are facing a huge deficit which, of itself, is creating enormous problems for average Australians, because that deficit which the government is running up will continue to place pressure on interest rates. In the end, the average Australian is going to be much worse off as home mortgage payments go up each month to fund all these programs that the government has put in place to try to solve the problem that, as I said, it has created in the first place.
As well, of course, despite what the member for Bonython and others say, the whole social security system becomes so complex and confusing and the welfare system becomes so complex and confusing that nobody quite knows what is going on. We keep getting letters. Heaven forbid, we are now a number in the Department of Social Security! Many Australians will not have experienced the joys of being a number in the Department of Social Security. We are now getting these letters saying, 'Dear Mr or Mrs so and so, I am writing to you about your claim for home child-care allowance.' Then, 'Please read the

2772

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

back of this letter carefully. It will tell you about your future payments, your social security rights and when you will have to contact us.' We are looking forward to those opportunities on a regular basis!
Then there is the key paragraph in these letters-I hope people are aware of what it actually means-where the department says, 'If you or your spouse have been receiving the rebate'-the one that it is taking off to fund the home child-care allowance-'through reduced tax instalments being deducted from your pay, you must now see your employer to fill in a new employment declaration form. Any questions about tax arrangements should be directed to the tax office.' If people have trouble with the Department of Social Security, good luck with the tax office!
The point is that we have had an underlying objection to this arrangement all along. People who do not adjust their tax deductions through their employer-there will be thousands that do not do that-will suddenly find at the end of the year that they will get a bill for the home child-care allowance that their spouse has been getting from the Department of Social Security. If this whole thing was meant to improve family and marital harmony, can you imagine the furore when a spouse that previously got the dependent spouse rebate gets a bill for the amount of money that has come to the wife, in most cases, via the Department of Social Security and the tax office?
Ultimately, of course, this whole exercise has managed to drag more and more people into the welfare net. The percentage of the population in Australia receiving welfare benefits as their primary form of income rose from 10 per cent of the population in 1971 to 27.5 per cent in 1992. At the moment in Australia there are 4.4 million people whose primary source of income is welfare of some sort.
The amendments in this bill, as we have already said, make largely cosmetic changes. There is no doubt that the overall effect will be more and more confusion. The parenting allowance, combined with the restructuring of the partner allowance, addresses the anomaly whereby unemployed families were unable to

claim the home child-care allowance. As I said, I have spoken about the home child-care allowance on many occasions in this place. I suspect we have won the debate, although it will take a while for the real truth to sink into everybody. But there is no doubt in my mind, and I think in the minds of an increasing number of Australians, that this is one of the greatest hoaxes perpetrated by this government on the Australian people, and more and more people are coming to realise that particular fact.
The parenting allowance, which is a commendable concept, provides an allowance of up to $132.65 per week. The words 'up to' need to be understood because the government has a habit of standing up and portraying the very best scenario that could exist in a situation as being evidence of its great
eMr generosity. The Prime Minister runs around to
the Minister for Social Security Baldwin) and says, 'We're going to give $132.65 per week by way of the parenting allowance.' If that amount were available to all parents by way of the parenting allowance, then it would be commendable and it would recognise a very valuable service provided by those spouses who stay at home and who deserve such an allowance.
The fact is that $132.65 is the maximum rate. In order to get the maximum rate of $132.65 per week, a family would need to have an income below $10,000 per year. If you are amongst those few families that earn less than $10,000 per year, then you will get the maximum rate. The rate then diminishes, so that a family which earns only approximately $19,000 per annum will get just $30 a week. It tapers off so quickly. The truth is very much different from that which is portrayed by the government. That $30 per week is about the same as the dependent spouse rebate. The government claims that nearly 120,000 low income families will receive an extra $59 a week on average. That is a very far cry from the $130 per week figure which no doubt we will hear ad infinitum.
As always the government has made grandiose promises but has failed to live up to the expectations which it has created. I have no doubt that this latest payment will again result

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2773

in widespread confusion and misunderstanding. I expect that that is part of the government's agenda: if you cannot convince them, you should try to confuse them. The government is very good at doing that.
Let us recap what the government is trying to achieve with this bill. The bill introduces the parenting allowance to subsume the home child-care allowance. It amends the income test for recipients of jobsearch allowance, newstart allowance, sickness allowance, partner allowance and widow allowance. It modifies the partner allowance to persons who have an age or a disability wage supplement, a disability support pension, a mature age allowance pensioner partner or a partner in receipt of rehabilitation allowance. It introduces a widow allowance, which supposedly replaces the widow B pension that the government vowed to phase out. It renames the existing widowed persons allowance to a bereavement allowance. It phases out the wife pension as a discrete payment. Wives of people granted a pension after 1 July or partners of allowance recipients will be able to apply for a parenting allowance, partner allowance, jobsearch allowance, disability support pension or carer pension depending on their circumstances.
The bill goes further and introduces an education entry payment for recipients of the wife pension, partner allowance, parenting allowance or mature age partner allowance. Finally-thank goodness-it repeals the sunset clause relating to the advance pharmaceutical allowance, which was another great scheme that the government brought in with a flourish and that hardly anybody took any advantage of at the time. That is the purpose of this legislation. If that is not confusing to people, I am not sure what the government would have to do if it wanted to try very hard-
Mr O'Connor interjecting-
Mr BRADFORD-You are next; you can try to make this sound like it makes some sense. It does not make sense to me and I do not think it makes sense to most people in Australia. Not only does it not make any sense but alsQ it does not even do much good for anybody. You can try to argue that it

does. I wonder what allowance or scheme you will come up with next. Hardly a week goes by when we do not have a new incentive, scheme or something that is supposed to fix up the problems you have created. But they never fix any of these problems; they just make them worse. If the bill is not confusing enough, it is just the last of three social security bills resulting from the measures announced in the 1994 budget and the white paper on employment and growth.
Perhaps the most alarming aspect of the government's social security amendments, in my view, is that the family is being dumped further into the welfare net. I have already made a point about the extent of welfare in this country. The government's whole philosophy has been to tum this nation into a welfare state. It is out to prove that it can work here, even though it has failed everywhere else in the world and in some places it has failed particularly dismally and tragically.
We need to understand-and people ought not to lose sight of this fact-that the Labor Party is a socialist party, although it makes all sorts of apologies for that and tries to obscure that fact. If that is not its basic philosophy, maybe someone from the Labor Party can tell me exactly what it is.
We have had more than 10 years of Labor government now, and that has carried on the Whitlam tradition which has actually wreaked havoc on our society-by almost any measure. If you look at all the measures of what is going on out there you will see the extent of the havoc that you people have actually wreaked on our society. Nothing is sacrosanct to you-no institution, no tradition, nothing. You want to throw everything out and you want to change everything.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Andrew)- Order! The member for McPherson keeps referring to 'you'. I did not pick him up earlier because he made the remark in response to an interjection from the member for Corio, but I would remind him that his remarks are appropriately addressed through the chair and that not even the member for Corio can accept full responsibility for all the initiatives and achievements-or, from the member for McPherson's point of view, the
difficulties-of the government.

2774

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

Mr BRADFORD-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. The Prime Minister indicated clearly yesterday in his answer to a question by the member for Wills (Mr Cleary) just how far he believed this socialist agenda has advanced. In fact, it has not advanced nearly far enough for the member for Wills, but that is another story. I am quite sure the government will not be happy until everyone is equally poor and it will not be happy until just about everybody is a number with the Department of Social Security. As I said, the government is not doing too badly. It has 4.4 million of the Australian population there already, including a lot of families such as mine and many others in Australia who did not want to be there in the first place. But we have been forced into the welfare net, into the Department of Social Security system, by this famous home child-care allowance, which I need to emphasise because the fact is you did not need-
Mrs Crosio-Don't take it; give it back. Give it to charity.
Mr BRADFORD-I am not saying we do not need the money. I am talking about the way we are getting it-and you should be able to see the truth in that. The fact is we used to get it in a perfectly reasonable way before. I will spell it out for you. It worked perfectly well through the tax system. Now we get it via the tax departmentI am still paying for it out of my tax-and the social security department, and we end up with $10 a month more than we were getting before.
I do not know how many times we have to spell out to you that that just does not make very much sense. The ultimate irony for you people, and for the Prime Minister yesterday when he was confronted with it in question time, is that many of the poor people have actually become poorer under Labor. You cannot stand up and say that you have been successful with your socialist agenda and the poor have actually become better off under Labor, because the lie has been given to that in recent days. It has become quite clear that the welfare poverty trap has actually ended up ensnaring thousands of Australians who are now actually worse off than they were before.

The real problem for the government is that it has come to recognise that higher welfare benefits actually decrease work effort and increase welfare dependence. Let me state the problem again, because you are actually coming to realise this. Higher welfare payments actually decrease work effort. You have recognised that in this legislation. You have said that, if welfare payments get too high, then obviously people are not going to work. Of course they are not going to work.
But, rather than solve that problem in a direct way by addressing it, you start to bring in these other schemes which complicate it but will not end up achieving the purpose. The fact is that you have now made it possible for people to decide not to work. Despite all the bandaids you might want to put on that by changing all the tapering arrangements and bringing in all these schemes, you have facilitated that choice for people.
The member for Bonython (Mr Martyn Evans) talks about disincentives. You will not solve that problem the way you are going. This government has given a whole new meaning to the term 'handout'. Many welfare recipients get a cheque in the mail with absolutely no obligations. What sort of society is that actually creating? It may create one that votes for the Labor Party but in the long term it will all come crashing down, and sooner or later the people of Australia will wake up to the fact that they have been absolutely deceived by the way this government has carried on over the last 10 or 11 years.
The chickens will come home to roost. In fact, I suspect they are coming rapidly home to roost now with the huge debt that you have created, though not for our generation, speaking for most people in here today. We will not have to contend with that $200 billion debt that you have created in the financing of all your schemes that you have come up with, but my children and my children's children will.
While the government keeps borrowing and the deficit goes up day by day, interest rates will go up and everybody will be hurt more by this government. Of course society should provide aid to those in need. We on this side

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2775

of the House are committed to ensuring that welfare goes to those who need it. Aid that is given in the way this government gives itthe government likes to talk about redistributing the aid and uses quaint terms like thatmerely becomes a handout which is harmful to both society and the recipients of that aid. These sorts of schemes that the government comes up with undermine the individual's ability to take responsibility for his or her own life.
I want to underline that, too, because I believe the intention is to create a welfare state, to get these 4.4 million people into the welfare system and to get a lot of Australian families who were doing quite well with the dependent spouse rebate and were previously not in the welfare system into it. Obviously, the government intends at every opportunity to get more Australians into the welfare net to give it numbers and to get them into the Department of Social Security welfare system. (Time expired)
Mr O'CONNOR (Corio) (2.01 p.m.)-It is with great pleasure that I support the Social Security (Parenting Allowance and Other Measures) Legislation Amendment Bill 1994. As has been stated by the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social Security (Mrs Crosio) when introducing this legislation, this bill gives legislative effect to the measures announced in the 1994 budget and the measures announced in the white paper on employment and growth-a document which certainly gets members of the opposition quite excited. I commend the Minister for Social Security (Mr Baldwin) and the parliamentary secretary for the excellent work they have done in bringing this legislation before the House.
I think there is a real need for members of the opposition and some elements of the community to come to grips with the breadth and depth of the Working Nation statement. It is probably the widest and most comprehensive statement that any government in the postwar history of this country has delivered on the floor of this parliament. It provides reforms to labour market assistance, a raft of industry policy initiatives, training and educational reforms, a strategy to give impetus to

the economic growth of regions and a stimulus to further micro-economic reform.
More importantly, the substance of the legislation before the House sets out a program for restructuring and further targeting of the social security system in this country. Other OECD nations are currently looking to Australia as a model for their own social security systems. Our system is acknowledged internationally as one of the most targeted and most comprehensive social security systems in the world.
We on this side of House make no apologies for Working Nation and the sentiments that it expresses. I draw the attention of the House to the very simple aim that is articulated quite clearly in that statement. In the words of Working Nation, 'It is our ambition to create a dynamic social democracy.' This piece of legislation is about creating a better and more dynamic social democracy. The measures contained in this legislation are indeed an important landmark in this nation's postwar journey. It is the Labor way to construct a more equitable society in Australia.
We have heard a lot from the opposition in recent days about the income disparities that it perceives has occurred in Australia in the past decade. I make no apologies on the floor of this House for the measures that have been undertaken by Labor in office over the past decade to protect and enhance the incomes and the living standards of working Australians.
The Prime Minister (Mr Keating) listed some of those measures in question time yesterday, and I would like to reiterate some of them here. Through the accord the government has supported wage increases to working families which this country can afford. Let it be a matter of public record that each one of those wage increases has been opposed by members of the coalition in the past decade, yet they come on to the floor of this House bleating about a concern for the low and middle income earners of this nation.
As far as tax levels are concerned, this government has introduced reductions in tax rates that have benefited low and middle income earners quite markedly. I guess this

2776

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

measure is part of what we call the social places. When Labor came to power some 10

wage-and one of the proud achievements of years ago there were some 40,000 places;

this government over the past decade is that now that figure is in excess of a quarter of a

it has maintained and enhanced that social million. With the initiatives that we have put

wage. We have increased our expenditures on in place in recent budgets, we will drive that

education, health and transfer payments to figure over the 300,000 mark. We have pro-

assist those in greatest need.

vided $12 million over four years for the

The Prime Minister also mentioned this government's support for the award system and its preservation of decent wages and conditions for working people throughout the

prevention of child abuse and we have provided a child disability allowance which provides financial assistance for people caring for disabled children at home.

Australian economy. That award system has been deliberately attacked and undermined by Liberal state governments, and it was only after the political gun was held at the head of the federal coalition that it conceded in its

There is nothing confusing about anything that I have said; it is all very simple. It is a very simple agenda of support for working families in this nation.

industrial relations policy at the last election The parenting allowance is for parents who

that it might support the award system.

care for dependent children under 16 years of

As far as working families and their employment prospects are concerned, the Prime Minister mentioned yesterday that the Australian economy, for the first time in its history, has provided eight million jobs for the working people of this nation. We have the highest employment growth rate in the OECD, running at four per cent, and that is commensurate with our economic growth rate. That is a record not rivalled by our trading partners in the OECD. That is the range of broad measures that this government has instituted in the past decade, and is instituting at the moment,

age. It represents a new approach to income support in Australia. It recognises people's rights to payments as individuals rather than as dependent partners. As I said before, the allowance will be introduced from July 1995. It recognises not only the role of parents in the work force but also the work of parents who care for children. Nearly 120,000 low income earners will receive on average an extra $59 per week. The home child-care allowance, which has been mentioned previously in this debate, will be incorporated into the parenting allowance from July 1995.

to protect the incomes and the living standParticular aspects of the parenting allow-

ards of working families.

ance need to be considered. Some of those

Let me get to the substance of this legislation and to the other measures that Labor has brought into effect to assist Australian working families. We have now the parenting allowance that we declared will be introduced from July 1995. This government has been a strong supporter in its budgets of the basic

aspects were alluded to by the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social Security in the Hansard of 9 May 1994. She made some very important points about the parenting allowance. It will go directly to the carers. It really opens up income support options for low income working people.

family payment and additional family payments.

The parenting allowance is a significant income redistributive measure by this govern-

Under the tutelage of this government, we ment; I make no apology for it, and neither

have seen quality and affordable child care does the government. Yesterday we heard in

being provided to Australian families so that debate in this parliament questions by the

those families who cannot survive on one opposition on what it perceives to be the

income can have the opportunity to expand widening gulf in incomes between the rich

their incomes by participating in the work and the poor in this country. Here is an

force. We introduced the child-care cash important redistributive measure that could

rebate on 1 July 1994, and in 1994-95 we overcome some of the problems that were

expect to provide 25,000 new child-care alluded to in question time yesterday, yet the

I

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2777

opposition continues to oppose measures such I want to examine the coalition's broad

as this.

record when it comes to the financial support

These reforms will have a very positive effect on the incentive for recipients to participate in the work force. For example, under the old arrangements, if one partner in a marriage decided to take some part-time work, the free area of $25 existed; the benefit went straight into a 100 per cent withdrawal rate. That is a massive disincentive. Under these new arrangements, we will have separate income testing, a $30 free area, a 50 per cent withdrawal rate for the next $40, and 70 per cent thereafter. It is a progressive measure, it is well targeted, and it contains incentive.
In my electorate of Corio, which encompasses the Geelong region, 28 per cent of families and 34 per cent of households have incomes below $20,000. So the parenting allowance will provide an important means of support to working families in my electorate.
This measure is of considerable social and economic significance. It is of economic significance in the sense that it will not only support households in a very important economic way but also provide income that will make its way into income streams in local communities such as mine. Working people on low incomes really do not have a great opportunity to save, but they have an enormous desire to spend on their families. In a social sense, the parenting allowance recognises the role of parents who may choose to stay at home as carers of children.

of families, both direct and indirect. It has consistently attacked the total level of wages to working people. In its public statements it has made massive attacks on the economic wage. It has opposed national wage increases, and its industrial relations policy has really only one aim-and that is to put at risk the economic livelihoods of low income earners. The Kennett legislation in Victoria has engineered that result for those workers who have had the misfortune to stay under its umbrella. That is the real Liberal intent. The solution to Australia's economic woes must, of necessity, mean that low to middle income earners must have a brake on their standard of living, while others in this society are allowed to advance their positions.
But the coalition has not only undertaken this broad attack on the economic wage; it has also mounted massive attacks on the social wage. What Fightback really represents-really, the sentiments are still there on the opposition back benches and frontbench; the architects, the proponents of Fightback are still there in the bowels of the coalition-is a massive attack on the social wage and an attack on low and middle income earners who will be the major recipients of the benefits of this legislation.
This is what the then shadow Treasurer, the federal member for Mayo (Mr Downer)-of course, we know that he now leads the coalition-had to say about the white paper:

Let me address some of the arguments that have been raised by coalition members in this

Today's White Paper, whatever the merits ... is a spending spree.

debate thus far. The coalition has incessantly That is how he sees it; actions of government

attacked the government on the size of the to redistribute income to low and middle

budget deficit. It has consistently argued for further reductions in government expenditure. This can mean only one thing: massive reductions in expenditure on health, education
and support measures and transfer payments

income families merely represent the substance of a spending spree. The honourable member for Mayo, in a press release which he
delivered before the white paper came down,
said:

of the type that are the substance of this Tomorrow's White Paper on unemployment will

particular legislation. The coalition has reoffer spending programs which are compensation

served its most trenchant criticism for its to Australians for the Government's failure to white paper initiatives. But when it is given create sufficient jobs.

an opportunity to support something that is of I do not know who is advising the Leader of

~eal and enduring benefit to working families, the Opposition, but governments are not really

1t really backs off at a pace.

in the business of creating widespread levels

2778

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

of employment in the economy. Through its expenditures government can influence the pattern of job creation, but governments do not directly create jobs unless, of course, they go out and increase the levels of Commonwealth and state public servants, et ceteraand that is a proposition which is opposed by members opposite.
On the opposition frontbench are some of the old villains, the ones who attacked the white paper-and I refer here to the honourable member for Bennelong (Me Howard), the great friend of the tax bludgers of this nation. He is the person who let the tax bludgers run riot in this country and get away with some $2 billion. That money, translated into current dollars, would probably fund this particular program at least once, if not 1112 times over. So we have these culprits now sitting and criticising the parenting allowance, which is the substance of the legislation before the House.
Let me take up some of the issues and problems, or perceived problems and criticisms that members of the opposition have levelled to date against the government. I refer to the contribution of the member for Grey (Mr Wakelin). The member for Grey is in the class of '93 and he is somebody for whom I have a deep respect. But he made the claim that the government is responsible for the unemployment crisis. Let me put it to the opposition that, when they blithely make these sorts of statements, they fail to appreciate the significant changes that have taken place in the economic structure of this and other countries. Can they give the Australian people a guarantee that they will restore the jobs for youth that previously were available in the banking system, the insurance system and the retail industry system? Will they give us a guarantee here today, when levelling their criticism, that in the automotive industry they will get rid of the robots on the production line that have taken the place of welders? Of course they cannot, and they will not.
Opposition members come in here and blithely criticise the government for engineering what they say is a massive catastrophe as far as unemployment is concerned in this country. They should keep in mind that, when

they were in government and they had the strings and the treasury levers, unemployment was a double-digit figure. They would not have countenanced the sorts of support measures to the unemployed which have been provided in the white paper, or the support to low and middle income earners which has been provided in the legislation before the House.
They make these blithe comments about the increased number of people on benefits. They lay no blame at the feet of the economic system, which pays people in fully paid work who cannot support their families on those wages. This parenting allowance will assist those people. Those opposite lay no blame on the market system for that particular deficiency. They lay no blame on the general social breakdown that we have seen. They want to heap it all at the feet of the Labor government. The honourable member for Grey said that regional communities have been left out on their own by this government. I suggest that he go to Victoria and look at what the Kennett government has done. It has raped rural communities by stripping away services that those people are entitled to enjoy. (Time expired)
MrNEVILLE (Hinkler) (2.21 p.m.}-The Social Security (Parenting Allowance and Other Measures) Legislation Amendment Bill before us today introduces a further raft of measures as proposed in this year's budget and white paper on employment and growth. The measures pertain largely to two important groups within our community-the unemployed and the low income families, and widows. While the coalition does not intend to oppose these measures, I wish to speak to the second reading amendment moved by the member for Berowra (Mr Ruddock). In particular, I wish to highlight how the measures in the bill are adding to the growing confusion and anxiety of families due to the government's increasingly complex and convoluted social security system.
As has already been pointed out by the member for Berowra, this legislation alone runs to some 169 pages and the explanatory memorandum to 137 pages. In the International Year of the Family, instead of creating

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2779

clarity and certainty for families, especially those less well-off, the government appears to be hell-bent on generating an even greater plethora of social security terminology and conditions.
The Prime Minister (Mr Keating) talks about growth in the economy, yet it can be seen very clearly that the growth will be in government bureaucracies which no doubt will have to stretch to accommodate these measures or, alternatively, add to the stress of officers in the field who must administer this nightmare of detail.
I will first refer to the home child-care allowance. On 29 September this year, the government introduced the new payment for home child-care allowance. Its purpose is to assist families where the partner chooses to care for the children at home, amounting to $30 per week or $60 per fortnight. The government, in tum, sought to whip up a public relations frenzy about the measure by trying to create the impression that it was some enormously generous special payment when it was not.
Apart from being a direct payment to the primary carer, the principle already shared bipartisan support. In pure dollars and cents term, it represents simply a cashing out of the dependent spouse rebate for couples with children, amounting to an extra $2.65 a week on top of the old dependent spouse rebate. How generous! As the member for McPherson (Mr Bradford) said, it nets him a marvellous increase of $10 per month.
Even then, the government's public relations exercise backfired somewhat when unemployed couples with children who previously received the dependent spouse rebate discovered that they were not eligible for the new home child-care allowance. This was a reasonable expectation that they might have obtained from the government's rhetoric, but it did not eventuate. So much for the government's caring attitude to the new payments benefiting low income families!

is now split equally between the two partners. The $530 per fortnight payment for an unemployed couple when split sees the primary carer receive $265 per fortnight. However, the income test for the home child-care allowance is $250 a fortnight. So that excludes the unemployed couple from receiving the allowance. Yet, under our socially conscious government, a family where the primary carer earns nothing and the other parent earns $100,000 can still receive the payment. How does the government reconcile this with social equity? The irony is not lost on many unemployed families in my electorate of Hinkler who have contacted my office and vented their anger over the government's clever public relations stunt.
To add to the confusion and mayhem, the new home child-care allowance was introduced before the old dependent spouse rebate was eliminated. Even this bill might get through the parliament before the taxation legislation is passed. The result has been that some people have been receiving the two benefits-receiving the new allowance while still receiving the spouse rebate by way of income tax reduction. Some time next year these unfortunate victims of the government's legislative bungling will be subjected to some form of repayment or extra tax. I might add that it will generally affect those people less able to afford any cut in their incomes.
Just when you thought you had understood the home child-care allowance, along comes yet another allowance. As from 1 July 1995, the parenting allowance will essentially incorporate the partner allowance and the home child-care allowance for both unemployed and low income families with children. It begs the question: why was the parenting allowance not introduced directly in the first place to save some of the confusion? Again, we can see that it was all part of a public relations stunt. It was not part of trying to give benefits to low income earners in the most efficient way possible.

Unemployed couples miss out because the home child-care allowance is means tested on the carer's income. The introduction of the partner allowance on 20 September saw to that-the unemployment benefit of a couple

The government has again sought to make mileage out of this latest allowance, despite the fact that it is simply reorganising the existing social security payments. The maximum rate of parenting allowance will be the

2780

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

same as the partnered rate of the social security pension or benefit. So what is new? Nothing much, except that the income test for allowees will also apply from 1 July next year. Certainly, the more generous new income test taper, plus the abolition of the joint income test for unemployed couples, will benefit some who are seeking part-time work if, as other speakers have pointed out, they can find that part-time work.
Even from the time the new income test arrangements were announced in the white paper, the coalition identified a number of groups that will be financially disadvantaged under the new system. I will not bore the parliament with all the details of that, but they were outlined very clearly yesterday by the member for Berowra (Mr Ruddock) in his speech, and they clearly show that not all low income individuals and families will necessarily be better off under the new arrangements. While the government might conveniently choose to dismiss such examples as policy oversights, now that they have been highlighted by the coalition will the government act to redress the situation or continue to organise these people? I suggest the government will continue to organise these people because the public relations value has gone out of it.
Finally, let me turn to the other group that has been betrayed by this governmentwidows. Further evidence of the government's ad hoc approach to social security can be seen in this bill with the introduction of the new widow allowance, which is payable from 1 January 1995. This measure was only announced after the 1994 budget and after the employment white paper and, again, in response to concerns raised by the coalition about this much neglected section of the community.
Of course, it was the Labor government that chose in 1987 to phase out the widow B pension after 15 years. I stress to the parliament that it was the Labor government and not the coalition. We heard a lot today from the member for Corio (Mr O'Connor) about our uncaring Fightback package. We conveniently forget little bits of minutia such as this. It was this government that chose to discriminate against older single women, many of

whom lived in a social era where women were not expected to have to provide for themselves in their latter years, let alone require the skills and training to compete in today's modem job market.
But rather than have me lecture the government about the treatment of widows, let us hear it from the widows themselves. I have heard a lot about their problems, anxieties and concerns. I have received letters from them, and earlier this year I attended the National Conference of Civilian Widows in Gladstone, which is in my electorate of Hinkler. One of the more succinct letters I received came from the central Queensland Labor held electorate of Capricornia, which borders my electorate of Hinkler. Mrs Elly Reddick of Rockhampton, in a letter dated 27 April this year, said:
I guess women of our age can really understand that the government just don't want to know us . . . we, who never had a helping hand to make our life easy.
If we got pregnant, we paid for our own mistakes. Also when we got divorced in the 60s and early 70s we could not fall back on the government, but I did think when we were widowed in our 50s we might have had some help, but no, once again a kick in the backside.
The greatest anger most widows have about the way the government is treating us is that we are forced to go through the CES system. The walking the streets asking for jobs that aren't there, the Skillshare courses, the loss of freedom to visit our children and grandchildren.
Men in their 50s who have the experience of a lifetime of work behind them who are now on the dole can't even find work, with all their retraining, etc, because most are regarded as too old.
She makes the point how much harder it is for women such as herself. Mrs Alma Lester, another Rockhampton widow, is probably well known to many in the House as she has led a national letter campaign on behalf of the Widows Support and Action Group. In a letter to the editor of the Gladstone Observer-a newspaper in my electorate-Mrs Lester made the following comments:
In most cases, these women have eased the government's financial burden for years, by physically caring for their sick husbands at home until their death-without any assistance.
To show this appreciation, the government has dumped them on the dole. With their basic or

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2781

limited education, it's a humiliating and degrading experience for them to be forced into a modern day training program which they cannot handle.
The additional stress of being forced to look for work severely impacts on their health, especially at a time when women are already experiencing health problems associated with middle age, ie menopause, arthritis and depression.
They are the forgotten ones who have worked tirelessly to secure the family unit. In the Year of the Family, it's an indictment on any government-
would you note that, Mr Deputy Speaker?-
that fails to recognise and act upon its very basic needs.
The efforts of Mrs Lester and Mrs Reddick of Rockhampton and the coalition have seen the government finally acknowledge, at least in part, the hardship that it has caused to this select group within the community. These people are perhaps not the ones on whom the public ~elations gimmicks will work, so they are cast aside.
This bill contains a new widow allowance which will be paid at the same rate and conditions as jobsearch and newstart but will not be actively tested. However, the government's about face on widows falls short of the mark. It is not a direct substitute of the old widow B pension. The widow allowance is not as generous as the actual pension itself. While the widow B pension amounts to $318.10 per fortnight, the equivalent widow allowance for a person without children is just $294.1O-a difference of $24. Allowances also incur a more stringent income test.
For the full rate of the widow B pension, you can still earn up to $90 if you have no children. The income limit for the widow allowance is just $60. Having the allowance is probably better than nothing at all, though one cannot help but wonder why the government has changed its mind after so steadfastly defending its stand in abolishing the widow's pension. I suspect that, when public relations pressure was put on the government, it looked at the widow B pension and tried to cobble together something that might win back a section of the community which, until recently, had very few people able to talk for it.
The bill before us today is full of various social security sweeteners which are expertly timed for introduction during what is likely to

be the government's lead-up to an election year. But, instead of offering anything substantially new, all the government has really achieved is to further confuse clients about the already complex myriad of social security benefits. As my colleague the honourable member for Mallee (Mr Forrest) said, it is Indian giving-giving with one hand and taking back with the other.
The home child-care allowance is supposed to replace the existing dependent spouse rebate for couples with children but is complicated by the impact of the new partner allowance. But, do not worry, all this will be subsumed into the new parenting allowance for couples with dependent children under the age of 16 next July. I can see a pattern: members of the government go out into the marketplace and trumpet these new schemes to gain the maximum amount of publicity in the media. They have not thought it through properly and they bring botched legislation into the parliament which has to be patched up as it goes along. It has a very nasty taste about it when one allowance comes in on top of another in order to gain the maximum publicity impact even though it does very little for the people at whom it is aimed.
At the end of it all, we should ask: are we confused? I think everyone is confused. People who come into my office, the groups I address in my electorate and groups such as the civilian widows are all confused. It is just one great mess; 169 pages of totally unnecessary detail. The honourable member for McPherson (Mr Bradford) said that in previous years it has been worked through very simply by using very simple measures. All we have done is to create a bureaucratic nightmare which will be expensive to administer and will impose unnecessary strains on DSS workers at the coalface, the ones who have to bear the brunt of the government's confusion.
The bill, while not opposed by the coalition, adds more complexity to our already bulging social security system. It will leave the genuine and needy families of this country even more confused and without assistance.
Mrs SILVIA SMITH (Bass) (2.38 p.m.)- I rise today to speak in support of the Social Security (Parenting Allowance and Other

2782

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

Measures) Legislation Amendment Bill, which gives effect to some of the measures announced in the government's white paper, Working Nation. It particularly provides unemployed people with a motivation to take up work that may be low paid through alterations to the income test.
This bill also gives rise to the implementation of the parenting allowance and makes further progress towards the strategy of this government to phase out payments which are based on dependent relationships between people under the social security system. It is only fair and equitable that individuals should establish their own entitlement to social security without that entitlement being dependent upon any other individual.
The parenting allowance will be introduced from 1 July 1995. This allowance will not be activity tested. It will be available to partners of those receiving income support who have dependent children under the age of 16. It will also be available to partners of low income earners and to partners who have low personal incomes and dependent children under 16. This measure will incorporate the home child-care allowance, which is currently being paid, but it will go far beyond the home child-care allowance whilst still incorporating its major elements.
The maximum rate of the parenting allowance will be the same as the rate paid to each individual pension recipient. In a general sense, it will be income tested. The income of both members of a couple will be taken into account. However, because this is being merged with the home child-care allowance, up to $61 per fortnight will be available, regardless of income. This represents the basic parenting allowance component. This $61 represents the estimated maximum rate of the home child-care allowance that will apply from 1 January 1995. This amount may be reduced only by the income of a parenting allowance recipient.
The maximum amount of the parenting allowance, which is currently $268.20 per fortnight, and the maximum rate of the basic component, which is currently $61 per fortnight, will be subject to indexation twice a year. This will happen in March and Septem-

ber. The parenting allowance will, in essence, be taxable but up to $61 per fortnight will be tax free. As a rule of thumb, only those who are being paid more than $61 per fortnight will be entitled to the additional family payment and health care card concessions. This allowance has been designed to give greater work incentives to unemployed couples with children. It also ensures that couples on a low income will be better off having one partner working than having both partners on a benefit. That must be exceptionally good for morale.
One of the great advantages of this bill is that it provides to low income earners an advantage that was formerly the province only of higher income earners. There will now be a greater degree of choice for low income families about whether one partner will stay at home and care for the children. At the same time, higher income families will still have access to the basic parenting allowance component that was born from the home child-care allowance.
The statistics about who will benefit from this are very interesting. Approximately 260,000 families will have access to $61 or more per fortnight, and 117,000 families are expected to receive about $59 per week from the parenting allowance. That the federal government has announced this in the year of the family is very special. This initiative will give partners who care for children their own source of income. That is something deserving not only of comment but also of high praise.
If I could digress for a moment, I would like to take further the point which I made about the International Year of the Family. This government has done wonders in the International Year of the Family and my own electorate of Bass has been one of the recipients. In recent days, we have been fortunate enough to have another 80 child-care places allocated to Launceston, which is in the north of Tasmania. Low income families, people gaining further education and people in low paid employment were in desperate straits for places in child-care facilities.
One such child-care facility has 40 places allocated to the Launceston campus of the

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2783

University of Tasmania. The university was dedicated to putting in some sort of child-care facility and needed the places to be able to allocate not only to students who have young children but also to some of the lower income workers and people in nearby areas. So Launceston has benefited because of some of the initiatives of this government in its caring for families.
Let us go back to the bill proper. This bill alters the income test for the unemployed. This bill will ensure that the unemployed will always be better off in a financial sense by increasing the amount of money which they earn through work. This has previously not been the case. I am sure that all members on both sides of this chamber would be aware of stories from their own constituents which provide them with such examples.
Under the arrangements which exist at the moment, above a certain level every dollar of income which is earned means that a dollar of income support is lost. This arrangement obviously means one thing, and that is that the incentive and motivation to look for work is lost and, in the long run, self-esteem is lost. This bill will change all that. From 1 July next year, all people in receipt of the unemployment benefit will have the ability to earn $60 per fortnight without losing any of their benefit. After this point, there is a SOc loss in benefit for each dollar of income earned between $60 and $120 per fortnight. They will then lose 70c in benefits for each dollar they earn beyond that threshold.
This new rule will apply to both the single unemployed and to couples, unless one member of the couple is a pensioner. It is an incentive for people on low incomes receiving benefits to go out and look for extra work opportunities. This rule will essentially replace the joint income, which in some instances has acted as a deterrent to both partners seeking work.
The income level of one partner will begin to affect the allowance of the other partner only when the first partner loses access to entitlement altogether. On the rates which exist at the moment, one partner will be able to earn up to $466 per fortnight before the benefit of the other partner is affected. The

joint income rules which exist at the moment will still apply when one member of a partnership is a pensioner. That has to be a bonus for those on low incomes and those on income support.
One aspect of this bill which I find most pleasing is the fact that it continues the policy of the federal government to eliminate social security payments that are based on dependence on another person. This government is redirecting payments to individuals based upon their own need and continues the steps which were taken by the withdrawal of the partner add-on rate earlier this year.
This bill will also introduce a new widow allowance. I certainly do not take the cynical view of the previous speaker, the honourable member for Hinkler (Mr Neville). This government really does listen. It is not afraid to redress anomalies and changes in previous legislation that do not work in a specific instance. It has not backed off from looking at new changes and addressing what has happened regarding the widow allowance.
Since 1987, there have been no new recipients of the widow B pension. This has essentially been because the government has a strategy to remove gender specific benefits from the social security program for people who are of work force age. Many of the women who would have been on the widow B pension are now the recipients of other payments, such as the jobsearch allowance. As a consequence, they have had to complete the usual jobsearch activity arrangements to maintain receipt of their payment. I, too, have received representation from women who were most concerned about this previous arrangement.
Many women in this category, including those whom I have talked to, are simply not equipped to enter the work force. If they do not want to, they should not have to. Most of them never expected to have to work outside the home after they were married. To force them into maintaining activity tests for jobsearch is simply not on, and this government has not been afraid to readdress that fact.
This bill establishes the new widow allowance, which is designed to ease the transition

2784

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

period for the phase-out of these types of question time, I will confine the scope of my

allowances. From 1 January next year, the remarks between now and then and discuss

widow allowance will be available to women some broader issues when the debate is

who are widowed, divorced or separated or resumed later today. I was interested to hear

who become so after turning 50 and who have the honourable member for Bass (Mrs Silvia

no recent experience in the work force. This Smith), who spoke before me, talking about

allowance will be paid at the same rate as the government now making payments based

jobsearch and newstart and will be the subject on an individual's needs rather than on a

of the same income and assets tests. Widow partner's. It seems to me that, on this issue

allowance will also carry an entitlement to a and other issues which relate particularly to

health care card.

families and women in the Australian com-

Those women who receive another payment as at 1 January 1995 may transfer to widow allowance without having to satisfy the recent work force experience test. Women who turn 60 and who have been recipients of the benefit for longer than 12 months will also be entitled to a pensioner concession card. This allowance will not be granted to new appli-

munity, the government is making a basic error. The Office of the Status of Women is getting the rhetoric right for the government but, when the bean counters come in and do all their modifications according to all sorts of other criteria, we end up with something that one would hope was not the government's intention in the first place.

cants after 1 July 2005.

In the last election, the Prime Minister (Mr

The sunset clause for advance pharmaceutical allowance will be removed by this bill. This means that advance pharmaceutical allowance will be available indefinitely. This bill will also extend the education entry payment. This is a payment of $200 which was introduced to offset costs associated with education if that education would lead to

Keating) made a big play for the women's vote. He talked about child care either in a paid child-care centre or in the home. He made certain undertakings about payments that would be made-essentially, although not exclusively, to mothers. He said some things that were very attractive indeed to the average Australian mother with dependent children.

increased chances of finding work. It was Mr Pyne-It was rhetoric.

only available, however, to recipients of certain allowances. This bill changes that. This bill extends that payment to those who are in receipt of partner allowance, wife pension and mature age partner allowance. It will also extend education entry payment to recipients of new parenting and widow allowances.

Mrs SULLIVAN-It was rhetoric. The exit polls from the polling booths showed that the Labor Party was very clever indeed in gaining a swing from Liberal to Labor among those women in the 24 to 34 age group, which is essentially the age group of mothers with young children. Those women have been absolutely dudded by the outcome.

The bill which we have before us today represents the human face of this government. Let us face it: this government is all about helping people. It is certainly the concern of this side of the House to constantly assess and reassess our programs of social security benefits so that finance is placed where it is needed in such a manner that it can best be used. This bill is another example of this government refining its programs so that they hit the target. I commend this bill to the House.

In previous debate on legislation relating to tax rebates for the cost of child care in commercial centres and on the introduction of the home child-care allowance, I have pointed out in some detail the enormous anomaly between the child-care rebate not being means tested and the home child-care allowance-which is now to become the parenting allowancebeing means tested. In other words, a mother at home who is basically dependent on her husband for income starts to lose the very small home child-care allowance payment as

Mrs SULLIVAN (Moncrieft) (2.53 p.m.)- soon as there is any other income in her

As there are only a few minutes left until name-it only has to be a small amount-

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2785

whereas a mother, let us say a full-time Austudy to a full-time student is determined

professional person who is earning a very according to the students' parents' income.

high income, loses not one cent of the childcare tax rebate as a consequence of the size of either her income or the family income.

The other payment means tested in this way is the family allowance. The family allowance payment to the mother was henceforth deter-

The member for Bass (Mrs Silvia Smith) mined according to the income of somebody

made precisely the same error when she said else, namely her husband. They are the only

that the government is making payments two payments that are means tested in this

based on an individual's need. That is the way. That is an offensive principle in the case

government's rhetoric. but the actual effectof mothers, because it carries with it that

when the bean counters get their hands on the same notion of dependency. That is very

draft policy-is rather different.

much against the rhetoric that this government

The fundamental error of the government's promotes in relation to women.

policies goes back to 1987. It started when That notion of dependency has carried

the Hawke government brought in means through into the home child-care allowance,

testing of family allowances. When the Fraser which is now to be called the parenting

government introduced family allowances it allowance. I know that many Labor members

did two things. Firstly, it abolished the dewould be upset to hear me say that because

pendent child rebate and subsumed it into the they do not think that women should be

family allowance. The effect was that certain considered in this inferior, dependent way.

people were significantly better off. Low They do not think society should think that.

income people were significantly better off Unfortunately for them, it is the people who

because the availability of their tax deduction are involved-the women themselves-who

had been of less value to them than it had are the judges. They know from the imple-

been to high income people. Middle income mentation of this party's policy how they are

people were marginally better off-the finanaffected; they conclude from those effects

cial effect of the change was almost lineball, how they are actually viewed by the govern-

but they were a little better off. High income ment.

people were a bit worse off.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! It being 3 p.m.,

Secondly, a philosophical point was estabthe debate is interrupted in accordance with

lished which is highly relevant to women. standing order lOlA. The debate may be

There was a transfer of income, essentially resumed at a later hour and the member will

from husband to wife. The husband had been have leave to continue speaking when the

getting the benefit in his pocket-presumably debate is resumed.

for the family's ultimate benefit-of the dependent child rebate. The transfer was made

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

so that the money went into the hands of the

Wilson, Mr David

person in the family who was considered to be primarily responsible for the day-to-day care of dependent children-that is, the mother. That was the philosophy of the transfer. That is a philosophy that no feminist could object to.

Mr DOWNER-I address my question to the Leader of the House. Will the government confirm press reports of the autopsy conducted by the Victorian Institute of Forensic Science which indicate that David Wilson was not shot but brutally beaten to death with

As soon as the Labor government means blows to the back of the head? What is the

tested family allowances it showed that it did government actually doing to ensure that

not understand its own rhetoric. There are those who carried out this cowardly and

only two government payments that are means appalling murder of an Australian citizen are

tested for the recipient according to the brought to justice? Why will the government

income of another person-a non-recipient's not make a statement in this parliament telling

income. One is Austudy where there is a the Australian people exactly what it is doing

notion of dependency: the payment of to make sure that David Wilson's murderers

2786

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

are found and pay the price for their crime? Why, in particular, will the government not seek international support for a UN tribunal to prosecute the crimes of the Khmer Rouge in the same way as it has supported similar tribunals in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda?
Mr BEAZLEYA question like that should be directed to the representative of the Minister for Foreign Affairs or the representative of the Minister for Defence, who is present here in this question time, as both ministers are handling issues related to the tragic circumstances which occurred in Cambodia in relation to David Wilson and his two fellow tourists.
The Prime Minister answered at some length yesterday in question time when presented with virtually the same question as put forward by the Leader of the Opposition today, with the exception of the autopsy report aspect of today's question. Otherwise, it was effectively the same question. Both issues have been put to both the foreign minister and the Prime Minister in public forums over the last few days. Both of them have given very detailed answers.
As somebody who has watched at a closer proximity than most the personal agony of the foreign minister as he has tried to deal with this issue over the last few months, I have nothing but contempt for the position of those who are so immature that they see this as an opportunity to make political capital, one way or another, in the process. He has put himself out considerably, as he should because it was his duty as foreign minister, to try to resolve this issue in something other than the tragic way in which it was ultimately resolved. Rarely have I seen a person put their heart and soul into what is the formal duty anyway of a foreign minister in that situation. He appropriately stood the foreign affairs department on its head to do the very best that he could for the family.
The foreign minister has already in public, as the Leader of the Opposition would be aware, discussed at length propositions related to international tribunal consideration of these matters and the law enforcement arrangements inside Cambodia and expressed a judgment

about the relative merits of either of those courses. So the public discussion of this question is not a new matter. He elaborated on the government's views on that in some detail when he was questioned by Laurie Oakes on the Sunday program last Sunday.
So I would do two things. I would refer the Leader of the Opposition to the now substantial public record of government comment on precisely those matters and I would suggest that he have the matter raised either in the Senate, as he could have today directly with the foreign minister-
Mr Downer-lam not a member of the Senate.
Mr BEAZLEY-Well, the Leader of the Opposition does have a spokesman on foreign affairs matters in the Senate. Robert Hill is leader in the Senate, and he will be leader in the Senate for some considerable time. Or the Leader of the Opposition could wait until-as will occur tomorrow-he has an opportunity to question the foreign affairs spokesman in this place on the matter; or he could wait until the Prime Minister appears in question time on Thursday to discuss the matter further.
But ultimately my advice to him would be: this is a tragic situation; it is one where a sensible opposition will take its case to a government and discuss it with the government, both overtly and in private. As far as I am aware, the Leader of the Opposition has not really attempted to do that up to this time. He ought to start to attempt to do that in the future as he handles what is a very sensitive and tragic situation.
Inflation
Mr ROBERT BROWN-My question is directed to the Treasurer. I refer the Treasurer to the announced CPI figures for the September quarter, which show that the increase in the CPI over the previous 12 months is 1.9 per cent. Would the Treasurer indicate how that performance compares with previous CPI figures in Australia and with CPI figures in other comparable countries? Could he also indicate what Australia's outlook for inflation is in the future?

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2787

Mr WILLIS-It is true, as the honourable member for Charlton says, that the inflation outcome was 1.9 per cent for the whole year, 0.6 per cent for the September quarter. That is clearly a very good outcome; it is an especially good outcome when looked at in conjunction with economic growth of well over 4 per cent, with employment growth of 300,000 plus in the last 12 months, with real wages increasing, and with real household disposable incomes increasing even faster. That is clearly a very good outcome for the nation.
The inflation rate has been below two per cent in the past year and below 21/2 per cent for the past three years. To get an idea of how good that is, throughout the 1980s our average rate for the CPI was 8.3 per cent and in the period of the Fraser government it was 10.7 per cent. It is now the case that that rate has been running at less than two per cent for the past 12 months and at less than 2112 per cent for the past three years.
In respect of other countries, which the honourable member asked me about, our rate of 1.9 per cent is one of the lowest rates in the OECD. Looking at the OECD minus Turkey, which is rather a special case, the latest figures we have show an average of 2112 per cent for the 12 months to August. If that is compared with our rate of 1.9 per cent, we are clearly well below the OECD average.
The government believes it is important that attention be paid to the underlying rate of inflation. For quite some time now the Treasury has published an index of the underlying rate of inflation. The index goes back to the mid-1970s, so it is not a new index. This underlying rate has the intention of enabling us to look at what the real rate of inflation is, minus one-off factors and temporary movements, so that we can get a clear picture of inflationary pressures. That index increased by 0.6 per cent in the September quarter and by two per cent in the last 12 months. It has been below 2112 per cent since the September quarter 1992. It is the first time it has been below 2112 per cent since the series began in the mid-1970s. So in terms of both the headline rate and the underlying rate, the inflation level in Australia has been historically quite

low, certainly compared with the level in other countries.
It is very important, having achieved that, that we go on to maintain low inflation. One does not have to spell out the reasons for that. It will be most advantageous economically to us if we can do that. The Reserve Bank and the government have established a target of keeping the underlying rate of inflation in the range of two to three per cent over the course of the cycle. It will be a tremendous outcome for us if we can achieve that. It would clearly establish in the minds of investors, particularly investors in financial markets, that Australia is a low inflation country. It is very important to us that we do not let this opportunity slip.
To achieve that target obviously we cannot just stand still; we have to adjust policy as appropriate to curb the natural tendency of the economy to spiral into a damaging inflationary outcome. That means that, from time to time, policy has to be adjusted. We have adjusted both fiscal and monetary policy as the economy has moved into recovery. With the fiscal adjustment, going back to the 1993 budget, we made substantial reductions in future budgets through the decisions made in that year's budget which are still being fed into the economy and which will take some two per cent of GDP out of the economy over the course of the period up to 1996-97. In addition to that, we have taken action on monetary policy on a couple of occasions to prevent the development of an inflationary boom and the need to take drastic action to curb it.
Incredibly, the opposition, and particularly the Leader of the Opposition, describes all this as a boom and bust situation. How ridiculous can you be? You have an economy going along at four per cent-that is reasonably strong growth, certainly-but with inflation at historically low levels. Yet he says we have a boom and bust situation. The whole point of the policy adjustments that have been made is to prevent a boom and bust occurring by taking early action to temper the growth of the economy and to ensure that we do not get an inflationary spiral developing which would bring about a

2788

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

boom and bust situation. So the criticisms that are coming from the opposition are absurdly based.
Finally, it is important, if we are going to maintain low inflation, that we have wages outcomes that are conducive to that. In that respect, I would point out that the existence of the accord mark 7 is very important because it says that we should achieve wage outcomes which will give us inflation results which are comparable to those of our major trading partners. That means we have to keep the underlying rate in that two to three per cent range. That agreement, of course, continues.
The parties involved in wage setting should clearly take note of the government's inflation target and act on that target so that they do not bring about wage outcomes which are inconsistent with that target. That does not mean, of course, that wages cannot increase faster than inflation. Of course they can, so long as they are backed by real productivity improvement. That is what we all want to see: real wages increasing, but real unit labour costs not increasing. That outcome is eminently achievable and will be achieved, in my opinion.
Mr Pyne-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I draw your attention to a ruling you gave earlier this year on 9 May where you said that ministers should bring their answers to a close in a shorter period rather than a longer period. We have just put up with the Minister for Finance speaking for about nine or 10 minutes, and I ask you to confirm that direction.
Mr SPEAKER-Actually, the minister spoke for six minutes and eighteen seconds. I would suggest to the honourable member that, as I have said in the past, ministers, particularly senior ministers in economic portfolios, are given some latitude. The comment made by the honourable member for Sturt nevertheless does have some validity. I think the minister has finished his answer.
Wage Claims
Mr COSTELLO-In view of the Treasurer's statement that he wants wage outcomes consistent with low inflation, could he suc-

cinctly say whether or not he endorses the 15 per cent wage claim by the Transport Workers Union? Could he say what the effect of that will be on inflation and interest rates? Could he say whether he agrees with Bankers Trust which claims that, if firms tend to roll over and start agreeing to pay wage rises of the size demanded in recent claims, the Reserve Bank will tighten monetary policy more aggressively?
Mr WILLIS-I think I answered that question in my answer to the previous question. Quite obviously, we expect that wage outcomes will be such as to enable us to keep inflation comparable with that of our major trading partners and keep the underlying rate in that two to three per cent range. That has been quite clearly stated by me, by the government and by the Reserve Bank as an inflation objective. It is quite obviously important that wage claims that are made are consistent with that and, certainly, if wage claims are not consistent with it, that the wage outcomes are consistent with it. Certainly it is the case that, from time to time, people make wage claims which have a fair bit of ambit based in them. I am certainly aware of the fact that that happens from time to time, from my previous experience before I came to this House. Maybe this is some such case; I certainly hope so.
If the productivity improvement were such that it could justify an outcome of this kind over two years with a 15 per cent claim, certainly that would be okay-as long as it is backed by very large increases in productivity. One has to doubt, however, whether increases of that kind would be so backed and, therefore, one would suspect that it is not consistent with the inflation objective. It is clearly important for unions to bear in mind that, if they do not adhere to wages outcomes which are consistent with the accord and consistent with maintaining low inflation, that will be damaging to the economy and to employment growth. I do not think that is what they want to achieve; in fact, I am quite sure it is not. I am sure that the union movement as a whole will continue to adhere fully to the accord and do as they have done all through the period that this government has been in

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

office: pursue responsible wage claims and, in the context of that, do their members the best possible service, that is, keep the e~onomy growing strongly, produce a lot more JObs and increase their real incomes.

samples of similar data; in fact, it is described as representing world best practice. I thinkit is important that we acknowledge the work not only of the Health Insurance COmmission but also of other exporters who are making an

Health Care

enormous contribution to Australia'S economy-a growing contribution, I am pleased

Mr JENKINS-Can the Minister for to say.

Human Services and Health advise the House of the level of interest being shown interna-

Interest Rates

tionally for Australia's health care expertise Mr COSTELLO-My question is directed

and skills?

to the Treasurer, who has just walked away

Dr LAWRENCE-I think it is important that we all take some pride in the fact that the skill and expertise of the Australian health system are being recognised by other countries as world class. That skill base forms the basis of Medicare and of our private hospital system, and it indicates that, in the eyes of the rest of the world, we have a world-class health system. There is frequent demand for those services to be sold overseas.
I draw attention to the fact that the Health Insurance Commission, in particular, has had very substantial interest shown by international countries and organisations. In the whole area of export of health services and aged care services, we have seen a growth rate of around 15 per cent per annum and these services provide a very significant portion of our export growth. As I say, we have seen too the Health Insurance Commission asked by the World Bank on a regular basis and countries such as Indonesia to help design and develop their health insurance systems and financial control mechanisms. Recently, other countries have asked Australia to advise them. They include developing countries, such as Hungary, Vietnam and Kenya, and eastern European countries. Most recently, there was a multimillion dollar project in Turkey. The Health Insurance Commission was asked to tender to provide those services. If successful, it will be a great boost to Australia's export industry.

from the Prime Minister on the TWU wage claim. I will see whether he will stick by Australian home buyers. Given that he has already jacked up official interest rates twice since August, forcing Australian home buyers into higher mortgage repayments, will he now give them an assurance that there will be no further rises in official rates before Christmas?
Mr WILLIS-This is the sort of idiot question that one expects from the opposition, I guess. Will you rule out this? Will you rule out that? It is an attempt to create a headline, to put out a press release saying, 'Government refuses to do this or that.' It is just puerile politics. Are opposition members really saying that we should not ever use monetary policy? They are really saying that monetary policy should not ever be used. They are saying that we should have put all the pressure on the deficit and that we should not have increased interest rates. When they had the opportunity to support a reduction in the deficit, they walked away from it and opposed $3 billion of deficit reduction. In 1993 they opposed, root and branch, $3 billion worth of deficit reduction.
Mr Costello-Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The Treasurer is debating 1993 legislation. The point. of ord~r is this: ?nder standing orders he IS reqUired to give a relevant answer to the question as to whether or not he will rule out a further rise in official rates before Christmas.

The Health Insurance Commission is a very efficient organisation indeed. There is a lot of interest in its operations because of its effi-

Mr SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order. The Treasurer is being entirely relevant.

ciency. A recent worldwide benchmarking Mr WILLIS-As I was saying, the opposi-

study found that the HIC's data centre opertion is suggesting essentially that there should

ations were 38 per cent below international be no use of monetary policy and it should all

2790

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

be on the budget. That means that the opposition is in the absurd position of advocating daily reductions in the deficit, having opposed all of the $3 billion worth of deficit reductions when it had the opportunity to put its money where its mouth was. So we can regard the opposition as being irrelevant to the debate.
It is also the fact that even where deficits have been reduced much further than here, such as in New Zealand where the budget is in surplus, we find that official rates have still increased by some 33/4per cent. The whole argument that you can avoid monetary policy by use of tougher budgetary policy is shown to be ludicrous. It has not happened in the United States; it has not happened in the United Kingdom; and it has not happened in New Zealand where the budget outcome is in surplus, yet there has been an increase in official rates of 33/4 per cent. So do not give us this absolute nonsense argument that you can totally avoid the use of monetary policy by a tougher deficit. Particularly, do not give us that argument when you are in this hypocritical situation of having had the chance to support deficit reduction and you opposed $3 billion worth of it.
Telephone Services: Access
Mr PRICE-My question is directed to the Minister for Communications and the Arts. In response to a question without notice earlier this year, the minister informed the House that he was exploring a longer term solution to make it easier for low income earners to have access to home phones. Can the minister inform the House of any progress in improving access to home phones for battlers?
Mr LEE-I thank the honourable member for his question. Today I am pleased that Telecom has announced the trial of two new products designed to make it easier for low income earners to get a telephone put on at home. Telecom is to undertake a trial as part of the development of these two new measures. The two new products will be known as Incontact and Easypay. A trial of Incontact is to commence later this week with a mail-out seeking interested participants. The trial will take place in Wollongong.

Mr SPEAKER-Now I'm interested.
Mr LEE-Incontact will allow householders to receive calls and to make emergency and free calls. The service will be offered free of charge where there is an existing telephone outlet.
Opposition members-What about the bush?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I said I was interested.
Mr LEE-So that is Incontact. Easypay, which Telecom will commence by conducting market research and a technical feasibility study, is designed to enable access to a less expensive prepaid service. For approximately $20 a month and no up-front payment for connection charges, the Easypay option will provide for all of the features of Incontact as well as the ability to make a specified number of prepaid local and STD calls with the option to purchase additional calls if that is what the consumer wants. That is the way Easypay will work.
The trial of these new products will be conducted between November 1994 and April next year in Wollongong and will be monitored by a steering committee made up of members of my department, Telecom, ACOSS and the Consumer Telecommunications Network. So consumers are represented in this trial as well. The trial is necessary to test consumer reaction and also to ensure that Telecom can sort out the technical implementation of the new products, because it will involve the development of some new software for the exchanges.
These new products have been developed in consultation with my department and consumer organisations. I would like to congratulate Telecom on this initiative, because I think it realises the importance of making it easier for the one million Australians who do not have a phone on at home to get a phone on at home. At the time when an equivalent number of people have mobile phones, at the time when both Telecom and Optus are talking of putting billions of dollars into the installation of cable infrastructure, it is right that Telecom is looking at making it easier for low income earners to get a phone on at home.

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2791

Telecom will take account of the outcomes of the trial in developing the products and will then introduce them progressively across the nation beginning next year. On the issue of cable, Optus Vision's initiative has been the subject of some media reports in today's newspapers. It is true that I have received a report from Austel on the Optus Vision proposal; however, the rest of the claims in a number of stories about the Optus Vision proposal do contain a number of inaccuracies. I warn honourable members to treat them accordingly.
Shipping: Australian National Line
Mr MOORE-Was the Minister for Finance approached by his colleague the Minister for Transport for funds to lift ANL's share in Australian Stevedores? Why did the government reject the advice of the ANL board-the one you fired-of those you appointed and of the advisers, Wran and Turnbull, that the government should increase its shareholding in Australian Stevedores? Given this advice, on what basis was the decision made to sell the ANL shares? Did the government or ANL in any way finance the transaction?
Mr BEAZLEY-From recollection of those times, any suggestion that the government should shift its position from being a part owner of Australian Stevedores to effectively, as it would have had to have been, full ownership of the stevedoring company was a suggestion the government did not take kindly to and did not want to pursue. I do not think that anybody with any common sense would seriously suggest the government ought to have done that.
Mr Downer-What about Wran? Did he think it was common sense?
Mr BEAZLEY-Whatever might be in the interests of the particular organisation, the government has to consider the interests of the taxpayer as these matters are considered. For the government to have gone down the road of acquiring for itself a combination of debt and other obligations to the tune of some $280 million would not, from the government's point of view, have been a sensible outcome. I am not saying necessarily it might

have been an outcome desired by other people actively engaged in the business but, from the government's point of view, that was a common sense outcome.
I take it from the second part of the honourable member's question that he is coming from an article that appeared in one of today's newspapers on aspects of the sale. I want to say that this morning's Australian did misrepresent the sale of ANL's interest in Australian Stevedores. There is no secret funding deal associated with this. The fact is that ANL accepted a deposit of 20 per cent, the $5.6 million mentioned in the article, with the balance to be paid within 60 days. That balance was secured by a mortgage over the shares. The effect of the arrangement was that Mr Corrigan gained immediate control of the company. In return, ANL was in a better position because of the 20 per cent deposit instead of the normal 10 per cent for such commercial transactions. ANL, along with Howard Smith, was able to exit immediately from Australian Stevedores.
Other than the 20 per cent deposit, no money changed hands until the balance of 80 per cent was paid last Friday. Shortly before the deal was finalised, ANL approached the government warning that it may be necessary for it to draw down on its promissory note in order to fund its day-to-day operations, including the payment of wages. The suggestion that the government authorised ANL to provide $22.4 million as a loan, as asserted in today's Australian, is untrue and distorts the commercial arrangement determined between the board of ANL and Jamison Equity.
At the time, the government was effectively, because of a whole set of complex arrangements in the ownership structure of Australian Stevedores, in a position where it either sold or ended up buying the lot. The consequence of buying the lot, from the government's point of view, irrespective of the views of the ANL management or board, was not in all the circumstances a common sense outcome. As a result, I think the arrangements in the long term have suited the government, have suited the Australian taxpayer and I think have put ANL in a position

2792

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

where there is at least a possibility of a restructuring and a decent outcome.
Prices Mr SNOW-My question is directed to the Assistant Treasurer. I refer him to the announcement today of changes to pricing arrangements. What do the changes mean for consumers? What impact will the changes have on economic and employment growth? Mr GEAR-I thank the member for Eden Monaro for his question. The changes I announced today will bring pricing into the 1990s. As you know, the Prices Surveillance Authority was established in the early 1980s, a period of high inflation. Nowadays we have not only low inflation but also a much more competitive economy, and next year we will have the introduction of the national competition policy. It is now time for a new approach. Currently, the Prices Surveillance Authority covers only 20 products and 50 firms. Consider that, when in any supermarket there are 10,000 items and we do not look at any of the services listed in the Yellow Pages. We will also be using our resources more effectively in future to focus on areas which have the most significance to consumers. We will still have surveillance in important markets where there is little competition. Declared firms will still have to justify their price rises beforehand but the PSA will have greater flexibility to do this better. The increased range of methods to look at costs will encourage productivity, investment and employment growth. We will also have a new power of formal monitoring to require firms to give regular data on prices so that the Prices Surveillance Authority can respond quickly to consumer concerns or to emerging market problems. We will also be using our resources to informally monitor a much wider range of goods and services for things like pay TV, consumer credit, child care and legal services. We are also going to beef up our publicity and our education facilities so that consumers are better informed about price problems. Today I also announced decisions on the Prices Surveillance Authority's first round of the review of declarations. I can inform the

House that beer and cigarettes will remain declared for surveillance, both of which are important to household budgets. Biscuits, tampons and instant coffee will be subject to formal monitoring under the new powers, and tea will no longer be declared.
In conclusion, these decisions establish a new generation of pricing oversight arrangements and focus more clearly on the priority issue for consumers. They should not be seen as a tacit approval by those firms to put up their prices. If I receive evidence of that happening, I will have no hesitation in putting them back under surveillance.
Health Insurance Mrs BISHOP-My question is directed to the Minister for Human Services and Health. I remind the minister of her statement that 'we are going to make sure those premiums come down'. In light of the fact that there have been recent increases in health insurance premiums-including Medibank Private, Victoria, which was caught out pretending that all its members were going to get a reduction when, in fact, over one-third got an increase-does she still stand by her statement? When will the parliament see the legislation enacting her proposed changes to private health insurance announced last August? Dr LAWRENCE-I am delighted to have a question from the opposition spokesperson on this issue because it is the first one I have had since August. I am pleased to indicate to the HouseHonourable members interjecting Mr SPEAKER-Order! Both sides of the House will come to order. Dr LAWRENCE-I can understand why that is so, given the initial response to those questions, but I am pleased to have one. I am, however, displeased that the member chooses to focus yet again on one area of health policy over and over again. Mr Downer-You don't like it. Dr LAWRENCE-I am delighted to answer the question. It is clear that these reforms, which have not yet been implemented -the shadow spokesperson will be pleased to

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2793

know that the legislation will be coming down very shortly, before the end of the year, to be implemented early next year-are already having an influence on the market. As I understand it, we will be debating this question more fully a little later.
It is quite clearly the case that, in some cases where it has already been negotiating preferred provider arrangements with hospitals and doctors, as is the case in Victoria, Medibank Private in particular has been able to renegotiate fewer packages, a wider range of benefits and lower costs on average. Yes, there are some elements of the package which represent very slight increases, slighter increases than the cost of hospitals and doctors fees I might say. They are well below the level of increase. But at the top level, which now represents more of their policyholders, there is a 19 per cent reduction.
The one company which appeared to be a little reluctant to look at price as a means of competition with other funds is one that is strongly supported by the member who asked the question. That particular company seems to be content to compete on elements other than price. But most of the companies that I have spoken to welcome the opening up of competition in this area and we will, once the legislation is through, see a capacity of private health insurance funds to do what they should have been doing for a long timecompeting on price. We cannot afford in this community to see health insurance premiums go through the roof. We cannot afford to see people driven out of that system by cost shifting from conservative governments, particularly the Victorian one. I will be elaborating on these points later but I want to make it very clear to the honourable member that, if she thinks this is the only issue of significance in the health system, she should think again.
APEC: Education Mr CUNNINGHAM-I wish to address my question to the Minister for Schools, Vocational Education and Training. With the Prime Minister due to attend the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation leaders meeting in Indonesia shortly, what steps has Australia taken to encourage the member economies of

APEC to focus on education and training as part of their cooperation? How does Australia's performance in this area compare with that of other members of APEC?
Mr FREE-I thank the honourable member for McMillan for his question. Since the formation of APEC, Australia has been active in encouraging cooperation among the member economies on all aspects of economic activity, but particularly education. The APEC education forum itself is recognition of the fundamental role that education plays. This forum, with the leadership of Australia, has just released the first phase of a study comparing schooling in APEC member economies. I commend this study to members of the House.
I am sure that all honourable membersparticularly the Prime Minister who, as the member for McMillan said, will shortly be attending the APEC leaders meeting in Indonesia-will welcome the fact that Australia is shown by the study to be performing exceptionally well in comparison with its APEC neighbours. For example, many people consider that the most important measure in education is the pupil-teacher ratio. The study shows that, of the 11 economies in APEC, Australia has emerged as the best performer in this area. The overall ratio of pupils to teachers in Australia was 15 to one, compared with 33 to one for the Philippines, 27 to one for Korea and 17 to one for Japan.
Education and training have been a priority of this government since it came to office in 1983. Our priority is both to improve educational outcomes and to make schooling more relevant to our young people. Everybody knows that this government's policies have achieved an absolute revolution in school retention rates. They have risen from around 36 per cent in 1983 to the situation now where some eight in 12 of our young people complete year 12. It is important to understand that this has provided young Australians with the necessary platform to acquire the skills demanded by employers in an increasingly competitive and technologically advanced global economy.
This APEC study actually shows that the government's achievements have gone further.

2794

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

They have placed Australia right at the forefront of education internationally. Imagine if Australia had been forced to endure the policies of those opposite. We would still have only one in three of our young people finishing school. Two out of three would be leaving the education system with no foundation for equipping themselves with the skills needed to take their place in our modem work force-absolutely none at all. Those opposite would condemn them to being the unskilled serfs of the Australia Pacific. In doing so, they would condemn Australia to becoming the poorly skilled, poorly equipped, poor cousin of APEC.
Instead, through the policies of this government-recently reinforced by the white paper-we continue to build an educated, highly skilled work force, a work force capable of meeting the challenges of technological change. This government has never given up on its young people and it never will. I am pleased to tell the House that, among the nations of APEC-those nations which already produce half the world's product and which are the fastest growing economies in the world-Australia stands well positioned to match it with the best.
Health Insurance Ms WORTH-My question is directed to the Minister for Health. Given that a recent Roy Morgan poll shows that nearly half the population believes that health services are deteriorating and that 80 per cent say that the government should offer tax incentives to take out private health insurance, will the minister now change her stance of refusing to put a floor under private health insurance, as advocated by her predecessor, ex-Senator Richardson? Can she explain why the deputy chief of her department, Dr John Loy, on 30 October, when discussing the package of so-called reforms, said that they were 'not directly aimed at reducing premiums and, therefore, not directly aimed at increasing or slowing the decline of participation' in private health insurance? Dr LAWRENCE-I am aware of the survey that was commissioned by one of the funds that I referred to earlier-MBF-and the associated release of those survey results.

They are very interesting indeed. They show that if you say to people, 'Would you like more money in your pocket?' they generally say yes, by and large. But if you asked them, 'Do you want more money in your pocket at the expense of the health care system?' I think they would be a little less certain about their answer. So the first point to make is that the survey questions were not constructed in a way that I regard as even-handed.
Mr Speaker, if you look at the specific question in that survey, you will see that it asked, 'Which of the following statements do you agree with?' and then it asked, among other things, whether the government should offer tax incentives to encourage people to obtain private health insurance. That is the way the question was put. It was not a question about where the money was coming from.
That question was put to the shadow minister for health on a recent Meet the press program no fewer than seven times. She indicated that she supported the idea there should be tax rebates. She was not prepared to specify how large they would be and she certainly was not prepared to say where the funding would come from. Where would the money come from? Which part of the health system would be penalised?
The old Fightback document basically said that the GST and the abolition of bulk-billing, amongst other things, and cuts to hospital expenditure would be used to fund tax rebates. Now the member of the opposition who is responsible for this area says, 'Well, there's no GST. We support bulk-billing.' That leaves cuts to hospital expenditure. Unless the opposition, through its shadow spokesperson on health, is saying that we should blowout the budget deficit by between $1.5 and $3 billion adding to the deficit does not make a lot of sense. Unless it is advocating that course of action, it has to come, as the Leader of the Opposition has confessed, from cuts to expenditure. Which section of the budget would it come from? It would come from cuts to public health expenditure.
Mr Speaker, if you said to those same people, 'Do you support a system of tax rebates which would be paid for by slashing the

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2795

public health system to the tune of $1.5 to $3 billion?' I think their answer would be a very different one indeed.
If you are going to quote from that survey, it is worth pointing out that one of the questions asked was whether people thought the decline in the number of people privately insured was putting pressure on the public health system. Do you know what they said in response to that? One per cent of the sample thought that there was any relationship between the two. Yet this is the line that is being pushed by the opposition spokesperson on this question.
As to Dr Loy's comments, they are absolutely correct. These are not directed directly at reducing premiums; they are designed to improve competitiveness in the market. In my view, as a result of increased competition-a philosophy I would have thought normally embraced by the opposition-they will reduce premiums, improve the product and generally give value for money. But they are not directed at that in a very direct way. They are designed to achieve that result. As I said, some companies like MBF appear to want to compete in other areas-for instance, publicity and politicising the issue. Others are getting down to the business of reducing their premiums. And we have already seen those effects.
Federal Election
Mr LEO McLEAY-My question is directed to the Minister for Finance. Has the minister seen comments today about the possibility of an early election before the full reality of the boom-bust cycle and rising interest rates hits mainstream Australia? Does the minister agree that Australia's economic circumstances support such a scenario?
Mr BEAZLEYI have seen those comments. Whether or not there is a boom-bust cycle in the Australian economy was amply laid to rest by the answers that the Treasurer gave earlier today. He pointed out how sustainable our growth was based on the fact that this is a government that has been prepared to address the fundamentals. As a result of that, we are now in a position of very strong and sustainable growth.

The only boom-bust scenario that has any application in current circumstances is the level of popularity being experienced by the Leader of the Opposition. There is one thing that I want to assure him of in relation to early election schedules and any other suggestions that he might desire to circulate at the moment. There is an area of common interest between us and you. The area of common interest between us and you is that you should stay firmly sitting where you are now. We will devote considerable attention to the task of assisting you to do that.
I am afraid to say that organising our election schedule ain't going to be one of those. You are going to have to survive on your own and listen to the advice that is occasionally handed out to you by your colleagues. For example, at the same time that you were suggesting to us that we are now considering scurrying to an election as quickly as possible, et cetera, you had a very sensible piece of advice from your National Party leader, who said:
This mid-term saga which merges every mid-term, that there'll be a whiff of an early electionI reject it.
At least if you are going to get your propaganda going on this, as you recognise the possibilities of your own survival bound up in some notion that there is instability in the political process, get your lines right with all elements of your situation. You need to get your lines right. You did not get your lines right with Tim on this occasion. You were not getting your lines right with Robert. You are now attempting to consult with a couple of your colleagues to see whether you can get your lines right next time around. If you cannot do a bit better in your public expression, all I can say is that you take the same advice that you offered the Prime Minister yesterday when he suggested to you:
I do not want to be horrid, not even a teensyweensy bit horrid-
You suggested that the Prime Minister needed to wash his mouth out with soap and water. I suggest the same remedy for your good self on the subject of early election campaigns.

2796

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

Health Insurance
Mrs BISHOP-You had better watch it. The Commonwealth Bank may call in the ALP loan.
Mr Beazley interjecting-
Mrs BISHOP-You bet, and we will deal with that some more too-any time you like.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the House is not helping. The member for Mackellar will get to her question.
Mrs BISHOP-My question is directed to the Minister for Human Services and Health. Has the minister signed agreements with the states implementing her announcement that equivalence payments will be made to public hospitals by health insurance funds in respect of private patients but requiring a large proportion of that payment being clawed back and repaid to the funds? If not, will the minister tell us what stage the negotiations have reached, as her package will fail without those agreements?
Dr LAWRENCE-I am pleased that the member seems to have finally discovered this element of the package because she has not made comment on it before today. I am sure most members here are not all that clear about the equivalence arrangements either, so I will just outline them. They are principally designed to ensure that private beds in public hospitals and private beds in private hospitals are treated on exactly the same basis for the purposes of reimbursement and insurance. At the moment, about half the rate is paid in our public hospitals as is paid in private hospitals.
One of the favourite tricks of state governments at the moment-I hope the member is aware and critical of this-is that they are shifting costs to the private health insurance sector by moving those private beds out of their public section of the hospital into standalone private facilities. In the case of the Royal Melbourne in Victoria, a very considerable impost is placed by that means on the private health insurance section. It is being asked to pay at double the rate. The states are getting the funds for those beds from the Commonwealth and are putting them in their pocket. They are moving the beds into the

private sector and saying, 'Well, that's very nice, thank you.'
According to the Business Review ~ekly this has not been repudiated by the New South Wales government-in the case of Port Macquarie a similar move will result in cost shifting of $35 million per annum. That is in one little hospital. Overall, if all of the state government hospitals made this move of privatising those beds and moving them out in various ruses, which many of them are doing at the moment, the cost to private health insurance in this country would be $700 million per annum.
It appears on this question that the member responsible for this area, the shadow spokesperson, has not got a word to say. She has not made any observations about this very substantial impost on the private health insurance funds which she purports to support.
Mrs Bishop-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order relating to relevance. The question was very specific: does she have agreements or not and where are the negotiations up to if the answer is no?
Mr SPEAKER-The minister is answering the question. The minister is in order.
Dr LAWRENCE-I was making it very clear why this is such an important matter and why it is important to negotiate with the states. It is not just about equivalence between private beds in public hospitals and private beds in private hospitals. It is about cost shifting of a very substantial magnitude to the private health insurance companies. Yes, I am in discussions with the states and we have had preliminary discussions. Officers are meeting at the moment.
I said at the time this package was outlined that I believed that it would take some time to reach agreement and, indeed, I was not necessarily confident that all of the states would agree. They want to hang on to some of the money on the way through. They are saying to me at this stage-and we are still discussing it-'We would like to take some of that money that should go straight to the private health insurance funds and put it in our own state coffers.'

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2797

At this stage we do not have agreement on this question, but it is a very important one indeed. That is why, ahead of the trigger, I have advised state premiers that we will review the Medicare agreements with an aim to preventing the sort of cost shifting and the consequences of privatisation without policy that several state governments are engaged in at the moment. We are seeing it increasingly in South Australia and we have seen it in Victoria and New South Wales.
The benefits to the taxpayers are not obvious. The costs to private health insurance funds are considerable. For a party which claims to be concerned about high premiums, the opposition has been remarkably silent about one of the major reasons for the increase in premiums at the current time-that is, cost shifting to the private sector. I would be interested to hear the opposition's policy on this matter and I am sure a great many people would also be interested.
Mrs Bishop-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I believe the minister has misled the House.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Mackellar should be very careful. That is a grave charge. There are forms of the House which she can use if she believes that that is the case.
Mrs Bishop-I seek leave to table a letter bearing today's date from the Minister for Health in Victoria.
Mr SPEAKER-Is leave granted? Leave is not granted. There is no point of order.
Petroleum Supplies
Mrs SILVIA SMITH-My question is directed to the Minister for Resources. Can the minister advise the House of the outlook for Australia's petroleum supply? Can the minister also advise the House of any recent developments which would affect the security of our petroleum supplies?
Mr BEDDALL-I thank the member for her question and acknowledge her interest in all the development issues in northern Tasmania, particularly those relating to her electorate of Bass. As she would be aware, I recently awarded two exploration permits for

Bass Strait north of Launceston. This is a very exciting prospect. As the member for Gippsland would know, most of the exploration in Bass Strait has been off the coast of his electorate.
These two new permits involve an expenditure of $50 million on exploration programs by three companies-two Australian companies and one United States company. As a result of increasing levels of exploration activity we have been making some important new oil discoveries in Australia. This is important because Australia's level of selfsufficiency in oil is now expected to rise from 75 per cent in 1993 to some 87 per cent in 1995. Unfortunately, it will drop off after that without further exploration.
Members will be aware that the North West Shelf has been, and still is, a major gas field, but because of new oilfields coming on stream in the North West Shelf it is now becoming an oil producing area of growing importance. By 1997 the North West Shelf is forecast to overtake Bass Strait as the principal oil producing area in Australia. If our domestic oil production is to be maintained beyond 1995 we must find more oil.
At the current rate of production, Australian crude oil reserves will only last some eight years. We have in Australia an attractive tax regime but by international standards Australia is a little explored area. It is therefore pleasing to note a recent discovery of oil a few weeks ago in the Timor Sea. Last month, Woodside Petroleum intersected a substantial column of oil in its Leminaria exploration well. This find is the second in the Timor Sea in the last 12 months. Recent discoveries, such as Woodside's, will hopefully attract more frontier exploration activities in the Timor Sea, which is still a vastly underexplored area.
The reason this is important to Australia is that Australian oil concentrate, LPG and natural gas production in this country is worth $7.1 billion per annum. Total petroleum exports out of this country are now worth some $4 billion, giving us a surplus of petroleum products of some $570 million after imports are taken into account. We need a constant and considerate exploration program

2798

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

in this country, and that is why I am pleased about the recent developments.
Mr Beazley-Mr Speaker, I ask that further questions be placed on the Notice Paper.
PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS Mr TIM FISCHER (Farrer-Leader of the National Party of Australia)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation. Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented? Mr TIM FISCHER-I do. Mr SPEAKER-Please proceed. Mr TIM FISCHER-It arises from the reporting of the Air New Zealand saga and the comments the Minister for Transport (Mr Brereton) made yesterday. The minister correctly confirmed that Ansett has been flying to New Zealand for seven years-inaccurately describing the New Zealand domestic market as a lemon-but misrepresented my position on cherry picking, which relates to the fact that Qantas uplifts some 160,000 passengers each year out of New Zealand compared to Air New Zealand uplifting merely 50,000 passengers out of Australia. Mr SHARP (Hume)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation. Mr SPEAKER-Do you claim to have been misrepresented? Mr SHARP-Yes, I do. Mr SPEAKER-Please proceed. Mr SHARP-Yesterday in question time, in answer to a question that I put to the Minister for Transport (Mr Brereton) in respect of the grounding of Yanda Airlines, he claimed that I had not provided, when asked to, detailed documents to substantiate the claims I made in the parliament in June this year that Yanda was a shonky airline. In yesterday's Hansard, Mr Brereton says:
As this House well knows, on not one or two but three separate occasions the honourable member refused to bring forward evidence when invited to do so.
Hansard records my interjection. I said:
I tabled the documents in the parliament.
Mr Brereton then says:

Not in respect of this. The only thing that you tabled was your accusations in respect of Airlink.
That is what the Minister for Transport claimed yesterday. In the Hansard of 9 June on page 1907, at the conclusion of a speech I made in regard to Yanda Airlines and my concerns about it then, I said:
Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek leave to table documents confirming the comments I have made about Yanda Airlines and the maintenance licences issued to the operators in Adelaide.
Leave was granted. Mr Speaker, I have here the documents that I tabled. They are properly stamped, as you can see. There is a report from Singleton Air Services Pty Ltd trading as Yanda Airlines and another report from Singleton Air Services Pty Ltd. Both of those documents are documents of the CAA's that were leaked to me. They substantiate the claims I made about Yanda Airlines and prove that yesterday the Minister for Transport seriously misrepresented me.
COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA AND COMMONWEALTH
DEVELOPMENT BANK OF AUSTRALIA
Annual Report
Mr SPEAKER-Pursuant to statute, I present the annual report and financial statements of the Commonwealth Bank of Australia and the Commonwealth Development Bank of Australia, together with the Auditor General's report thereon, for the year ended 30 June 1994.
AUDITOR-GENERAVS REPORTS
Mr SPEAKER-I present the Auditor General's report No. 6 of 1994-95 entitled Efficiency audit-Australian Taxation Officeinformation technology security.
Motion (by Mr Beazley)-by leaveagreed to:
That:
(1) this House authorises the publication of the Auditor-General's audit report No.6 of 1994-95; and
(2) the report be printed.

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2799

PAPERS Mr BEAZLEY (Swan-Leader of the House)-Papers are tabled as listed in the schedule circulated to honourable members. Details of the papers will be recorded in the Votes and Proceedings and Hansard. The schedule read as followsAboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission Act-Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission-Report for 1993-94. Aboriginal Deaths in Custody-Royal Commission-Implementation of New South Wales Government responses to the recommendations of the Royal Commission-Report for 1992-93. Administrative Appeals Tribunal ActAdministrative Review Council-18th report, for 199394. Australian Broadcasting Corporation ActAustralian Broadcasting Corporation-Report for 1993-94. Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Act-Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research-Report for 1993-94. Australian Federal Police Act-Australian Federal Police-Report for 1993-94-Erratum. Australian Film Commission Act-Australian Film Commission-Report for 1993-94. Australian Film Finance Corporation Pty LtdReport for 1993-94. Australian Institute of Marine Science ActAustralian Institute of Marine Science-Report for 1993-94. Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Act-Nuclear Safety BureauReport for 1993-94. Australian Trade Commission Act-Australian Trade Commission-Report for 1993-94. Commonwealth Law Enforcement BoardReport for period 24 March to 30 June 1994. Dairy Produce Act-Australian Dairy Corporation-Report for 1993-94. Electoral Matters-Joint Standing CommitteeInterim report-Financial reporting by political parties: Inquiry into the conduct of the 1993 election and matters related thereto, June 1994Government response. Environment, Recreation and the Arts-Standing Comrnittee-Report-Biodiversity: The contribution of community-based programs, 4 June 1992 -Government response. Equal Employment Opportunity (Commonwealth Authorities) Act-Equal employment opportunity program-

Film Australia Pty Limited-Report for 199394. Health Insurance Commission-Report for 1993-94. Reserve Bank of Australia-Report for 199394. Law Reform Commission Act-Law Reform Commission-Report No. 70 (interim)-Child care for kids: Review of legislation administered by the Department of Human Services and Health. Leasing by the Commonwealth of accommodation in Centenary House-Royal CommissionReport of the Commissioner (Hon. T R Morling, QC). Murray-Darling Basin Act-Murray-Darling Basin Commission-Report for 1993-94. National Film and Sound Archive-Review for 1993-94. National Occupational Health and Safety Commission Act-National Occupational Health and Safety Commission (Worksafe Australia)- Report for 1993-94. National Science and Technology CentreReport for 1993-94. Primary Industries and Energy Research and Development ActFisheries Research and Development Corporation-Report for 1993-94. Land and Water Resources Research and Development Corporation-Report for 199394. Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation-Report for 1993-94. Procedure-Standing Committee-About time: Bills, questions and working hours-Inquiry into reform of the House of RepresentativesReport-Proposed amendments to the standing orders of a machinery nature following the initial operation of changes consequential to the report, 8 November 1994. Public Lending Right Act-Public Lending Right Committee-Report for 1993-94. Public Service ActDepartment of Administrative ServicesReport for 1993-94. Department of Finance-Report for 1993-94. Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Report, including a report on the Adult Migrant English Program pursuant to the Immigration (Education) Act and a statement pursuant to the Australian Citizenship Act, for 1993-94.

2800

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

Department of Industrial Relations-Report, incorporating a report on the operation of Part V of the Industrial Act, for 1993-94. Refugee Review Tribunal-Report for 1993-94. Safety Rehabilitation and Compensation ActComcare Australia and Commission for the Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation of Commonwealth Employees-Report for 199394-Erratum. Snowy Mountains Council-Report for 1993-94. Motion (by Mr Beazley) proposed: That the House take note of the following papers: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission Act-Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission-Report for 1993-94. Aboriginal Deaths in Custody-Royal Commission-Implementation of New South Wales Government responses to the recommendations of the Royal Commission-Report for 1992-93. Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act-Administrative Review Council-18th report, for 199394. Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Act-Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research-Report for 1993-94. Commonwealth Law Enforcement BoardReport for period 24 March to 30 June 1994. Electoral Matters-Joint Standing CommitteeInterim report-Financial reporting by political parties: Inquiry into the conduct of the 1993 election and matters related thereto, June 1994Government response. Environment, Recreation and the Arts-Standing Committee-Report-Biodiversity: The contribution of community-based programs, 4 June 1992-Government response. Equal Employment Opportunity (Commonwealth Authorities) Act-Equal employment opportunity programReserve Bank of Australia-Report for 199394. Law Reform Commission Act-Law Reform Commission-Report No. 70 (interim)-Child care for kids: Review of legislation administered by the Department of Human Services and Health. Leasing by the Commonwealth of accommodation in Centenary House-Royal CommissionReport of the Commissioner (Hon. T R Morling, QC). Murray-Darling Basin Act-Murray-Darling Basin Commission-Report for 1993-94. National Occupational Health and Safety Commission Act-National Occupational Health and

Safety Commission (Worksafe Australia)- Report for 1993-94.
Procedure-Standing Committee-About time: Bills, questions and working hours-Inquiry into reform of the House of RepresentativesReport-Proposed amendments to the standing orders of a machinery nature following the initial operation of changes consequential to the report, 8 November 1994.
Public Service Act-
Department of Administrative ServicesReport for 1993-94.
Department of Finance-Report for 1993-94.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Report, including a report on the Adult Migrant English Program pursuant to the Immigration (Education) Act and a statement pursuant to the Australian Citizenship Act, for 1993-94.
Department of Industrial Relations-Report, incorporating a report on the operation of Part V of the Industrial Act, for 1993-94.
Refugee Review Tribunal-Report for 1993-94.
Snowy Mountains Council-Report for 1993-94.
Debate (on motion by Mr Howard) adjourned.
Mr Thckey-With indulgence, would the Leader of the House indicate whether any of those items might now find their way to the Main Committee for some debate?
Mr BEAZLEY-That course is available to honourable members. I think it is a matter that the honourable member for Watson (Mr Leo McLeay) discusses with the Manager of Opposition Business (Mr Howard) in regard to the second chamber. As I understand the arrangements, if there is a hiatus, if you like, on legislation before the Main Committee, it is possible to discuss other reports that are tabled and the motion that has just been passed is put down. As I said, that matter needs to be discussed with the honourable member for Watson. As I understand it, there are something like 20-odd bills before the Main Committee at the moment, which I must say is having a marked effect on the workload here, for the good. I suspect that those bills will probably occupy the bulk of the time of the Main Committee until the conclusion of the year.

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2801

MATTERS OF PUBLIC IMPORTANCE
Health Insurance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Mackellar (Mrs Bishop) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The funding crisis in our health system resulting from the Government's failure to recognise the essential contribution of private health insurance to the health care of individual Australians and the overall health system.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the standing orders having risen in their places-
Mrs BISHOP (Mackellar) (4.02 p.m.)- Earlier in question time today, we touched on some of the elements of the health care crisis that this country of ours is facing. The numbers spell it out the best. The cost of delivering our health care system is $34 billion. Of the $34 billion, $15 billion comes from the Commonwealth, $8 billion from the states, and $11 billion from the private health sector. The well-known figure, and the industry accepted figure, is that for every one per cent decline in private health insurance the government has to find $100 million of taxpayers' money to make up the shortfall.
The government has commissioned various reports, such as the Response to government discussion paper: reform of private health insurance by the caucus-ACTU working group. It says in its executive statement that a worst case scenario is that the rate of decline may leave a core of 20 per cent membership of private health insurance. If that prediction came true, the Minister for Human Services and Health (Dr Lawrence) would have to find $1.7 billion to make up the shortfall. Where is the money coming from?
We have got a fundamental problem here with this government. It has forgotten that its job is policy. Policy means exercising executive function. It is bestowed upon you when you are sworn in as a member of the Executive Council. Policy means that you spell out

to the parliament and to the people the precise details of the proposals that you put forward. Yet what have we seen?
First of all, we saw denial-the head in the sand attitude. It was a case of just pretending that if we do not think about the problem it will all go away. When the minister has been asked about this, as she has again and againI was very interested to see that she seems to mark her participation in this chamber only by the number of questions she is asked-she forgot to mention that the last time we were to have a debate on this matter in an MPI she had to get her colleague the Leader of the House (Mr Beazley) to call on government business and negate the MPI. Only after he had called it off did the minister come into this place.
We tried again the next day. We put the same letter in-'Let's have it again the next day.' But, guess what, the government saved her again. It popped in a letter that day, and the Speaker picked that letter. So we did not have to debate the issue that day either. Then there have been the myriad of opportunities for the minister and me to be on the same platform. She would accept invitations until she realised that we might actually place her under scrutiny and she might have to answer some questions. Take the private hospitals conference in Queensland only a few weeks ago. The week before she pulled out. Once again, we did not have the opportunity to have a debate. As recently as last Sunday-
Mr Gibson-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. The honourable member has just made a statement which is untrue. I was in fact invited to that conference five weeks before the conference-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jenkins)- Order! There is no point of order. The honourable member will resume his seat.
Mrs BISHOP-I have to tell you, that is what she sent along in her place. But, if we go on, as recently as last Sunday an invitation was issued to the good minister to come along and debate the issue on Meet the Press. Once again she declined. It is not the first invitation she has had to appear and debate the issue on a television program either. She simply runs away.

2802

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

I have been told that is her track record in Western Australia-she does not like confrontation, I am told. I was also told in Western Australia that she had misled the Western Australian parliament. Today we had a statement from the minister that said she is negotiating-negotiations have begun and are taking place in order for her health reforms to be put into operation-leading us to believe that the agreements are well on the way.
Let me read to you a letter bearing today's date, 8 November, from Robyn Cleland, Adviser to the Minister for Health in Victoria. It states:
I refer to our conversation earlier today regarding the recent Commonwealth proposal for changes in the area of private health insurance.
The Commonwealth has not sought formal agreement from the States regarding the proposed private health insurance reforms. Officer level discussions regarding certain aspects of the package have occurred, but the Commonwealth has refused to disclose the proposed legislation to allow detailed analysis and comment.
At State level, officers from our department continue to seek further details of the proposals and, in the meantime, are having discussions with participants in the private health insurance market regarding the implications of these proposals.
It should, however, be noted that the proposed changes will do little to resolve the current problems in the private health insurance market. The proposals are clearly inadequate and fall well short of what is required to lift private health insurance levels.
I understand that the Commonwealth Minister, Dr Carmen Lawrence, will be introducing legislation into the House of Representatives in the first week of December to implement her health insurance package. It is expected that State Health Ministers will be invited to participate in the consideration of this legislation by various Senate Committees in late February/early March 1995.
That will take care of it, with the election. It continues:
Please do not hesitate to contact me if you would like further information . . . Regards-
I seek leave to table the document.
Leave granted.
Mrs BISHOP-The point is that the minister told us that the negotiations were on the way so that her reforms could be implemented. I know she is forgetful. I know she

has a problem because I remember that she took money out of the imprest account and put it into her account for travel expenses and forgot all about it-$5,OOO she forgot. Is that not extraordinary! Somebody else who misused funds went to gaol-but you would not even go and testify for him.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member should be very careful in couching accusations in those terms.
Mrs BISHOP-It is true. Let us go back and help the minister with her memory. What happened in August when this great package came down? We got three or four bits of PR paper, a press conference and a wish list. Did we get any policy or any substance? No. What was the most meaningful question and answer session given at the press conference? 'Mrs Lawrence: please forgive me. I am sorry this is all so difficult.' The one question the press forgot to ask was for whom-for her or the gallery?
The really important question asked at that press conference was, 'Will the basic table be repealed?' Bill Norman from the Canberra TImes asked that question. It was a very good question because this whole package depends on what happens to the basic table. What was the answer? 'Yes,' said the minister. Immediately her department went around telling every interested party who would listen, 'No, it won't be.' When I turned up to do an interview with some people in the industry, they were all under the impression that the basic table would not be repealed. But then, at the latest briefing, we got the best answer. The answer was, 'Perhaps.' The 'perhaps' depends upon the success of the agreements about which I asked a question of the minister earlier today.
Let us have a look at why the basic table matters. The basic table is the instrument by which private health funds are required to make payments to all and any hospitals where a private patient is admitted as a private patient. That means public hospitals receive revenue somewhere between $500 millionthat is half a billion dollars-and $700 million a year from that source. That means private patients are subsidising the public hospital system. When the minister was

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2803

Premier of Western Australia, on 1 September 1992 she said-I think this is a nice little quote-to parliament:
Despite our funding efforts in this area, there are clearly pressures on public hospitals because of the shortfall in funding from the Commonwealth and incr~asing demand for publicly funded health servICes.
That is what she said when she was Premier. Now she is talking about cost shifting the other way. Funny thing, is it not? It is funny that, when we talk about competition, it is okay for the burden to shift to the states but not the other way around.
But let me go back to the basic table. The basic table requires the health funds to make a payment for whichever hospital the patient chooses to go to. That is called freedom of choice. But the minister's proposals are to get rid of freedom of choice and to ensure that the health funds, not the patient, pick the hospital. They will stitch up a deal. What if they happen to own a string of hospitals? I think the Trade Practices Act might be interested in a little vertical trust. The minister says that there is no need to worry about trade practices, despite the fact that the Trade Practices Commission tells me it has been in discussions for six months with the department of health. We will have a little deal stitched up, the health fund will pick the hospital and, if the wish list comes true, the doctor too.
The problem with that is that it can be done only if the basic table is repealed. If the basic table is repealed, public hospitals lose out on $500 to $700 million. Needless to say, the minister had to come up with some sort of scheme to try to make it work. She has called it equivalence. Mr Roger Kilham, addressing a conference for Access Economics the other day, said that the equivalence scheme is fundamental to the success of a package.
In order to abolish the basic table, she has to stitch up this deal where the private health funds will make the same payment to the public hospital as they make to a private hospital. They then have to claw back the money and give it to the health funds so that they do. not suffer the enormous extra cost and perhaps go out of business. That is the

essence of the scheme. To this date, the minister has not even begun negotiations. Yet she has the hide to put it around that we will get the legislation the first week in December. Nobody has seen that legislation. It does not exist; it has not been seen.
Dr Lawrence-It is not in the legislation.
Mrs BISHOP-Here we go. 'It doesn't exist in the legislation,' says the minister. Let us see what we can expect. Could it be possible that we are going to see what is called bare bones legislation, with all the nitty-gritty done by regulation? The Attorney General (Mr Lavarch) over there would not approve of that sort of thing; it is bad legislation. He holds himself up as a pretty good Attorney-General. He would not approve of that, but it looks as though that is what we are going to get because this minister has not got a policy; she has a wish list.
Let me tell honourable members what our policy will be: to offer tax relief for premiums paid for private health insurance to stem that flow. If something is not done-and that is what the people expect-this minister will have to find $1.7 billion. She told John Laws, 'We won't put up the medicare levy,' pretending it was relevant. Less than 10 per cent of our health care expenses are paid for by the Medicare levy-a miserable $2.4 billion out of $34 billion. If the minister does not put up the Medicare levy, what will she put up? General taxation. She told John Laws, 'A budgetary adjustment would be the preferred way of paying for it.' That is code for tax hikes. If it is not tax hikes, she will have to cut spending.
Let us look at the track record. In the last 10 years the government has cut spending in real terms on public funding by reducing the amount of money, in overall outlay terms, that has gone to public hospitals. Back in 1984,53 per cent of outlaws went on public hospitals-this year, 44 per cent; next year, 39 per cent.
Mr Lavarch-Outlaws or outlays?
Mrs BISHOP-In other words, the outlays have been cut. The minister got it rightoutlays. The only outlaws are the ones sitting over there. So, to put it very simply, we are

2804

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

in crisis. The minister will not acknowledge Of course, Medicare benefits are payable.

it. The only way to solve the policy is to offer We have a wonderful health financing system

tax relief. It is a good policy, Minister. Feel in this country which would be undermined

free to pinch it.

by the proposals being put forward by the

Dr LAWRENCE (Fremantle-Minister for Human Services and Health) (4.17 p.m.)-It is a bit hard to know where to start. The speech of the shadow minister for health, the honourable member for Mackellar (Mrs Bishop), is full of the most extraordinary inaccuracies and misunderstandings. I am quite happy to stand here and give a little

opposition on this question. We have a good fee-for-service system. There are pressures in it which I would be the first to acknowledge and which our OP reform program is designed to address. We have pharmaceutical benefits too, providing I think the cheapest drugs in the developed world. We certainly have a system that is cost efficient.

lecture to the shadow spokesperson on health, As well as those major elements of access

but I do not imagine that would be particularto hospitals on the basis of clinical need,

ly edifying for her colleagues. So what I access to general practitioners and special-

propose to do is address the matter of public ists-again, on the basis of clinical need, not

importance before the House-the same what you can afford-and pharmacy at low

matter of public importance that the member prices, we have other elements of our health

brought to the House in August. She has been system funded by the Commonwealth, by the

silent since August. That was the last time taxpayers, which I think are deserving of our

this exactly worded matter of public importsupport: the dental program, women's health

ance was put to the House. As the member and Aboriginal programs, and our whole

said, it was not debated at that time. I was health promotion and prevention campaigns.

delighted to have the opportunity-

That is what the taxpayers' dollar buys for us.

Mr Howard-She's got a written speech.
Dr LAWRENCE-I can use a word processor, you know. It is an amazing thing in the 1990s. This was the same issue that we were going to debate then. According to the member, nothing has changed in two months. She has brought up the same matter of public

In my view, the Australian health system provides a comprehensive health program, perhaps with too much emphasis on intervention and curative medicine and not enough on prevention, but, by and large, a system of which we can be proud. Obviously Medicare is the centrepiece of that.

importance, which shows a distinct lack of Any move which sees significant funding

imagination. I want to address a number of drawn out of the system is bound to produce

issues around this matter of public importance cracks in that system. The community under-

which I think are very important for the stands that. Its support for Medicare is very

people of Australia rather than for the edificahigh indeed and it has been growing since the

tion of the shadow minister. Firstly, I will program's introduction. Percentage approval

address the principles of Medicare, which are started in the mid-60s and has now reached

endorsed by the Australian community and 90 per cent. The extent to which doctors

endorsed very fulsomely.

approve of Medicare has increased too.

In the Medicare agreements, Medicare provides for access to hospitals on the basis of clinical need. Sadly, there have been some

Doctors are increasingly using bulk-billing as a way of reducing their costs and improving the quality of care they provide.

recent developments that are showing some Medicare replaced a very confusing se-

exceptions to that-queue jumping in some of quence of changes made during the time of

our hospitals, state governments initiating the Fraser government which resulted in a

changes in outpatients and pathology sertwo-tiered health system. This is precisely

vices-which make it more difficult for what the current spokesperson on this issue

people to have equitable access. But the wants to take us back to-one system for the

principle is there and I think it deserves to be rich and another for the poor, a system for

endorsed by this parliament.

those who can afford to pay larger premiums

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2805

in health insurance and another system for the charity cases. That is where we have come from.
We came from a system where the Prime Minister's driver paid more for his health care than did the Prime Minister. That was clearly unacceptable to the Australian people and that is why they have endorsed and embraced Medicare over successive elections. They have done so in the face of some fairly ridiculous propositions by the opposition, including the one the shadow spokesperson now chooses to put before us again-tax rebates. Those opposite lost the last election because people believed Medicare was a far superior system and it is unlikely they are going to embrace this sort of pea and thimble trick at the next election. I would commend members opposite, including the person responsible for this area, to go away and have another think.
I make a little point about the role of the private sector. I think it is absolutely critical that we have a universal system. I think Australians generally agree with that. Even the member who has brought forward this matter of public importance appears to agree with it because she is now saying that Medicare should be embraced by the opposition as well. Nonetheless, she wants to dismantle it.
We have a universal system, available no matter who you are. Those of us who are more wealthy pay higher taxes and higher Medicare levies and those who have a low income or are in receipt of a pension or benefit pay very little. That is what a progressive tax system is all about. It is designed to ensure that need is the basis on which service is delivered and ability to pay is the basis on which people put money into the system. That is what happens at the moment.
We have a quality system because of that. Yes, there are difficulties with certain elements of it and I think they are the problems we should be addressing in debates such as this-not phoney proposals to take money and give it to some people by way of tax rebates or credits and take them out of other parts of the system.

In my view, the private sector-I have said this publicly on many occasions-is complementary to our universal system. It is a choice for those who want it-a choice of doctor and of hospital. It is very much something that is added on to the existing system. That is a view generally shared by people in the community.
I think older members of our community who were, if you like, users of the old system, where if you did not have private health insurance you did not get decent cover, are more anxious about retaining their private health status and standing, even when perhaps it is not in their financial best interests to do so. Nonetheless, I can understand that, historically, my own parents' generation is very much more enamoured, I suppose, of private health insurance than are younger people. Therein lies some of the problems with the existing private health insurance system.
It is the young and the healthy who are pulling out of the system because they do not see any particular benefit in being privately insured. But incidentally-this is a very important point-they do not make claims on the public system either. That is a point I want to refer to briefly because the opposition health spokesperson has tried to make that the linchpin of her tax rebates argument. The idea that a one per cent decline in private health insurance ultimately produces a $1.7 billion claim on the public health system is arrant nonsense and I hope to be able to show why it is.
It is quite clear that with the initial introduction of Medicare it was intended that private health insurance should decline. That was precisely the point of the system. That is why an increasing amount of money went from the Commonwealth into the health care system rather than coming out of individuals' pockets. That is why the Medicare levy was introduced: to fill that gap initially between reasonable contributions to public health as existed in the past and the new regime.
So, in my view, responsibility for the growth and the prosperity of the private sector belongs in the private sector. We can change the system, the market, to reduce regulation and to improve the ability of the various

2806

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

partners to negotiate with one another, to system. The fact is that they are not. They are

enter into contracts, to inform the consumer the young and the fit and are a deferred

and to allow for consumer complaints mechaliability. It is something I have said that needs

nisms. They are the key elements of the to be addressed and is why we have addressed

private health insurance package. But in the it through that package.

end it is up to that private market to provide value for money.
People were dropping out of private health insurance because they knew that they were not getting a good deal. After the initial introduction of Medicare, there was a continuing decline in private health insurance coverage, mainly, as I say, of the fit and the young. I will cite a couple of figures to put this into perspective. The participation rate for the December 1993 quarter, for instance, was 38.4 per cent and in recent times it has fallen to 37.2 per cent. That is the sort of level we are talking about, and it has been pretty much

The private sector is a very important part of our health system in the same way that the
private education system is an important part of our health system. But I believe the
Commonwealth has a responsibility to provide
quality health care for all of its citizens. If they want an addition to that, an element of
choice, then it is theirs to make that choice. We as regulators can try to make sure that they get value for money, that they are not being ripped off and that premiums are not going through the roof as they have done in the past.

like that on an annual basis after the initial The result of that system has been consider-

known decline occurred with the introduction able. We do have a good system. Our

of Medicare.

achievements are access and equity for all. It

It was and is still expected that membership
of private health insurance will continue to
decline because these market changes as yet have not been introduced. The legislation will
be brought down to ensure that the market is opened up and that competition is genuinely introduced. The theoretical maximum demand transfer to the public sector from a decline in private health insurance of one per cent-and
this is where we part company very substantially-is around $60 million per annum if
you assume that the people dropping out of
private health insurance are of exactly the
same age profile as those currently using the public system. That is $60 million per annum,
not $1.7 billion in total which, by curious

has encouraged innovation. There is competi-
tion between the public and the private sectors and between public hospitals them-
selves. We have quality care and constant
vigilance by various bodies to make sure that we have the best. But, importantly, the public health system, the public hospital system in particular, supports excellent research and
teaching. We would not have the quality we have in general and specialist practice in this
country without decent research and teaching
facilities, which are, by and large, in the
public system. So, to the extent that you
demean and downgrade that system by removing funds, you are actually putting the whole health system in jeopardy.

calculation, the member seems to have got to. In a system such as ours which is admired

It was a deliberate content of the last Mediby other countries and increasingly emulated,

care agreements that states such as Victoria as I pointed out in an answer to a question

and New South Wales, which had had notoritoday, we have managed to contain the total

ously low use of public hospitals by public cost as a percentage of gross domestic pro-

patients, would improve the number of people duct. It hovers around eight to 811z per cent

they had using the public hospital system. In depending on the robustness of the economy

return, they got very substantial increases during a recession. Obviously, the percentage

under the Medicare agreements-much more stays somewhat higher than it does during

than the $60 million the department estimates economic recovery. That compares with 14

would have to be paid assuming the same per cent in the United States, where a great

profile of people dropping out of private many more people rely principally on private

health insurance and going to the public health insurance and where some 40 million

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2807

people, on last estimates, are without any cover at all.
The OECD has recently done a report on those systems that rely heavily on private health insurance and fee-for-service arrangements and they end up costing more than those systems such as ours which rely in part on public funding for all of the elements of the system. In any comparison between Australia and the rest of the world, particularly with places such as the United Kingdom and the USA, we come out very well indeed.
I just want to turn quickly to a couple of issues which I think have been overlooked by the member opposite. As I say, private health insurance is important. The health of our system is important generally, but we have to look at the elements of pressure in the system. One of them is the withdrawal of hospital funds by the states. I am in discussion with the states at the moment to try to ensure that the cost shifting going on does not accelerate even further. Victoria has taken the lead in this, New South Wales is not far behind and, sadly, South Australia is now moving there.
I found it extraordinary at a meeting of health ministers recently that, when I raised the problem of cost shifting by privatisation to the private insurance sector, the ministers from conservative states found it amusing that a federal Labor minister should be concerned about the private health insurance industry. They said that the private health insurance industry could cop it. They said that it could cop the sort of $34 million transfer at Port Macquarie, the transfer at the Royal Melbourne Hospital and the proposed transfer at Modbury. In their view, it did not matter too much if all those costs were just moved to the private health insurance system, and they were inclined to be sanguine about the inevitable increases in premiums that would follow. So I get a little impatient when I hear some of the state ministers publicly saying how important it is to maintain high levels of private health insurance and not put pressure on the public system when they are doing precisely that in a quite calculated manner.
In addition to that, the state governmentsin particular, Victoria and, until recently, New South Wales-had been withdrawing funds

from the system at as rapid a rate as the Commonwealth had put them in under the Medicare agreement. There have been times when the balance is different. The member made reference to statements I made as the Premier of Western Australia. At that time, it was correct to say that, relatively speaking, we had increased our expenditure at a rate faster than the Commonwealth's, but at the moment the only state in which that is possibly true is Queensland, which has recently announced very significant increases, particularly in its capital program. In Victoria, over the last three budgets, there has been a 14 per cent reduction-or a prospective one-in health system funding. The net result of that is that the amount of money going to the hospital system from the various state governments is declining very dramatically.
That is a pressure, and that is one of the reasons why there have been all sorts of stories about accidents, emergencies and catastrophes. Basically, the system cannot operate when that level of funding is taken out so quickly. We are all in favour of efficiencies and improvements in the management of hospitals, and the Commonwealth has put substantial funding in to reduce waiting lists, improve hospital management and ensure that we get the best quality care. If we are going to talk about the need to reform the health system, we have to look at all of the issues, not just this one. (TIme expired)
Mr LIEBERMAN (Indi) (4.32 p.m.)-It is clear that the poor old Minister for Human Services and Health (Dr Lawrence) is not coping, just as the health system is not coping. Perhaps I should say that I do have private health insurance and I think it is probably a good idea for the minister to indicate whether she does or not. I take it that she does not. She probably philosophically would not have a bar of it anyway. She said quite proudly that Medicare was always intended to drive people out-they are my words but that is what she meant-of private health insurance.
There is no doubt that she has succeeded. She and her buddies, in the left wing of the Labor Party particularly, hate the private sector. There is no question about that. Their

2808

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

performance over many years indicates their Mr Gibson-Your state government

prejudice. They have put obstacles in the way doesn't fund them.

of the delivery of innovative health services by the private and voluntary sector in Australia. So that we do not let her escape the real truth, let me remind the House that in the last 12 months the Labor government has driven out of private health insurance 335,000 people. It is not all the current minister's fault; she has been in there wrecking the place for only six or eight months. A succession of Labor ministers have carried out a total demolition job since 1982, when the government introduced Medicare.

Mr LIEBERMAN-Let me say it again while those opposite try to shout me down: the problem with Medicare-which we support-is that it is mortally wounded because the federal government is starving the states of adequate funding to maintain the service that the Australian people believe they are entitled to because the Labor government, through Bob Hawke and the Prime Minister (Mr Keating), wrote to all Australians and said, 'Dear fellow Australians, we are going to introduce the best health reform that has

Since 1982, there has been a drop in Australia in the number of people taking out private health insurance to supplement the health care of their families and themselvesto the extent of more than 3112 million people. They have been driven out by the Labor Party. No-one else has done it. The Labor government should have had policies to keep people contributing. There is nothing wrong with self-help as far as we are concerned, but there is a lot wrong with self-help as far as the government is concerned because the government is supposed to supply everything. What a mean and miserable record that in Australia in the last 12 months we have driven 335,000 people out of health insurance and that in the last 10 years under a Labor government we have driven more than 3112 million Australian people from self-help.

ever been. All Australians will be able to have access to free health care in our hospitals.' Of course, the government has let the Australian people down because to do that you have to sustain adequate funding.
But what has it done? It has driven 3112 million people out of insurance-people who would have opted to go to private health care or pay public hospitals for private health services in public hospitals. It has driven those people out and, increasingly, those people are now in the queues of public hospitals looking for care and attention. Ask any federal or state member of parliament, any doctor, any person in the health system or any caring person to go to a typical hospital anywhere in the district and say, 'Tell me, what's your waiting list?' The people in the hospitals will probably say, 'Well, we are not allowed to tell you officially. In fact, they are

What an indication of how this minister is in the ivory tower, busily sweeping things

maintained in the surgeon's office, not ours.' That is one of the tricks they now play.

under a carpet. If people walked into the There are horrendous stories of hardship, of

minister's office, I bet they would fall over people unable to get surgery to relieve pain

because there is so much stuff swept under and of children who have been involved in

the carpet since Richo left that it would be accidents. These children have certainly

dangerous and a health hazard to go in there. received excellent care after their accidents-

The minister did not mention at all the fact there is no question about our emergency

that many independent commentators and care-but have had operations for, say, skin

people involved in the day-to-day care of grafts due to bums cancelled because hospi-

Australians are expressing alarm at the intals do not have adequate funds. The minister

creasing number of people who are unable to is desperately going around Australia now

get health care in public hospitals because trying to blame the states for this. But she

public hospitals are underfunded. Why are will not get away with this. She cannot, the

they underfunded? The reason is that the reason being that, for once, ex-Senator

federal government has starved Medicare of Richardson has done a service to Australia. In

adequate funding.

December last year he issued a discussion

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2809

paper on the health crisis and said, 'We are in crisis.' Let me read a few words of what he said when he released that statement.
Mr McArthur-Did he put it in the book? Mr LIEBERMAN-It was not in his book, actually, which is rather interesting. Maybe he left all the truth out of his book. He said:
The case for refonn is overwhelming. More than 200,000 Australians dropped out of private insurance last year and we expect the number to accelerate over the next few years. This represents $85 million lost in the year 1992-93 to the national health budget.
Note that: lost to the national health budget. He continued:
Unless we stem the flow, the public purse will continue to have to find the bulk of the money to replace their lost contributions.
Of course that is a year ago. It is even worse now. On the figures of the former minister, in excess of $100 million was lost. I ask the very few Labor members on the other side what that $100 million would do to their hospital? How would their hospital like a share of that to help the people on the waiting lists who are in pain and who cannot get pain relieving surgery? If they think that I am exaggerating, let me read from a report of the AMA on that question. It says:
. .. it is misleading if not cruel to say that Australia's public hospital system is working extremely well.
Ex-Senator Richardson was honest enough to say that it was in crisis. This minister says that it is not. The report continues:
There are around 100,000 Australians languishing on waiting lists for elective surgery in our public hospitals, some of them up to 5 years. Any general practitioner working in any part of the country will also tell you that many frail and elderly people are frequently not admitted to our public hospitals-
they are frequently discharged too early, because the hospital does not have enough funds from the federal government to keep operating-
when both they and their family doctor clearly believe that they are in need of care. This is but one consequence of rationing that now occurs on a daily basis in our public hospitals.
By the way, this is in Queensland, for those Labor cynics opposite who say that it happens

only in Liberal states. That is nonsense. It is also happening in Queensland. If you are honest with yourselves, you will know damned well why. The federal government has failed the Australian people. It has introduced a Medicare system which we support, and it has failed to sustain it with necessary, adequate funding. The AMA went on to say:
There are also patients who wait hours if not days to be transferred from the emergency department to a ward while a bed is desperately sought.
In the face of that crisis, the minister today says that there is not one. I started off by saying that the minister is not coping. I was being kind to her. I was concerned for her. Some health ministers regard the health portfolio as the graveyard for politicians. Cabinet often does not sustain the health minister's requirements because the cabinet is not fully aware or the minister is not strong enough around the cabinet table.
This minister has come in from the west. I like westerners, but it is clear that she is not coping. She has been rolled. Ex-Senator Richardson said that there is a crisis. He issued a discussion paper and pointed out that we have lost $80 million-there is more to come-and that we have to stem the flow. This minister, six or eight months after becoming the minister, said, 'Hang on, I will tell you what I'll do. I'll re-gig part of the private health system. By the way, I won't be able to introduce the legislation for a little while.' I think she said today that it would be in December. Furthermore, it has emerged that that legislation has not been discussed with the states, which is remarkable. After all, the states deliver the service under the Commonwealth-state arrangement. Why not? Work it out. It has now apparently been revealed today in the letter from the Victorian minister that the Senate committees will look at the legislation next year. (TIme expired)
Mr GIBSON (Moreton) (4.42 p.m.)-I am delighted to have the opportunity to participate in this debate on the matter of public importance. The honourable member for Indi (Mr Lieberman) at least tried to answer the substance of the question. This contrasts quite remarkably with the contribution of the honourable member for Mackellar (Mrs

2810

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

Bishop), which substantially ignored the question altogether. That is not surprising, because she has very few facts.
I sat here during the contribution of the honourable member for Mackellar. I had my pad ready to take notes about all the powerful points she would make in her debate so that I had a long list of things to which I thought I could respond. How many points did I actually get? Two. The two points I listed were the two points whereby she misled this House about particular information.
The first untruth that she outlined regarded her allegation that the Minister for Human Services and Health (Dr Lawrence) has been deliberately trying to avoid debates and that every time she knows the honourable member for Mackellar is going to be on a platform she runs away and hides. She had the hide to say recently at a conference in which I also participated-the Australian Private Hospitals Association conference-that, just a week before, the minister found out that the honourable member for Mackellar was going to participate and she withdrew.
Mrs Bishop-No. She pulled out a week before.
Mr GIBSON-That was an untruth, and you well know it. The honourable member for Mackellar knows that I was contacted by the minister's office five weeks before that conference. Dr Greg Herring, the executive director of the Australian Private Hospitals Association, rang me 4112 weeks before the conference to confirm that I was going in the minister's place because the minister had cabinet responsibilities and could not attend at that conference. Dr Greg Herring rang me 4112 weeks before and said, 'I understand that you are going to be representing the minister at this conference. Discuss with me the arrangements for the conference.' So the honourable member for Mackellar outlined an actual untruth in this House by claiming that the minister pulled out one week before. It was, in fact, arranged five weeks before. That is the first point.
The second point that the honourable member for Mackellar made in her contribution-the only two points that I was able to find in her contribution-concerned the lack

of substance in the policies regarding the reforms to private health insurance that the government has outlined. Let us just examine that question about substance in policy.
This flimsy little sheet from The Things That Matter is the health policy of the Liberal Party. We heard from the honourable member for Mackellar that health expenditure is $34 billion. One would think that health is a pretty substantial issue nationally and that there should be policies with some real substance. These are the people who are saying to the people of Australia, 'We should be the alternative government. We should be in charge of health policy in this country.'
What do they say in this, their policy? Their policy occupies three paragraphs. There are then 13 lovely goals that all sound quite reasonable. They are very much the parenthood type goals that we have come to expect from the opposition. But when the wood is put on the honourable member for Mackellar to give us some substance to this policy, as was asked of her-
Mrs Bishop-This is the government we are talking about.
Mr GIBSON-The wood was put on you at the Private Hospitals Association conference. She was asked, 'Mrs Bishop, you have just said to us that you would offer tax breaks to Australians to provide incentive to take out private health insurance.' One of the 400 people who had listened to her contribution raised this question; it was not me or another politician. This person continued, 'Mrs Bishop, how would you provide these tax breaks? What is the shape of these tax breaks and where will the money come from?'
I would have thought that they are quite legitimate questions. She has put up as a policy that the opposition will provide tax breaks for private health insurance. The person at the conference said, 'Give us a bit more detail. If we are going to be listening to you and deciding whether you will be the alternative government that we want to put in power, we need some substance.' Did she bother to give any substance? No. She avoided the question completely and said, 'A ljllUch better question is to talk about the govern-

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2811

ment's failure', blah, blah, blah. So I had to answer the question for her.
In providing tax breaks, we are talking about a cut of somewhere between $1.5 billion and $3 billion in revenue to the government, which would have to be funded by cuts to government grants to hospitals.
Mrs Bishop-Wrong! Wrong!
Mr GIBSON-If it is wrong, tell us how you would do it. I am prepared to sit down and give you another five minutes to tell us how you would fund the tax breaks and what the tax breaks would be. We have asked you to provide details of those tax breaks on numerous occasions. On every occasion, the honourable member for Mackellar has failed to give us any sort of substance.
Opposition members have been bleating about allegations that the Commonwealth has been cutting funds to the state hospital system. It is another untruth, because I have the figures here about how much money we have been spending. I will get to that point shortly. But they are saying to us, 'The Commonwealth has been cutting money to the states and this is causing all these calamitous problems in state hospitals.'
If the honourable member for Mackellar were to become the health minister and to introduce these 'tax breaks'-whatever they might mean-she would have to cut grants to the states for hospitals by at least 25 per cent. How big will the waiting lists be under your administration when you start slashing up to $3 billion from the state hospital system?
Mrs Bishop-Wrong again! Wrong again!
Mr GIBSON-She claims that I am wrong. Tell us the facts. Where will the money come from? How will you structure these tax breaks? If you are not going to cut it from state grants on hospitals, where will you cut the $3 billion? Will you do the exact opposite to what your leader says and add another $3 billion to the deficit? What will that do to interest rates? Where is the consistency in the opposition's position on this issue? There is no consistency. It is very hard to find out anything from these three miserable little paragraphs, which is the opposition policy

statement for $34 billion in national expenditure on health.
Let us look at the levels of Commonwealth funding for health. The member for Indi has alleged, as has the member for Mackellar previously, that the Commonwealth has been cutting expenditure. Let us consider the facts. Commonwealth funding to the states for public hospitals has grown by over 21 per cent in real terms since 1985-86. With the introduction of the new Medicare agreements in 1994, there was a jump of eight per cent in real terms. Hospital funding will grow by about 2.5 per cent per annum in real terms over the next few years. In fact, the Commonwealth's share of total health funding and public hospital funding has grown in recent years compared with that of the states, and this trend is set to continue.
The honourable member for Indi mentioned concerns raised with him by his constituents about waiting lists and cuts to expenditure. He should look to his own party for the reason for that problem. The Victorian Liberal government has slashed between 10 and 12 per cent from the state's public hospital sector. That is why you have growing waiting lists in Victoria. That is why you have problems with your health system in Victoria. It is not because the Commonwealth has cut expenditure. The Commonwealth has increased expenditure in your state and in all states. The fact is that the Victorian Liberal government and other Liberal governments around this country have been slashing their state expenditure on public health. That is why we have a problem with the provision of health services to the people of this nation. The Commonwealth has been contributing increasing amounts of money to the nation's public health system.
We have had an appalling performance today from the shadow spokesperson on health. If she wants to pretend that she is going to become the next health minister, she has to do a lot more work than she has done of late. She has to start reading some material and talking to people across the health industry instead of just ringing up a few of her mates in the private health insurance industry, a couple of her mates that run private hospi-

2812

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday,8 November 1994

tals or a couple of her mates in the AMA and saying, 'What should I say now? What's my policy to be today on this matter?' She needs to go out there and find out what the issues are.
If she did that work, she would find out that private health insurance is a third order debate in this country. There are many more substantial issues of importance to this nation that she has to deal with. She has to start dealing with things like the quality of primary care. She should talk about not only acute care in hospitals but also primary health care provision in this country. She needs to talk about the community health care sector. She needs to talk about medical research issues. These are the issues of substance. (TIme expired)
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jenkins)- Order! The discussion is concluded.
AUSTRALIAN POSTAL CORPORATION AMENDMENT BILL
1994
First Reading
Bill received from the Senate, and read a first time.
Explanatory memorandum presented by Mr Punch; ordered that the second reading be made an order of the day for the next sitting.
MATTERS REFERRED TO MAIN COMMITTEE
Mr LEO McLEAY (Watson)-I ask leave of the House to amend notice No.1, government business, relating to the referral of bills to the Main Committee, by adding the Australian Postal Corporation Amendment Bill 1994.
Leave granted.
Motion (by Mr Leo McLeay)-agreed to:
That the following bills be referred to the Main Committee for consideration:
Merit Protection (Australian Government Employees) Amendment Bill 1994;
International Air Services Commission Amendment Bill 1994;
ANL Guarantee Bill 1994, and
Australian Postal Corporation Amendment Bill 1994.

COMMITTEES
Selection Committee
Report
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jenkins)-I present the report of the Selection Committee relating to the program of business prior to 2.45 p.m. on Monday, 14 November 1994. The report will be printed in today's Hansard and the items accorded priority for debate will be published in the Notice Paper for the next sitting.
The report read as followsReport relating to the program of business prior to 2.45 p.m. on Monday, 14 November 1994 Pursuant to standing order 28D, the Selection Committee has determined the order of precedence and times to be allotted for consideration of committee and delegation reports and private Members' business on Monday, 14 November 1994. The order of precedence and the allotments of time determined by the Committee are shown in the list.
COMMITIEE AND DELEGATION REPORTS Presentation and statements 1 ENVIRONMENT, RECREATION AND THE
ARTS-STANDING COMMITTEE: Report on environmental policies which stimulate employment growth. The Committee determined that statements on the report may be made-all statements to be made within a total time of 45 minutes.
Speech time limitsFirst 4 Members speaking-tO minutes each. Other Members-5 minutes each.
PRIVATE MEMBERS' BUSINESS Order of precedence Notices 1 MR J. N. ANDREW: To move-That this
House: (1) notes the difficulties that GATT-produced tax
changes pose for the Australian citrus industry; and (2) recognises the need for the (a) introduction of a range of tax changes and/or compensation packages to allow the citrus industry to maximise its export potential and (b) maintenance of the Uruguay Round of trade reform as it advances the opportunities for all exporters in Australia. (Notice given 11 October 1994.) Time allotted-30 minutes.

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2813

Speech time limitsMover-lO minutes. First Government Member speaking-lO minutes. Other Members-5 minutes each.
The Committee determined that consideration of this matter should continue on a future day. 2 MR LANGMORE: To move-That this House: (1) recognises the 50th anniversary of the Bretton
Woods Institution by acknowledging both the value of the achievements of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund and the costs of their misjudgments; and (2) calls for the establishment of an intergovernmental committee with broad representation along the lines of the Committee of Twenty for the task of reconsidering the functioning of the international financial institutions after 50 years and their future role in the dramatically different world economy from that in which they were founded with a view to improving their effectiveness, their coverage and their democratic covenants. (Notice given 19 September 1994.) Time allotted-30 minutes. Speech time limitsMover-lO minutes. First Opposition Member speaking-I0 minutes. Other Members-5 minutes each. The Committee determined that consideration of this matter should continue on a future day. 3 MS WORTH: To move-That this House: (1) recognises that about a quarter of a million Australians are affected by mild, moderate and severe dementia; (2) notes that hundreds of thousands of other Australians, who are loved ones, carers and friends of dementia sufferers, are as much victims of dementia as the actual sufferers; and (3) calls on the Government to provide greater and more effective assistance to all victims of dementia, particularly by: (a) fostering the establishment of residential
care facilities designed specifically to give full-time and specialist care and support to sufferers of severe forms of dementia; (b) ensuring that home and community care services are operating to allow as many sufferers of dementia as possible to remain at home; and (c) directing more funding to research into the cause of dementia, particularly related diseases including Alzheimer's Disease,

Huntingdon's Disease and Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease. (Notice given 13 October 1994.)
Time allotted-any remaining private Members' business time. Speech time limits-
Mover-l0 minutes. First Government Member speaking-lO minutes. Other Members-5 minutes each.
The Committee determined that consideration of this matter should continue on a future day.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs Committee
Membership
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Mr Speaker has received advice from the Chief Government Whip that he has nominated Mr Cleeland to be a member of the Standing Committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs in place of Mr Home.
Public Works Committee
Reports
Mr HOLLIS (Throsby) (4.55 p.m.)-On behalf of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works, I present the sixth and eighth reports of the committee for 1994 relating to the upgrade of the transonic wind tunnel at the Defence Science and Technology Organisation at Fishermens Bend, Victoria, and the construction of a new chancery at Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea.
Ordered that the reports be printed.
Mr HOLLIS-by leave-The first report which I have tabled deals with the proposed upgrade of the transonic wind tunnel at the Defence Science and Technology Organisation's aeronautical and maritime research laboratory at Fishermens Bend, Melbourne, Victoria. The proposal which the committee examined involved the replacement of a range of components to the transonic wind tunnel, including the compressor system and most importantly the tunnel test section. The estimated out-tum cost of the proposed work is $12.7 million at December 1993 prices. The committee has recommended that the upgrade should proceed.
The committee sought to establish why Australia needs a modem transonic wind

2814

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

tunnel. The need is based on Australia's selfunable to endorse the deactivation of the

reliant defence policy. The committee conSalisbury wind tunnel, nor is it convinced that

cluded that for Australia to continue this selfit should continue to operate.

reliant defence policy it is necessary for capabilities which depend on aircraft and related airborne ordnance to be maintained and further developed. In this general context, it is essential for Australia to have a modern transonic wind tunnel to provide data on aerodynamic loads of aircraft and stores, such as missiles, to permit their more efficient deployment and life extension.

For these reasons the committee has recommended that an independent study of the desirability of deactivating the Salisbury S-1 wind tunnel should be carried out under the auspices of the Australian Science and Technology Council. The committee has also recommended that the membership of the study panel should include experts in the fields of aerodynamics, engineering and financial

The committee heard evidence and conanalysis.

firmed that the existing transonic wind tunnel The second report which I have tabled

at Fishermens Bend suffers from small test involves the construction of a new Australian

section dimensions and inadequate compressor chancery complex in Port Moresby at an

capacity. Studies undertaken over a number estimated cost of $22.26 million at February

of years revealed that it would be very expen1994 prices. The committee again draws

sive to construct a new and much larger wind attention to the continuing difficulty it faces

tunnel to replace the existing facility. The in assessing overseas projects, as, under

alternative proposal, involving the upgrading current legislation, it is unable to meet outside

of the tunnel and using advances in computAustralia or in its external territories. Until

ing, would reduce cost and at the same time this legislation is amended to enable site

would provide a facility which will be adinspections to be carried out overseas, the

equate for our purposes.

committee continues to reluctantly give

Before embarking on the development of the proposed upgrading, DSTO obtained expert advice on its feasibility. The advice

approval for construction of projects which, in its view, it has been unable properly to assess.

confirmed the feasibility and practicalities of The structure of the present chancery does

upgrading the transonic wind tunnel at Fishernot conform to the current design codes for

mens Bend. Furthermore, the extent of the upseismic performance. The building requires a

grading of various components of the wind major overhaul refurbishment, does not meet

tunnel has been the subject of extensive the latest security requirements and was not

studies and consultation by DSTO. For these planned to cater for the present staffing levels

reasons DSTO is confident that the enhanced and functions of the high commission.

capabilities which the upgraded transonic A need therefore exists to provide a new

wind tunnel will achieve are adequate for the chancery in Port Moresby which will provide

longer term. The proposal also has the strong a safe working environment. The proposed

support of the Australian aerospace industry chancery will comprise the following ele-

and the Australian Division of the Royal ments: a new five-level purpose-built chan-

Aeronautical Society.

cery; office spaces, display spaces, workshop,

A proposed consequence of the upgrade of the Fishermens Bend wind tunnel could be the eventual closure of a smaller, but from the evidence presented very effective, wind tunnel at Salisbury in South Australia. The committee received strong arguments for and against

storage areas, staff amenities, external plant facilities and services building; a grassed playing area with associated facilities, including toilets, showers and change room; staff and visitor car parking; and associated site works, services and landscaping.

the closure of this facility from the DepartThe committee was advised by the Com-

ment of Defence and staff associations repremonwealth Fire Board that it considered a risk

senting members at Salisbury. On the basis of analysis/cost benefit study should be under-

the evidence presented to it, the committee is taken with regard to fire protection in the new

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2815

chancery. The committee, therefore, recommends that such a study be carried out and that the Commonwealth Fire Board and the committee be kept informed of the results. The Overseas Property Group advised the committee that, although it did not consider an environmental impact study of the site necessary, it will conduct a review of past uses of the site as well as a munitions search. The committee has recommended that it be advised of the results of this survey.
At the public hearing the Community and Public Sector Union stressed that it would like to continue to be involved in the planning of the chancery to the stage where the building becomes operational. The committee commends the Overseas Property Group on its willingness to continue consultations with the Community and Public Sector Union during the planning and construction phases of the project. I commend the reports to the House.
SOCIAL SECURITY (PARENTING ALLOWANCE AND OTHER MEASURES) LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL 1994
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mrs SULLIVAN (Moncrieft) (5.02 p.m.)- Prior to the debate on the Social Security (parenting Allowance and Other Measures) Legislation Amendment Bill being interrupted for question time at 3 o'clock today, I was making some comments about the government's rhetoric versus its actions in relation to women. I was pointing out that, whilst publicly it appears to have its rhetoric right, when judged against its actual actions the story is very different indeed. I had said a few words about, for example, the family allowance which-when introduced by the Fraser government-subsumed the dependent child rebate, was payable to the person who actually had responsibility for child care, was increased significantly and was deemed to be some economic recognition of the economic value of parenting, of child care.
I had pointed out that the Hawke government in 1987 income tested the family allowance-usually received by the motheraccording to the income of the spouse, the

father. I pointed out that it was the only such benefit paid by government income-tested according to the income of someone other than the recipient. I pointed out that whilst this form of income testing is also used in the case of Austudy where there is a notion of dependence, it is obnoxious for full-time mothers to be treated as dependants, an appendage to someone else. In fact, the family allowance effectively no longer exists. It is now a welfare payment. The previous payment which was made for parenting no longer exists. It is now a family support payment.
The coalition has no problem with family support payments. We have no problem with lower income families being given additional assistance towards the cost of rearing children. We think that is very worthwhile, but we point out that the government has taken away from women-the mothers of Australia-this universal recognition of the economic value of parenting.
The government's rhetoric, as always, is 'motherhood is wonderful' and 'mothers do a wonderful job'. Australian women have heard rhetoric about their value and about the value of motherhood since the year dot. They are not dills. They know that, if something has value in our society, it receives a cash payment somewhere along the line. Many of them know they were getting a cash payment and they lost it. They lost it for reasons that had nothing to do with them.
I have pointed out before in this chamber that there is no guarantee that the wife of the Toorak millionaire sees one cent of her husband's income as disposable income for herself. She may well have credit cards-in his name, always coming to him for payment: she is always accountable-she may well have all those types of benefits. However, there is no guarantee that she will have money in her hand over which she has total discretion and for which she answers to nobody, apart from herself. The family allowance change was an obnoxious change.
In this bill we are talking about something called the parenting allowance, which is to take over from the home child-care allowance. I have my own theory as to why we have this change of name of the allowance. In previous

2816

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

debates I have pointed out that when child was a very clever politician. Her first example

care in Australia is undertaken by a person in of cleverness was letting the press portray her

paid employment, there is no income test of in that way. She let it happen and raised no

the tax rebate beneficiary. The person who objection, she just went on talking. As a

gets the benefit of that child-care tax rebate result, she received an extraordinary vote in

may have a limitless income. In contrast, the that Senate election in 1980. My feedback

person who is paid the home child-care alwas that the housewives of Queensland went

lowance may have a very tiny income into the polls-having seen her ridiculed for

deed-I think an income in excess of somebeing a housewife-and voted for themselves.

thing like 70c a day-but will start losing it. They believed those who ridiculed Flo Bjelke-

So this allowance is income tested. It therePetersen thought they were dills, that they did

fore comes into the welfare category, just as not have any brains and that they were worth-

the family allowance was put into the welfare less because they were-like Flo-only

category. There is a ceiling on income for housewives. However, they knew that was not

receipt of the home child-care allowance. In so, and they voted for themselves. Senator

other words, once again the value of parenting Bjelke-Petersen never lost their support.

and child care in the home can be deemed to

be worthless by the government, depending The Keating government should face the

on whether the person doing the parenting has fact that the full-time at-home child carers of

other sources of income.

this country are basically there by choice and

I have to wonder whether that stark contrast in the treatment of the child care undertaken by the mother in the home versus the professional child care undertaken in an institution away from the home is the reason that the words 'child care' have been taken out of the name of the allowance. The term 'home childcare allowance' has gone. We no longer have this linguistic link between government assistance for paid child care-the child-care re-

are proud of the job they do. They expect the
same dignity as that given to the paid child carer. That dignity is money in the hand. I ask the Labor Party: who, in this country, is remunerated for the work they do according to other sources of income? Is the income of members of parliament affected by income they might have from some other sourcefrom shares, a business, a farm? Of course not!

bate-and home child care-the home child-

care allowance. Now the latter is called the However, according to this government's

parenting allowance and is a welfare payment, policies the full-time mother is the only

because it is income tested.

worker in this community who is deemed to

As I said a couple of minutes ago, Austral-
Ian mothers are not dills. Australian housewives have long since suspected that a large section of the community thinks they are dills. I will give an anecdote to back up my theory. In 1980, when one Florence Bjelke-Petersen stood for election to the Senate, she was unmercifully ridiculed in this place and out in the community by the press, by young journalists-almost overwhelmingly male journalists, but not all were male-as a noncandidate because she was a housewife and one of her claims to fame was that she freely made available her favourite scone recipe. She was portrayed almost as a fool.

be worthy of remuneration determined according to income received from other sources.
No union would put up with that sort of case-from an employer deciding in this manner what he or she was going to pay an employee. It is like saying, 'I do not need to pay Bob Charles as much as I might pay Janice Crosio, because Bob Charles gets more money from his business than Janice Crosio gets from whatever other source of income she has.' What rubbish! What foolish stuff! I am pleased to see that the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social Security (Mrs Crosio) finally appears to be paying attention. I was hoping that she might have been listening to what I was saying a little

Her political opponents subsequently learnt, earlier, because it is relevant to her as one of

to their great cost, that she was no fool. She the female members here.

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2817

Only full-time mothers receive remWleration tempered by income from other sources. She is the only worker in our community so affected. I return to the point I made earlier: is that the reason for the changed name of this allowance? No other substantial reason is given for this benefit being changed from 'home child-care allowance' to 'parenting allowance'. The link, the nexus, in the terminology is being broken for reasons of political rhetoric.
This change will eventually catch up with the government. It has lost the plot on the subject of women. I wanted to talk about the original feminist argument for child care but my remaining time is very short. I am not going to be able to say much about that at this stage, but I will at a future opportunity. The original feminist argument about the right of women to work and their right to receive support for necessary child care was that, unless there was recognition of the cost and the value of child care, mothers did not have a free choice in whether or not they took paid employment. That was the original feminist argument and I support it 100 per cent-and I always have. I am pleased to see that finally this right is being recognised by the Labor Party. It has been a Liberal Party policy for many years-the Labor Party finally got scared enough of losing the last election to make it part of its policy and is now having to carry out its promise.
The feminists have always said in their rhetoric-and still do say, so far as I am aware-that the full-time homemaker, particularly the full-time mother, is somebody who is following a vocation of her choice. If you are given the choice to work outside the home-a proper choice which supported child care allows you-it is exactly that: a right to choose. But the alternative of staying home and being a full-time mother is also a legitimate choice of vocation.
When the government treats child care so differently for those two types of women, it is really saying that there is child care of lesser value involved in this choice, therefore, the person doing that job is doing a job of lesser value. When the government takes away the dignity of an objective universal rate

of remuneration for work done, it totally torpedoes its own rhetoric and its own rationale. It is demonstrating very clearly that it does not have a regard for the work done by the full-time mother; it has regard for only income testing and welfare assistance. It does not regard the job done in the home as being of some objective value-and both the measure presently in place as well as the measure being put in place by this bill, achieve very different outcomes. (Time expired)
Mr ALLAN MORRIS (Newcastle) (5.15 p.m.)-Just to ensure that we do not get confused as to who might have lost the plot, I want to draw the House's attention to the legislation and what it is about, then I want to refer to what the opposition has put forward. The Social Security (Parenting Allowance and Other Measures) Legislation Amendment Bill 1994 puts forward five important points which came out of the white paper. It replaces the 100 per cent taper in the income test for the jobsearch, newstart and sickness allowances with a 70 per cent taper; it replaces the joint income test for couples with a new separate partner income test; it introduces a new parenting allowance; it phases out, over a period of time, the partner allowances and the gender based wife's pension; and it extends the education entry payments.
The opposition's amendments effectively wipe out the whole legislation. The legislation deals with issues like the Wlemployment crisis, adequate assistance to low income families, harsh treatment of older single women, and so on. The opposition's amendments have in many ways lost the plot completely. It reminds me very much of the last piece of legislation debated from this portfolio. The amendments and the debates were much the same as they are in this case, and the legislation was being used as a platform for the raising of entirely different topics.
The previous speaker, the honourable member for Moncrieff (Mrs Sullivan), was talking about women in Australia not being dills. That applies to men as well. People are not dills. In his speech the shadow minister, the honourable member for Berowra (Mr Ruddock), despite what the previous speaker said, indicated that the opposition supports the

2818

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

parenting allowance. They were fine words about the government being discriminatory, but the fact is that the shadow minister said that the coalition will not be opposing the introduction of the parenting allowance. Most of what we have been hearing has had nothing to do with the debate. Further on there will be other amendments that the opposition will not be opposing, yet it has moved a set of amendments which opposes the whole of the legislation.
This is very shallow politicking. Those people who are out of work are being used as political fodder in a fictitious and continuous way by members who make some pretence of being concerned. The pretence is audacious, if nothing else. The Liberal Party spent two years telling us that the long-term unemployed did not deserve the dole. I can recall that debate and I can recall the opposition changing its mind, yet the previous speaker told us how we got scared in the last election. I would have thought that that was a bit of a misstatement about who got scared at the last election.
This legislation is essentially about encouraging unemployed people, particularly unemployed couples, to seek work. It is about making the system less punitive for the vast bulk of people so that they suffer less if they can obtain part-time work and can therefore increase their disposable incomes. That is one of the primary aims of this legislation, particularly in terms of the taper in the income test. But we are seeing the argument being used that this legislation is all to do with the unemployment crisis.
In recent months we have seen employment increasing. In previous speeches I have pointed out that, since 1983, Australia's population has increased by 2.6 million and the work force has increased by 1.75 million. In other words, the work force is growing at a much better and faster rate than is the population. That gives a lie to those opposite. It gives a lie to the nonsense that somehow we are worse off. The fact that the work force has grown from 61f4 million to over, eight million is indicative of that. The strong growth in the work force, in the number of

people in employment, is a major issue which the opposition carefully chooses to ignore.
One could gain the impression from opposition speakers that these measures are either revenue neutral or save the government money. The fact is that these measures involve hundreds of millions of dollars of additional expenditure. We are getting daily calls from the opposition to cut government expenditure. As a result of these measures, the government is increasing expenditure by hundreds of millions of dollars; it is increasing the amount being paid to people who are poorly off. At the same time, it is encouraging those people to seek more work and it is making it more attractive. The opposition is saying that, unless we cut spending, we are going to fuel a boom-bust cycle. Even stronger than that, it is saying that, by not cutting spending, we are actually increasing interest rates. The opposition wants it each and every way-not just both ways-for every possible angle.
These are fictitious amendments designed to oppose the legislation in total. Throughout the debate on this bill, the opposition has been indicating that it is going to support most of the amendments. Then it tells us that we have somehow lost the plot. At the same time, throughout all of this, the opposition's Treasury spokespeople are saying, 'Unless the government cuts expenditure, it is in fact putting interest rates up.'
These measures form part of a coherent package which involves the expenditure of many billions of dollars over the next four years. It is long-term and permanent. The package of measures announced in the white paper, which focuses on assisting people who are out of work, particularly those who have been out of work for long periods, is vital.
The way the opposition is treating this whole process is demeaning-both to itself and to those who are out of work. The opposition is nit-picking its way through, in the most tedious and tendentious way possible, a series of major changes which make up the most comprehensive approach taken to long term unemployment by any country in the world at the moment. What we are facing in this country is not all that different from what

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2819

America, Japan, England and France are facing. The Australian government is taking the most comprehensive approach of any government in the Western world.
Where is the opposition's sense of vision? What about the lessons from the last election, the one before that, the one before that, and the one before that? What we are seeing from the opposition are tedious, nit-picking examples of person A in hypothetical situations. Are we seeing from the opposition any constructive response to what is happening in world economies? Is that being put into context in terms of the situation in which our unemployed people find themselves? Are we seeing from the opposition a long-term, constructive approach being taken to unemployment, to training, to education, to how we actually deliver the transfer payment system? Not at all. We are not seeing any of that.
What we are seeing is an amendment that all words be omitted and substituted with 'The House condemns the government for its inability to solve the unemployment crisis.' That is really profound policy and profound politics. It demonstrates once again why those opposite are still on the other side of the chamber. I do not mind them being on the other side because, whilst they are there, Australians have a much better chance. What I do mind is the opposition demeaning a lot of people who do not deserve it.
The people in this country who are out of work deserve and warrant support. They deserve and warrant respect. They deserve and warrant decent debate, discussion and proposals. They are not getting that. They are getting trivia; they are getting tendentious, repetitive speeches. The opposition's speeches could be recycled. The opposition's amendments are virtually recycled. How many retreads are available to those opposite?
This legislation is part of a coherent package to try to ensure that those who can obtain part-time work benefit more from that part-time work. The shift of the taper in the income test from 100 per cent to 70 per cent, the shift in allowances and the shift in structure are largely to try to echo and reflect what is happening in our community.

The Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social Security (Mrs Crosio) will be speaking on this matter once again. I am confident that she will more than add to what I have been saying. I remind her of the challenge she faces. She now has a wonderful challenge to see whether or not she has the capacity to respond to this matter.
This situation is indicative of the depth and quality of those opposite. The challenge they have put to the parliamentary secretary is: will she put her name on the line that the Social Security computer system will not fall over? That is said by the would be minister for social security. This debate is really about: 'How is your PC going?' This is accountability to absurdity. Somehow the great challenge coming forward from the opposition and the would be minister for social security is: 'Do you stake your parliamentary future on a computer system?' And we are supposed to see this as serious debate. We are supposed to take these people seriously. Forgive me for not doing so.
What we do take seriously are the people who are out of work and who are seeking work, the people who, with an income from part-time jobs, are losing more of their allowances and support. As I said, these measures are part of a comprehensive package. It would be really delightful if, for a change, we could see the opposition actually comprehend and respond to the broadness of the white paper, instead of having this tedious politicking and nitpicking.
There is no question that there will be a division on this bill. Opposition members constantly tell me that if there is a division, they know that it is on legislation dealing with social security. There will always be a division on social security legislation. What is the point? The point is to condemn the government for its inability to solve the unemployment crisis. We have a faster rate of growth in employment than any country in the Western world, and somehow we are condemned for that. We are faced with that kind of nonsense. There is always a division on social security legislation. If the shadow minister realised how much his own members were' embarrassed by that, perhaps the opposi-

2820

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

tion might not call these divisions. I have had more than one member of the opposition say to me, 'There is a division, it must be social security. I do not know why; I do not know what it's about; I don't know why we are bothering to divide.'
Mrs Crosio-It must be the member for Berowra.
Mr ALLAN MORRIS-It must be the member for Berowra (Mr Ruddock). He has gone through the debate saying, 'We will not oppose this; we support this; we will not oppose this.' He is now saying that the opposition is going to divide over a set of nonsense amendments which are recycled from the previous debate; they will be recycled in the next debate and in the next. Unfortunately, divisions actually do take up time, they are disruptive, and they deny the reality. The reality is that, in the main, the opposition supports most of these proposals. It wants to give the impression that it opposes them all. We have the hairy-chested approach by the opposition, which says, 'Put yourself on the line, parliamentary secretary. Will you stake your reputation on your computer system?' What a hell of a challenge that is! Will the member for Berowra stake his reputation on his car, or on the fact that his chair will not fall over, or on a whole range of possibilities? What kind of absolute nonsense is that?
But we will have a division. Those opposite will look hairy chested. But throughout this process they are ignoring and forgetting the people whom this particular part is about. This is not about all people out of work; this is not about all people on unemployment benefits. They have been addressed in a whole range of areas. The opposition moves amendments of this nature, then speaks in favour of most of the legislative changes that are being proposed and then calls a division on the amendments-I mean, who are the 'dills' around here? The word was used earlier in reference to the supposed objection by the government to Australian women. It is easy to see that Australians know who the dills are because last time they did not vote for them. People do not vote for dills-and it is easy to see why those opposite are still on the other side.

I hope that the day will come when we can address these issues in a more comprehensive way, when we can actually address the issues which are at stake here and not be caught up in the embroidery, the politicking and nitpicking. Whilst ever the member for Berowra is in the position he is in, however, I suspect we will not. I suspect that I will say similar things next month, next year and much later. This debate does tend to be a repetitive one, and I am sorry for that. But it is pretty hard to ignore what this is doing to the people who need all of our support, all of our encouragement and all of our assistance. Quite frankly, it is not us who have lost the plot; clearly, it is the opposition. I certainly commend the bill to the House.
Mrs CROSIO (Prospect-Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social Security) (5.30 p.m.)-In reply to the second reading debate there are a number of points I would certainly like to make, and I will make sure that I keep within my time in doing so. I would first say thank you to all those members who have contributed to the debate before the House. I am particularly pleased that the member for Newcastle (Mr Allan Morris) has reminded me of a number of points that were stated yesterday by the shadow minister for social security, the honourable member for Berowra (Mr Ruddock).
But I would like to record my appreciation for the contributions made by the member for Moreton (Mr Gibson), the member for Franklin (Mr Quick), the member for Bonython (Mr Martyn Evans), the member for Corio (Mr O'Connor), the member for Bass (Mrs Silvia Smith), the member for Newcastle, the member for Berowra, the member for Grey (Mr Wakelin), the member for Pearce (Mrs Moylan), the member for McPherson (Mr Bradford), the member for Hinkler (Mr Neville), and the member for Moncrieff (Mrs Sullivan). I mention those names because it emphasises that this is important legislation with many people expressing their interest in it.
Needless to say, those who read Hansard in the future and, I think, take on the debate that has been before the House, thinking they will pick up the opposition's contributions to this

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2821

debate and be enlightened by some fantastic novel spoken words which will go down in history, will be very sadly mistaken. I suggest that they do like I do occasionally and pull out the copies of the Hansard and read them. With this one I did not have to go far. I just had to go to the honourable member for Berowra's statement on 22 September when he was speaking on other social security legislation then before the House, not this legislation which he spoke on yesterday.
What do we find? Continually through this type of debate, we find that the shadow spokesperson does not understand the legislation, even though he gets more than ample briefing from our departmental officers who are made readily available to him to answer any questions he may have. Our officers are there to sit down with him, show him, demonstrate to him and fully, I believe, put the message across to him so that he can comprehend and understand the legislation before he comes into the House. But we do not seem to get that. What we get is, 'We will support the bills, but ...', and then those opposite bring out the amendments.
We expect even the amendments will have some originality in them. I think: great, here is another lot of amendments; maybe we can learn from them; we can always learn. What do we find? It is 22 September; of course, the government has to be condemned-the usual thing: 'While not opposing the provisions of the bill, the House is of the opinion that the government should be condemned for'-here it is- 'its failure to solve the ongoing unemployment crisis, in particular' et cetera.
If we go to 7 November, the amendment before the House is: 'Whilst not declining to give the bill a second reading, the House condemns the government for its inability to solve the unemployment crisis' -and then we go on from there. I have mentioned those words because I want to take up a couple of points relating to them. If we are to have a contribution from an opposition that should be involved in what legislation is all about, let us for once have originality and at least some independent thinking.
Again, I sat down last night and thought: maybe I misheard what the shadow spokes-

person, the member for Berowra, said when he was on his feet. I thought: perhaps I did not comprehend what he was saying. Perhaps I did not sit here and listen for nine minutes while he quoted from Professor Harding's report-all his original ideas, of course, so he quoted all the way through it. Then I thought: now, wait a minute, we are going to get to the debate of the bill before we even get to the amendment. What did we have then? Another seven minutes when he actually quoted back to me my second reading speech I made in the House. That was not only given in the House yesterday; it was circulated to every member of this parliament; it was readily available. But we had to have it requoted by the honourable member for Berowra when he got up to say, 'We support the bill before the House, but ...'.
I then decided to start to take notes of some of the points he was making. I kept saying to myself: why does he want to keep doing this? Is it because he just lacks the comprehension and understanding of what social security is all about? Is it that we are not getting the message across clearly to him? Maybe he wants more briefings. Maybe we should say to the staff, 'Take it very slowly, one step at a time; make sure you spell it out; make sure you give him all the information that is required; repeat it all so that, when we have bills before the House, they are easily understood by him and, through him, by the other members of the opposition. But this has not been the case.
I was taking copious notes yesterday. I remind the member for Moncrieff that I was not actually not listening to her today; I was reading through some notes I had taken on the issues that she was referring to. I had already taken those notes in inquiries from opposition spokespersons on the same subject that she was speaking about.
But, first, I looked at the second reading amendment moved by the opposition. I thought: well, right, in the rest of the speeches by members of the opposition and, particularly, by the shadow spokesperson for social security, those opposite will tell us why we have to have the amendment. Previously, of course-and you have witnessed this also,

2822

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

Mr Deputy Speaker-we have had recycled speeches which have come out of the bottom drawer talking about employment/unemployment, but not social security. So I reread his speech last night. There was not one word in it about anything in the amendments that he put before the House-not one word.
First, I thought, when he mentioned employment, that at least he would say why he had included that reference in the amendment and why it should be agreed to. He failed to even address the amendment in his speech. I suppose I must ask him-and I ask him through you, Mr Deputy Speaker: why do you stand in this House and say that you support a bill but that you will then move a number of amendments to it, and then go for the next 22 minutes without one word as to what the amendments are all about? If you have such a conviction as to what you are doing as far as the bill is concerned, why not get up and debate the amendments and then convince us perhaps as to why amendments need to be placed into the bill at all? What did we have? Nothing, zilch. Go through the debate; have a look at it. There is not one comment about the amendment.
So I thought: well, maybe he was just upset about the employment/unemployment figures that are coming out so much in support of the government's policy and which are certainly an indication that the white paper is working and that everything that the government is doing out there is working. No, we did not come in for any of that either.
I went on a little bit further and I thought: well, perhaps he is concerned about other changes in the legislation before the House. I could only come to the conclusion that obviously all of that lengthy debate that we had on the white paper, particularly from the opposition in general, has registered for nothing. You would get more indent from putting a pin in a pincushion than all the debate on the white paper has left on those opposite. All they do is proffer the same argument, the same types of amendments, the same, 'Well, we will support it, but . . .'.
Then we get on to all the other issues that they feel they have to keep on raising and reraising. Talk about the raising from the dead!

When we have bills before the House which will affect people at large out there, when there are important amendments to legislation that will have long-term effects, at least we expect to have an input from the opposition that will be more pertinent to the bill. The opposition's criticism would then be more valid, and it would be talking about being either in support of or against legislation.
Certainly, the government's assistance to families-even the opposition now has to admit-could never be better targeted. The opposition is obviously going to support the bill; therefore, it is saying that our support for families could never be better targeted than it is in the bill before the House. I suppose I say to them, and particularly to the shadow spokesperson: if we are really going to have a debate on policy, then let us have a debate on policy; let us be very clear on what we are debating.
Let us not come up here with suppositions, innuendo and a furphy-as the honourable member for Newcastle reminded me-about the computer failure and about those thousands and thousands of people all over Australia suffering because of it. The member for Berowra well knows that that computer failure was a burnt out circuit and that our staff had to be evacuated in the Sydney area-or does he suggest that we should have left them in there to burn down with the circuit? That was the first point. The second point is that it had nothing to do with the HCCA programming; it had nothing to do with what we were putting onto the computers. It certainly had a lot to do with a number of other smaller problems which were associated with it.
But, when we examined the claim about the so-called thousands of people affected all across Australia, we found they were restricted to New South Wales. We found it was for one day only and affected only one-tenth of our clients; that is, 25,000 in New South Wales. I am not saying that is not a lot; it is important to those people. But only one-tenth of those particular clients on JSA and newstart allowances did not receive their payments that day; they got them the next day. As well the member for Berowra knows, virtually all of our other DSS clients received

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2823

their payments without disruption. Yet one would have thought from hearing the member talk yesterday about the great computer failure-asking whether I would stake my career, my life on it-that that was the cause of all the concern the opposition had with this legislation. We revise our systems consistently. In the Department of Social Security we revise them with a single purpose in mind-and that is to continue to upgrade not only our facilities but the services we provide through our excellent staff to our clients, the community of Australia.
I remind a number of opposition speakers that the Department of Social Security is now servicing over five million people. We have in excess of 300 offices across Australia, and we have a staff that I believe is second to none. It is not only what I am saying as a parliamentary secretary; it is what rest of the world is saying. Because of the safety net system of social security that we have put in place in Australia and the changes that we have been able to implement since we came into government in 1983, we have countries all over the world coming to us for advice and expertise. They want to tap into the knowledge that we have in running a social security system.
I want to bring up a number of points about the contributions of opposition members in this debate. I listened intently to them. I think even they would have to admit that I like to sit in on debates on bills like this and take on board what people are saying. I believe that we can learn from such input. Either opposition members are so bamboozled by the legislation that they have no comprehension about it at all or they just fail to grasp-I do not want to be this critical-the fundamental truths of what our social security system is all about. I believe some of the fundamental truths about such a system concern its breadth, its application and certainly its complexity.
Our social security system is geared to the variable needs of its users in the fairest and most equitable manner possible. The customers are certainly not complaining. They appear well satisfied with the flexibility of our system. All of us could come into this House

with an odd letter of complaint, where someone criticises. I will later talk about the contribution of the member for Pearce, which I thought was very patronising. I say to our five million clients out there that of course there will be complaints. We acknowledge that. I see them in the mail that I receive every day. We take on board those complaints.
Mr Charles-Thousands of them. Mrs CROSIO-From where? From the people coming in and thanking the brilliant staff behind the counters for their assistance? From people thankful for the assistance that a social worker has been able to provide in the time of their bereavement? From people thankful for the assistance of migrant liaison officers through the Department of Social Security? From people thankful for the assistance of the jobsearch and newstart allowances? From people thankful for the assistance of family payments, home and child-care allowance payments? These are the thousands of thankyous that we get. If opposition spokespersons want to bring in as an example one particular statement of one particular individual through one particular member's electorate office, they should be honest and bring in all the others as well. If that happens, we will get a true debate in this House. We will also get true criticismcriticism which is well weighted, not weighted to one side. We acknowledge that we have a very sophisticated and, at times, complex system. What we also acknowledge in the Department of Social Security is that, as our community changes, we also change the laws to suit the needs of the people. That is part of the culture of the Department of Social Security. It is not a static organisation. It never has been, and it never will be under us. I can assure honourable members of that. Once again, the opposition has failed to inform the House of its concerns in respect of the social security system. I listened to the tone of the debate yesterday, and it increasingly suggested that opposition members still strongly hold all the Fightback vestiges. They told us Fightback was discarded and that they are starting on a new path, yet it still seems to be hanging around. They seem to be concerned at the number of persons receiving

2824

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

30cial security. They ask whether that is a good thing or not, without giving one skerrick of further information as to why it worries them.
The member for Berowra mentioned the unemployed persons who will have their incomes reduced because of the new taper system. The only thing that can be predicted about the member for Berowra is that he will always find something to snipe at in this government. He seizes on issues that he sees as championing the cause of the unemployed. Quite frankly, where is his party statement? Where is the policy that we can talk about and look at? It is not there.
It has certainly left a great void when one would like to go through copious pieces of information and see what the opposition has to offer. There is certainly no alternative, so obviously opposition members are supporting what we have before the House. I am rather pleased with that. Where the honourable member for Berowra fails in positive directions, he must be complimenting what the government is doing.
Because of the limited time available, I will generalise the other comments made by the member for Berowra. He said that he fully knows the parenting allowance is no more than a change in name. I can assure him that it is more than a change in name. As I have previously mentioned, I found the speech of the member for Pearce on our social security structure to be very patronising. She came into this House and talked about being the minder of a particular portfolio. She mentioned questions that she asked the Prime Minister (Mr Keating).
When I asked her pointedly across the floor this morning when that question was asked, she said, '5 Mayor around May.' I decided that I would do a bit of homework and mention other comments made at the same time on our social security reforms and white paper. Robert Fitzgerald, the President of ACOSS said:
Liberalisation of the income tests on unemployment benefits and the introduction of the parenting allowances were a tremendous boost to low income earners.

David Cappo, the Director of the Australian Catholic Social Welfare Commission stated in the Canberra Times on 5 May:
The major reform of the social security system centres on the introduction of new income test arrangements which recognise the increasing participation of women in the labour market. These arrangements are overdue and will provide much needed incentives and greater flexibility for individuals and couples wishing to increase earnings through casual and part-time employment.
Julian Disney, Professor of Public Law at ANU and former ACOSS president, stated:
The changes in the social security system have many admirable aspects, especially the adjustments to the income tests for unemployment payments and the introduction of the Parenting Allowance (incorporating the previously promised Home Care Child Allowance). These measures not only reduce unfair and counterproductive discrimination against part-time and casual work but also facilitate greater sharing of the roles of paid work and parenting between men and women.
I could mention other quotes. If a member wants to refer to a question directed to the Prime Minister-a question which the opposition felt at that time was not fully answered to its liking-I refer that member to quotes from others in the community in the same month in 1994. Praise was being heaped onto the government and continues to be heaped onto the government for what we have been able to achieve in social security legislation.
I thank the government speakers for their contribution because their understanding of the bill is certainly higher than that of coalition members. I again refer the honourable member for Berowra to a media release put out by our minister on 5 May, 'Coalition gets it wrong on poverty traps'. We have the same repeat in the legislation before us today-the same misinformation and the same mistakes. He should read that press release. If he likes, I could table it for him, but I am sure that he has a copy.
The member for Hinkler is worried about the support given to people at large. The changes in this legislation are timed to take advantage of the economic recovery. There is certainly one on the way. We are offering encouragement to the unemployed, particularly members of couples, to take up offers of

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2825

work even if it is low paid work. This is what we are all about. It is time that the opposition accepted that.
Mention was made of the widow B pension allowance. It was decided in 1987 to gradually phase that out. Because we have looked at the white paper and the ramifications in the community at large, we as a government reassessed where we were going with widow B pension, and it has been reintroduced for that specific area of women. The opposition should acknowledge what we are doing. We heard assumptions that we did not know what we were talking about when the decision was made in 1987 to phase it out. At that time, the reason was that, looking at that particular age group, approximately 70 per cent of single women were in the work force, and something like 65 per cent of partnered women were active in the work force. To say that legislation is gender specific is anachronistic and certainly irresponsible.
I have stated in the second reading speech that the position of these women has been reviewed in light of the initiatives arising out of the white paper. I say to the member for Hinkler, who was a little worried about where we are going with social security, that since 1983 our social security payments have increased by 15 per cent against the CPI to all single age pensioners and 37 per cent in real terms to sole parents with two children renting privately. Additional family payments are up by 150 per cent in real terms for teenage children and by 77 per cent for young children. This is not a social security system that is not helping and assisting the people of Australia, particularly those in need-again, I emphasise the safety net and those in need.
The opposition has also made much of the name change. I ask those opposite: what is the difference between the change in the leadership of the coalition from John Hewson to Alexander Downer and the reforms announced in the government's white paper? I suppose in asking that question I will provide them with the answer. Quite frankly, the first merely involved a change of name when you

talk about name changes, but the second does something to help the people of Australia. That is what this legislation is all about and that is what this legislation will continue to be
about.

Mrs Sullivan-Changing the name's a help?

Mrs CROSIO-No. I am being critical. I say again, for the honourable member for
Moncrieff, that I heard repeatedly from the coalition speakers on this bill, 'All you've done is change the name.' I am saying that
we have not changed the name. You may have changed the name of your leader and achieved nothing, but we, through the white
paper, have achieved a change in a structure and a system that is of benefit to Australians at large, particularly the Australians we are assisting under the social security safety net. That is why we will never accept the amendment as moved by the opposition in the
House. I commend the bill.

Question put:

That the words proposed to be omitted (Mr
Ruddock's amendment) stand part of the question.

The House divided.

[5.55 p.m.]

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr A.C. Rocher) Ayes ............... 68

Noes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57

Majority ......... 11

Adams, D. Beddall, D. P. Bilney, G. N. Brown, R. 1. Chynoweth, R. L. Crawford, M. C. Crosio, 1. A. Deahm, M. J. Duffy, M. J. Elliott, R. P. Fatin, W. F. Fitzgibbon, E. J.
Gear, G.
Grace, E. L. *
Haviland, C. D. Holding, A. C.
Horne, R. H. Humphreys, B. C. Jones, B. O. Knott, P. J.

AYES Baldwin, P. J. Bevis, A. R. Brereton, L. J.
Campbell, G. Cleeland, P. R. Crean, S. F. Cunningham, B. T. Dodd, P. G. Easson, M. Evans, M. 1. Ferguson, L. D. T. Free, R. V. Gibson, G. D.
Griffiths, A. G. Henzell, M. M. Hollis, C.
Howe, B. L. Jenkins, H. A. Kerr, D. J. C. Langmore, J. V.

2826

REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

AYES

Latham, M. W.

Lavarch, M. H.

Lawrence, C. M.

Lee, M. J.

Lindsay, E. 1.

McLeay, L. B.

Melham, D.

Morris, A. A.

Morris, P. F.

Newell, N. J.

O'Connor, G. M.

O'Keefe, N. P.

Price, L. R. S.

Punch, G. F.

Quick, H. V.

Sawford, R. W. *

Sciacca, C. A.

Scott, L. J.

Simmons, D. W.

Smith, S. F.

Smith, S. J.

Snow, J. H.

Swan, W. M.

Tanner, L. J.

Theophanous, A. C.

Tickner, R. E.

Walker, F. J.

Woods,H.F.

Abbott, A. J. Andrew, J. N. Atkinson, R. A. Bishop, B. K. Cadman, A. G. Charles, R. E. Connolly, D. M.
Evans, R. D. C. Fischer, T. A. Gallus, C. A. Halverson, R. G. Hewson, 1. R. Howard, J. W. Katter, R. C. Lieberman, L. S. McArthur, F. S. McLachlan, I. M. Moore, J. C. Nehl, G. B. Nugent, P. E. Pyne, C. M. Reith, P. K. Ruddock, P. M. Sharp, J. R. Somlyay, A. M. Truss, W. E. Vaile, M. A. J. Williams, D. R. Worth, P. M.

NOES Anderson, J. D. Andrews, K. J. Beale,1. H. Bradford, J. W. Cameron, E. H. Cobb, M. R. Dobie, J. D. M. Filing, P. A. Forrest, J. A. Hall, R. S.
Hawker, D. P. M. * Hicks, N. J. *
Jull, D. F. Kemp, D. A. Lloyd, B. McGauran, P. J.
Miles, C. G. Moylan, 1. E. Neville, P. C. Prosser, G. D. Reid, N. B. Ronaldson, M. J. C. Scott, B. C. Sinclair, I. McC. Sullivan, K. J. Tuckey, C. W. Wakelin, B. H. Wooldridge, M. R. L.

PAIRS

McHugh, J.

Costello, P. H.

Gorman, R. N. J.

Taylor, W. L.

Griffin, A. P.

Aldred, K. J.

Staples, P. R.

Braithwaite, R. A.

Keating, P. J.

Downer, A. 1. G.

*denotes telles

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Messages from the Administrator and the Governor General recommending appropriation announced.

Consideration in Detail

Bill-by leave-taken as a whole.

Mrs CROSIO (Prospect-Parliamentary
Secretary to the Minister for Social Security)
(6.00 p.m.)-by leave-I move:

(l) Clause 2, page 2, omit subclause (2), lines 4 to 7, substitute the following subclause: "(2) Items 27 and 33A to 33E of Schedule 3
are taken to have commenced on 20 September 1994, and subsection 5(2) is taken to have commenced on that day to the extent necessary in order to enable those items to be taken to have commenced on that day.".

(2) Clause 15, page 4, lines 28 to 31, omit the clause, substitute the following clause:
Application of amendments of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936

"15.(1) The amendments of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 made by subsection 3(2) and items 162A to 162D of Schedule 1 apply in relation to payments made on or after 1 July 1995.

"(2) The amendments of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 made by subsection 3(2) and item 162E of Schedule 1 apply in relation to payments made on or after 29 September 1994.

"(3) The amendments of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 made by subsection 6(2) and Divisions 1 and 2 of Part 3 of Schedule 4 apply in relation to payments made on or after 1 July 1994.".

(3) Schedule 1, Part 4, page 90, after item 162 insert the following heading and items before the heading "Social Security (Home Child Care and Partner Allowances) Legislation Amendment Act 1994":

"Income Tax Assessment Act 1936

162A. Section 24AB (Table-after the entry for Newstart allowance):

Insert: 'Parenting allowance

24ABXB'.

162B. Subsection 24ABA(1) (Table-after the entry for Special benefit):
Insert: 'Parenting allowance'.

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2827

162C. Before section 24ABY:
Insert: Parenting allowance
'24ABXB.(1) Payments of non-benefit parenting allowance under Part 2.18 of the Social Security Act 1991 are exempt.
'(2) The treatment of payments of benefit parenting allowance under Part 2.18 of the Social Security Act 1991 is as follows:
(a) the supplementary amount of each payment is exempt;
(b) so much of each payment as: (i) was included in the payment by way of provisional rate of parenting allowance in accordance with the Method statement in point 1068A-A3 of the Social Security Act 1991; and (ii) does not exceed the maximum basic component of parenting allowance;
is exempt; (c) the balance of each payment is not ex-
empt. '(3) Payments under sections 951Y and 951ZB of the Social Security Act 1991 (which deal with bereavement payments) are exempt. '(4) If a taxpayer derives a payment under section 95lZC of the Social Security Act 1991: (a) so much of the sum of that payment and
other payments under the Social Security Act 1991 derived by the taxpayer during the bereavement lump sum period as does not exceed the tax-free amount calculated using the exempt bereavement payment calculator AB in section 24ABZD is exempt; and (b) the balance of the sum is not exempt.'. 162D. Subsection 160AAA(1) (after paragraph (a) of definition of 'rebatable benefit'): Insert: '(aa) paid by way of parenting allowance
under Part 2.18 of the Social Security Act 1991, to the extent that the amount is not exempt under Division lAA of this Part; or'. 162E. Subsection 160AAA(1) (paragraph (b) of definition of 'rebatable pension'): Omit 'or 2.l5A', substitute', 2.15A or 2.18'.". (4) Schedule 3, Part 2, page 116, after item 33 insert the following heading and items before the heading "National Health Act 1953":
"Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
33A. Subsection 24ABL(2): Omit the subsection, substitute:

'(2) Payments under section 589B of the Social Security Act 1991 (which deals with bereavement payments) are exempt.'.
33B. Subsection 24ABM(2):
Omit the subsection, substitute:
'(2) Payments under section 660LB of the Social Security Act 1991 (which deals with bereavement payments) are exempt.'.
33C. Subsection 24ABO(2):
Omit the subsection, substitute:
'(2) Payments under section 728PB of the Social Security Act 1991 (which deals with bereavement payments) are exempt.'.
33D. Subsection 24ABP(2):
Omit the subsection, substitute:
'(2) Payments under section 768B of the Social Security Act 1991 (which deals with bereavement payments) are exempt.'.
33E. Subsection 160AAA(1) (paragraph (b) of definition of 'rebatable pension'):
Omit 'or 2.15', substitute ',2.15 or 2.15A'.".
(5) Schedule 4, Part I, page 120, proposed section 408BB, omit "unless", substitute "if'.
(6) Schedule 4, Part 3, page 156, after item 49 insert the following items before the heading "Veterans' Entitlements Act 1986":
"49A. Subsection 160AAA(1) (paragraph (a) of definition of 'rebatable benefit'):
Before '2.11', insert '2.8A,'.
49B. Subsection 160AAA(1) (paragraph (b) of definition of 'rebatable pension'):
Before '2.11', insert '2.8A,'.".
I also table the explanatory memorandum.
Mr RUDDOCK (Berowra) (6.01 p.m.)- The amendments before the House are quite significant. In a sense, it is a pity that they are before us at this time. Earlier in the debate the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social Security (Mrs Crosio) was taking great credit for the fact that the government often provides, appropriately I might say, the opportunity for opposition spokespersons to be briefed on important legislation.
We were the subject of quite an extensive briefing in relation to the previous debate, but these amendments have not been the subject of any briefing. I have not had the opportunity to examine the full import of them. They do have quite significant implications so far as the Social Security (Parenting Allowance and Other Measures) Legislation Amend-

2828

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

ment Bill 1994 is concerned and the government achieving its announced intention, particularly in relation to the tax treatment of benefits. I want to be satisfied that the objectives the government is seeking to meet with these amendments reflect the announcements that have been made. Therefore, I will be seeking briefings on this matter.
At this time. I simply want to foreshadow that if the situation arises-after we have had a briefing and after I have been able to examine the amendments in their entiretywhere further matters ought to be addressed, I will advise my colleagues in the other house. I do not wish to foreclose the option of having a committee review the matter if there is a requirement for further consideration; I also do not wish to foreclose the option to make further amendments to the additional material the government has brought forward.
The parliamentary secretary, in responding to my speech on the second reading, alluded to it in a way that can only convince me that it must have been a very telling speech. I have never seen the government so anxious to respond point by point as it did in relation to the comments made yesterday in relation to the amendments themselves. I think there is a degree of sensitivity on the government's part, particularly in relation to its inability to solve the unemployment crisis.
The parliamentary secretary suggested that the government's white paper went without critical comment, and read a number of quotes. I imagine that they were somewhat selective, because she did not quote the whole of the statements made. The Brotherhood of St Laurence, which commented on the government's white paper on 4 May, said that the government had set its sights too low in the white paper. Bishop Challen, who commented on the white paper on behalf of the Brotherhood, said:
Much will depend on the quality of the implementation over the next three years. But in terms of total spending, there is no doubt that this is a very modest response to Australia's appalling level of unemployment.
He went on to say:

We have serious doubts that it is enough to decisively reverse the trend over many years to higher levels of unemployment.
I notice the government increasingly suggests that it has addressed the unemployment problem, shown by the extent to which there is growth in the Australian economy and resultant job creation. One ought not be surprised that with population growth there is growth in the economy and additional jobs are created. The question is whether the government can claim the credit for it, particularly when we have the very high and continuing levels of unemployment that remain in Australia today. That is the reason I continue to emphasise the issue of unemployment. The government's programs, policies and approaches to these matters have not solved the unemployment crisis. In that context, I think the amendment was very appropriate and one worthy of support.
Mrs CROSIO (Prospect-Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social Security) (6.06 p.m.)-I appreciate that the opposition will not vote against the amendments before the House. The member for Berowra (Mr Ruddock) has stated that he would like to go through the amendments more fully. I say to him that the amendments will provide supplementary amounts, as indicated in the explanatory memorandum, to allowances such as rent assistance, which is paid with the parenting allowance and exempt from income tax. The explanatory memorandum then goes on to explain that any payment of parenting allowance up to the maximum basic component of
parenting allowance is exempt from income tax. It goes on with a lot of explanations. If the honourable member requires any assistance whatsoever from the department, it will always be given-as it has been in the past.
I could have brought up many other points in the second reading debate but for the limited time available. For example, I refer to the Henderson poverty line, which is raised all the time by the opposition. I could also have pointed out that Professor Harding referred to it. Even Professor Harding admits that the Henderson poverty line should not be acknowledged as a marker. Professor Harding said this because the poverty line had no relationship to the contemporary Australian

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2829

society; it was based on the basic wage of amendments before the House, I can assure

1966 and derived from scales of a New York both the coalition and the opposition spokes-

survey done in 1954. I could have brought all person that we are not trying to hide anything.

of that into the debate, but I did not because We are trying to make legislation workable at

of the limited time allocated to me.

all times. The tax amendments which have

I and the government welcome debate on all aspects of any bill before the House. Opposition amendments, particularly to social security legislation, seem to be repetitive in

been moved in this House will now go to the Senate so that they can be fully looked into by the Senate. I commend the amendments to the House.

nature. The opposition always says that it will Mr RUDDOCK (Berowra) (6.10 p.m.)-

support legislation but then it moves some I have never heard of such sensitivity on the

innocuous amendments that never seem to get part of a government. It is interesting that the

debated. Opposition members never seem to government wants to be praised for everything

follow through with their conviction and stand it does. It would be like me standing here and

up to be counted; they turn around and say saying, 'I am just waiting for the government

that they will not divide on the matter. In this to thank members of the opposition for the

particular case, the member for Newcastle (Mr constructive ideas that were contained in their

Allan Morris) was rather critical and said that policy before the last election and that the

we ought to have a division anyway. Let the government has picked up.'

opposition not use that sort of excuse in this House. If anyone genuinely wants a division, we will have a division. The opposition has the right to debate and criticise bills; it is our right to present them to the House.

Mrs Crosio-I never said that.
Mr RUDDOCK-The Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social Security says she never said it. Of course she has never said, 'We want to thank you, the opposition,

The statements of opposition members are for your constructive ideas, which we were

so repetitious that we almost know what is able to draw upon, and for undertaking our

going to come out of their mouths before they fundamental reforms on social security.' It speak. Obviously they just recycle speech would be like trying to argue that the sun after speech and dish it out again. They does not rise to expect the opposition to come

always ask that we delete all words after in here, with measures which are flawed,

'that' and insert 'condemn the government which have occasioned such hardship and

for'. Just once I would like the honourable which have required constant amendments

member for Berowra and the opposition to get and change, and rollover and say to the

up and say that they commend the governgovernment, 'What a great job you have been

ment; it is helping. I would like to hear doing.' I will struggle to find ways and means

opposition members say, 'We commend the in which I can compliment the government

government for helping those 5 million when it is big enough to acknowledge that it

citizens who are out there under the social drew upon the policies of the opposition at

security structure and need that assistance; we the last election for some of the initiatives it

commend the government for what it has been has brought forward.

able to put into place with the white paper and what it is doing with the long-term unemployed, the job compacts and all of the other structures that have been put in place to help the people of this country.' I would like to hear opposition members get up and say that. It would be a change.

Mrs CROSIO (Prospect-Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social Security) (6.11 p.m.)-We are in the consideration in detail stage and have taken the Social Security (Parenting Allowance and Other Measures) Legislation Amendment Bill as a whole. If the honourable member for Berowra (Mr

Unfortunately, we do not often hear praise Ruddock) wants to waste the time of the

for the social security portfolio. While I have House, I am only too willing to provide him

been parliamentary secretary I have not heard with that opportunity. I have said that, for

it at all. That is why, in supporting the once, it would be interesting if the govern-

2830

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

ment were to be commended for the bills before the House instead of having the type of debate we have had in the past.
I will not dwell on that. As the honourable member for Berowra wants to continue this debate, I will go one step further. When he says that he is being overcritical because we seem to be tapping into his ideas, can we be overcritical when he says, as he stated in his speech yesterday in this debate before the House, that this parenting allowance is no more than a name change? The honourable member for Moncrieff (Mrs Sullivan) wanted to understand what I was talking about. She ought to read the speech of the honourable member for Berowra as well.
The honourable member for Berowra said that the parenting allowance does nothing to assist low income families. That is just one point. He realises, because he has been briefed on it, that these new payments and the parenting allowance in particular are not simply name changes. He has failed to notice that, as a result of the proposed changes in this bill, an additional amount of over $350 million will be expended to assist people. This matter was brought up by the honourable member for Moreton (Mr Gibson) in the previous debate.
Surely this is just one instance-and I can and will go on with many others if the member for Berowra wishes to continue-that proves these payments are more than just a name change. That is what I am talking about in the legislation before the House and when we talk about the parenting allowance, the child-care recipients and the 144,000 home child-care allowance recipients with low personal incomes who will gain over $6 extra per week as a result of the more generous parenting allowance income test free area than that which applies to the home child-care allowance.
This bill will provide valuable assistance to a partner with limited capacity to undertake paid work because of child-care responsibilities. We did not hear about any of that. The bill before the House and the amendments which have just been moved provide parents with a choice as to their level of participation in the paid work force, in education, training

and all other activities that they wish to be involved with which were previously available only to high income families. That is another point I did not bring up in my closing remarks but which I can mention now.
I could have gone on and said that the changes also represent a new direction for social security. Members of the opposition did not come forward and say the social security system is moving away from dependency based payments towards a system that recognises entitlement on the basis of individual circumstances. I did not do that. I said that it would be a change if, for once, we did not have the same tired old speech that comes up before the House with the same tired old amendments and the opposition saying, 'We will not oppose it, but . . . " and then go on to a great debate as to why it will not oppose it without debating any particular amendments. That can lead one only to assume that the amendments that are moved are moved in voice only; they are not moved with either conviction or belief. If they were, they would be debated. It is time for the opposition to come forward, stand up and be counted.
Amendments agreed to. Bill, as amended, agreed to.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mrs Crosio)-by leave -read a third time.
MIGRATION LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL (No.4) 1994 Consideration resumed from 7 November.
Second Reading Mrs CROSIO (Prospect-Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social Security) (6.15 p.m.)-I move:
That the bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of the Migration Legislation Amendment Bill (No.4) is to ensure that Australia's onshore refugee determination system is not open to the abuse of forum shopping by asylum seekers who have been denied refugee status by or who have access to protection in another country. The bill will ensure that non-citizens covered by the comprehensive plan of action for Indo-

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2831

Chinese refugees, CPA, or in relation to whom there is a safe third country, should not be able to apply for a protection visa and, in some cases, any other visa. An immediate example is that of people for whom there is a safe third country who have been assessed by a refugee determination process which is accepted by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UNHCR. Under this bill such people will not be entitled to opt for another assessment under Australian processes.
These amendments to the Migration Act are being introduced following the arrival in Australia of 17 Vietnamese people on a boat codenamed 'Vagabond' from a refugee holding centre in Galang, Indonesia. These people, who had been rejected as refugees in Indonesia by a refugee determination process approved by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, sought to have another assessment of their cases conducted by Australia. They have, in effect, forumshopped in the expectation of obtaining the outcome they were seeking through the refugee determination process in Australia.
Under current domestic law there is no option but to allow such arrivals access to Australia's refugee determination process, which we operate as a party to the 1951 UN convention and the 1967 protocol relating to the status of refugees. Consequently, this access was granted despite requests from the UNHCR and the Indonesian government not to process the applicants but to return them immediately to Galang. The UNHCR undertook to examine any fresh claims or evidence put forward by the Vagabond arrivals following their return to Indonesia. If the legislation introduced today had existed at the time that the Vagabond landed, we would have been able to comply with these requests.
In the event, the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, after examining all claims, decided not to grant refugee status to 14 of the 17 Vagabond arrivals. Three were found to be refugees on the basis of new information. Had this information been available to the UNHCR, the further refugee claims of these three people would have been examined by them.

In view of the prejudice to our international relations that would have arisen from any change in the decisions refusing the 14 Vagabond applicants refugee status, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Senator Bolkus) issued conclusive certificates denying them access to the Refugee Review Tribunal.
It is worth reviewing the history of this issue in the region, which provides context for the bill. Until 1989 the international response to the problem of Indo-Chinese asylum seekers had been a combination of temporary asylum in countries in the region and international resettlement. Increasingly, the reasons given by those fleeing relate to poverty rather than persecution. In 1989 the UNHCR-sponsored CPA, in which Australia has been a major participant, constituted a new framework to safeguard the protection of refugees. Under the CPA, those screened in as refugees are offered third country resettlement. Those screened out are required to return to Vietnam under arrangements monitored by the UNHCR. The CPA also provides a framework for orderly migration from Vietnam.
A crucial part of the CPA has been the establishment of refugee status determination procedures in countries of first asylum, such as Indonesia. These processes are conducted in association with the UNHCR and according to the UN convention definition of 'refugee'. They include both primary and secondary levels of assessment. The 17 Vietnamese boat people who arrived in Broome on 7 July 1994 had been assessed under these UNHCR sponsored processes in Indonesia and had been found not to be refugees.
From July 1989 to July 1994, Australia has resettled 17,600 Vietnamese and Laotian refugees under the CPA, with about 1,400 expected to arrive during 1994-95. Our effort has been, and continues to be, exemplary. A continuation of the present Australian law, where anyone who can get into a boat in Galang or other camps in South-East Asia and sail to Australia is entitled to another assessment of their refugee status, would severely undermine the whole CPA process and weaken the credibility of all such comprehensive international approaches. If there is to be no

2832

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

difference in the way genuine refugees and those assessed to be economic migrants are treated, protection for those in real need will be seriously weakened and the genuine refugee will be pushed aside by the forum shopper.
In July, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs stated the government's firm intention to act urgently when parliament resumed to ensure that Australia's policies and refugee procedures are brought into line with the UNHCR's concerns. This bill puts this resolve into effect. The seriousness of the potential undermining of the CPA is highlighted by the arrival in Australia of a second boat of Vietnamese people from Galang on 9 September and the recent interception by Indonesian authorities of a third boat which was heading from Galang to Australia. As foreshadowed by the minister on 29 August, the bill will cover the period from 1 September onwards and so, in effect, will deny the second and any subsequent boats the chance to contribute further to the breakdown of the CPA.
While initiated because of events relating to the CPA, the bill also enables Australia to identify safe third countries which will allow for the return to those countries of any asylum seekers who could have availed themselves or did avail themselves of an equitable refugee assessment process or protection in those countries, or for whom effective protection is available in those countries. In accordance with our obligations under international law, countries with whom we enter into safe third country agreements would need to observe the principle of non-refoulement of refugees and internationally accepted minimum standards of human rights. The bill requires the minister to make a statement to the parliament after a particular safe country is prescribed by the regulations about the country's, or each of the countries', compliance with relevant international law concerning the protection of persons seeking asylum and relevant human rights standards.
The minister's statement is also to include information about the country's, or each of the countries', willingness to allow any person in relation to whom the country is prescribed

as a safe third country to go to the country and to remain in the country during the period in which any claim for refugee status is being assessed. Additionally, where a person is determined to be a refugee while in the country, the minister's statement is to include information about the willingness of the country to allow the person to remain in the country until a durable solution to the permanent settlement of the person is found. Furthermore, the formal mechanism for designating safe third countries by way of regulations will afford the parliament the opportunity to scrutinise that designation.
Persons who have the necessary connection with a safe third country will not be permitted to apply for a protection visa in Australia. Further, those persons who have not been immigration cleared will not be permitted to apply for any other form of visa; they will be detained and removed from Australia. To ensure there are not harsh or unintended results, the bill contains two key safeguards: firstly, to exempt coverage of persons by the legislation through the making of a regulation, for example, where conditions in the country of origin have changed to the extent that temporary asylum in Australia is the most appropriate form of response to their situation; and, secondly, in relation to individuals, the bill provides a non-compellable power for the minister to set aside the operation of the safe third country provisions to allow an application to be made. The bill requires the mandatory removal of people covered by the amendment who have not been immigration cleared and of people who, having been immigration cleared, are in detention and have not made a valid application for any other visa that can be granted in the migration zone.
Australia is a staunch supporter of UNHCR's massive efforts throughout the world to assist genuine refugees, and the imaginative and enlightened adoption by countries in our region of the comprehensive solution of the CPA. It is because of this that the government regards this legislation as a crucial defence of proper, equitable and humane processes. To do less undermines the CPA in what is its most difficult period, following the screening of all in the camps

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2833

and the requirement to return those found not to be refugees, which now constitutes almost all of the population of the camps. Not to make the changes would also undermine the integrity of, and public support for, Australia's own refugee determination system.
In an era when onshore refugee determination systems in most asylum countries are being modified to refocus attention on convention refugees and to limit the impact of irregular migration upon the ability to offer protection to those who genuinely need it, Australia can not afford to be left behind. It is essential that our determination system keep pace with developments in other asylum countries and continue to enable Australia to honour its international obligations to refugees.
I commend the bill to the House.
Mr RUDDOCK (Berowra) (6.26 p.m.)- We have now moved from social security issues to immigration issues, but there seem to be the same two combatants. It is interesting, is it not, that the speech the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social Security (Mrs Crosio) has just given on behalf of the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Senator Bolkus) is one which, in its strict terms, actually acknowledges amendments that were the subject of considerable dialogue and discussion and for w~ich the cooperation of the opposition was absolutely essential to their adoption. But nowhere in the speech could I find reference to the cooperation that the government received.
It is interesting, while we are talking about proprieties and sensitivities in relation to the way in which these matters are dealt with, that the government, even in a matter as simple as this, finds it difficult to be big enough to give that credit.
Mrs Crosio-I am big enough.
Mr RUDDOCK-Well, we will give you the opportunity later on to see whether you would like to make those observations. I want to make a number of comments about this legislation because we in the opposition never put at risk our nation and its ability to handle its own important decisions in relation to who should or should not be able to come and

settle in Australia. We accept that there are certain international obligations that we have acceded to and that we have made important commitments which carry responsibilities that this government and other governments have to accept.
This bill has been introduced to ensure that asylum seekers who have had access to refugee determination processes in another country should not have additional access to Australia's system, other than in the most exceptional circumstances. There are two aspects to this bill: the first is putting into effect the principle of the comprehensive plan of action which Australia signed in July 1989; and the second is, for the first time in Australia, applying a safe third country concept to our onshore refugee screening procedures. As I said, the opposition consulted widely in relation to this matter. It determined to support the bill. It did have some concerns about which it pressed certain amendments. I understand that the Australian Democrats had some like concerns and the Senate adopted a number of amendments which find themselves in the bill we are now considering.
This is not the government's original bill. This bill is an amended bill from the Senate. We recognise that the asylum seekers covered by this bill are effectively jumping the queue, as it has often been termed. In many cases, they have ignored the decision of the UNHCR, or the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in another country and they have come to Australia seeking to try again. This is referred to as forum shopping. By currently allowing them access to our protection, we are discriminating against all other legitimate refugees and asylum seekers who are following correct procedures. We wholeheartedly agree that any breach of that regime which has been established should not be allowed to continue.
We understand that, if this bill is defeated, it would encourage more boat people, as they are termed, who have had their applications for asylum rejected-in accordance with the comprehensive plan of action-to make their way to Australian shores to seek an additional chance. This would not only undermine the comprehensive plan action; it would put

2834

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

additional pressure on Australia's refugee processing and detention regime. With over 100,000 people in such camps throughout this region, this is of significant concern.
The measures contained in the bill have their roots in the Indochinese refugee situation that developed in the late 1970s and early 1980s, when thousands of people fled their home countries and, in particular, Vietnam. Many finished up in camps in Thailand, Hong Kong, Indonesia and the Philippines. As we all recall, a number of them came to Australia. In the late 1980s, their treatment was conducted in an informal manner, with countries of first asylum accepting the arrivals and other countries accepting substantial numbers for resettlement. I might say that they accepted most for resettlement without their claims being seriously examined in many cases.
In July 1989, an international conference on Indochinese refugees was held in Geneva. The major result of that conference was a comprehensive plan of action to apply to people who arrived in first asylum countries after the cutoff date, which ranged from June 1988 to March 1989, depending upon the country concerned. At that time, I was the shadow minister for immigration and ethnic affairs. I took a great deal of personal interest in the development of the comprehensive plan of action. I travelled extensively within the region. I visited Hong Kong and Thailandtwo of the countries concerned. I also took the opportunity of visiting Vietnam. It was one of a number of visits that I paid to Vietnam. The one at the end of 1989 was particularly to look at this very issue of the implementation of the comprehensive plan of action.
I was very thoroughly briefed on the way in which it was to operate. I took the opportunity of seeing numbers of people who had been returned from Hong Kong to Vietnam in particular and following the trail, as it were, in relation to people who were being returned. At that stage, many of them were doing so voluntarily. But I went there immediately after the first efforts by the British in Hong Kong to return some people compulsorily.
I saw the procedures. I made assessments and had discussions with many people about

their circumstances. It was perfectly obvious that many of the people who were returning voluntarily did not have bona fide claims. They had no expectation other than that many people had gone before and were able to be resettled. They felt that this was an opportunity for them. I could cite circumstances of young people who had sound antecedents within the communist party of Vietnam.
A young man whose father was the deputy managing director of a local factory lived in a substantial residence in the port of Haiphong. He was the grandchild of the senior communist apparatchik. He bought passage in a small boat to Hong Kong and expected to be able to resettle in the United States of America or Australia, earn substantial moneys and remit them to Vietnam. Clearly, they were part of the group from the north which had fought against so many of those people who had genuinely fled Vietnam and been the subject of persecution. So the oppressorsthose in the communist party of North Vietnam-were allowing, encouraging and enjoining family members to get them into small boats as asylum seekers.
Is it any wonder that a comprehensive plan of action was needed to test the bona fides of those who were seeking resettlement. I would be the last to want to deny individuals their right to have their claims properly determined. But it is clear that there were very large numbers of people at that time leaving Vietnam who, on all of the bases upon which the conventions have been developed, could not in any sense of the word be regarded as refugees demanding resettlement in third countries.
So the comprehensive plan of action was particularly important. It was the first step in the procedure to determine whether a person was a refugee. That meant the automatic assumption of refugee status had been revoked. All of this was to be determined under the UN 1951 convention relating to the status of refugees and its 1967 protocol.
The comprehensive plan of action prescribes that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is to be involved in the determination process and that the handbook of procedures was to be the authoritative guide. It also provided for a consistent region-

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2835

wide refugee decision making status. One of refugee has been erroneously screened out due

the principles of the comprehensive plan of to his or her failure to bribe or in some other

action was in accordance with article 33 of way obtain entry. This effectively means that,

the UN's 1951 convention that no contracting although these allegations are of a very

state shall expel or return-that is, refoule-a serious nature and must be examined further,

refugee in any manner whatsoever to the they could not impact upon this bill. If any-

frontiers of the territories where his life or thing, these allegations draw attention to those

freedom would be threatened on account of people granted refugee status who may not

his race, religion, nationality, membership of have been genuine refugees but who have

a particular social group or political opinion. been accepted in good faith by countries like

This is an important platform on which the Australia.

comprehensive plan of action was based. It ensured that an applicant for asylum would not be returned to his or her country of origin without having his or her claim for refugee status assessed.

Although there is no evidence of the wrongful screening out of refugee applicants for corrupt reasons, in the opposition's view, such allegations are worthy of further consideration and investigation. We called for that by way

The comprehensive plan of action was of an amendment which was carried in the

adopted by the UNHCR and the governments Senate. I will offer some comments on it

of countries where refugees originated, such later. The coalition takes the view that such

as Vietnam and Laos in particular; of countallegations are serious and that it is an indict-

ries or the territory which offered first asyment of the government if they are not fol-

lum, such as Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, lowed up.

Hong Kong and the Philippines; and countries offering resettlement, such as the United States, Canada and Australia. The comprehensive plan of action ensured that Vietnamese and Laotian asylum seekers were first given asylum and screened for refugee status. Those determined to be refugees were eligible for resettlement, and those who were determined not to be had to return to their country of origin.

I want to move on to the question of the safe third country concept. In general, the concept of a safe third country states that someone who has had access to the system of protection in a safe third country will be denied access to Australia's onshore refugee determination process and will be returned to that safe third country. Countries such as Austria, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, the Netherlands,

Unfortunately, some allegations have been Sweden and the United Kingdom have adoptraised against the UNHCR's processing of ed this practice in one form or another.

procedures in certain places. I have spoken to This concept was subjected to some exam-

the commissioner's representative here. He is ination by the parliamentary committee. A

anxious that there should not be criticism of number of us were very strongly of the view

these matters. I want to make it clear that that these matters that are specifically sanc-

these are allegations. But some concerns have tioned within the international covenants to

arisen from members of the Australian Vietwhich we are a party ought to form part of

namese community. They are not directly the system here. In other words, if we are at

related to this bill, but they do go to the the end of a chain in which a number of

centre of Galang in particular. They are countries on the way may offer sanctuary,

matters that ought to be mentioned. They then there should be no encouragement for

allege that the screening processes were people to believe that it is more beneficial to

corrupted and that many non-refugees were bypass those countries, to put their lives at

either buying refugee status or gaining it by risk and to seek to sail on to Australia on the

way of sexual favours.

basis that there may be some preferable

Mr Pierre Fontaine, the regional representaoutcome.

tive, has assured parliamentary committees The system in Canada resembles that

and my colleague and me that no bona fide proposed in this legislation. People who claim

2836

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

to be convention refugees will not be eligible to have their claims determined in Australia if they come from a prescribed country. As with the system proposed here, the Canadian system stipulates that the country must be prescribed in regulations and that the country must be a party to the 1951 convention and, in particular, article 33 of the convention on non-refoulement. It also considers the particular country's record on human rights. Prescription lasts for two years but it is renewable and it may be revoked at any time. Canada, in its approach, recognises the refugee sharing agreements with other countries such as the comprehensive plan of action.
The United Kingdom defines a 'safe third country' as one in which the life or freedom of an asylum applicant would not be threatened within the meaning of article 33 of the convention and whose government would not send an applicant elsewhere in a manner contrary to the principles of the convention and protocol.
This bill effectively implements the safe third country concept in Australia. It will require that asylum seekers who have arrived in Australia from safe third countries or who have had access to safe third countries will be barred from making applications for protection visas. They will then be removed to the safe third country. The government argues that the need to amend the Migration Act to effect this has been demonstrated by the recent unauthorised arrival of boat people from the Galang processing centre in Indonesia. These people were covered by the comprehensive plan of action and have already had their claims fully considered under the processes approved by the UNHCR. They argue that, if we do not enact such legislation, we will be sending the wrong messages back to Galang and thus exposing Australia to boatloads of asylum seekers.
Under the provisions of this bill, a country will be a safe third country in relation to a non-citizen if it is a country of first asylum under the comprehensive plan of action and the non-citizen is covered by the comprehensive plan of action. The country will be prescribed as a safe third country in relation to the non-citizen. To be prescribed as a safe

third country, the country will need to be one with which Australia has an agreement providing for the return of a person to the country of asylum for the purpose of determining his or her refugee claims in accordance with the UN convention.
The country will also need to be one which, in accordance with article 33 of the convention, will not refoule them or expel them in any manner whatsoever to the frontier of territories where their lives or freedom would be threatened on account of their race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion. The country will also need to be one which will ensure that their basic human rights are respected.
The status of a country prescribed as a safe third country is to be subject to a sunset clause. Unless the status is renewed by regulation, a country is to cease to be a safe third country three years after the commencement of the current regulation which initially conferred that status.
As I mentioned earlier, this bill can be divided into separate parts-that part which concerns comprehensive plan of action countries and that to which the safe third country concept applies. It appears that most concerns have been raised over the safe third country concept and how it is to work. The UNHCR representative, although thoroughly supporting the CPA component of the bill, had some reservations about the safe third country concept. His first concern was over the bill's failure to specifically mention non-refoulement or article 33. That was the reason that the opposition, with the cooperation of third parties in the Senate, proposed the amendments to subsection 91D(3) in particular. This bill now provides for:
. . . a statement, covering the country, or each of the countries, prescribed as a safe third country by the regulation, about:
(a) the compliance by the country, or each of the countries, with relevant international law concerning protection of persons seeking asylum; and
(b) the meeting by the country, or each of the countries, of relevant human rights standards for the persons in relation to whom the country is prescribed as a safe third country; and

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2837

(c) the willingness of the country, or each of the countries, to allow any person in relation to whom the country is prescribed as a safe third country:
(i) to go to the country; and
(ii) to remain in the country during the period in which any claim for asylum is determined; and
(iii) if the person is determined to be a refugee while in the country-to remain in the country until a durable solution relating to permanent settlement of the person is found.
That is to remain in force for a period of two years after the regulation commences. It will then be the subject of further review. That has been reduced from the three-year period that was originally proposed by the government.
The final concern was over the term 'public interest'. Much of the workability of the bill heavily relies on the fact that it must be firm but also fair. Recently, when a boatload of potential asylum seekers landed on our shores, three already assessed cases were granted access to our system of assessment and review because they had further information which was not used in their original assessment in Galang. It is vital that, if such cases are going to continue to arise, there is flexibility under the act to allow for their reassessment. As we understand it, there is some scope within this legislation, particularly in the form of ministerial discretion, for that flexibility to occur.

ganisations regarding the bill and, in particular, the allegations that I mentioned earlier about the screening processes in Galang. They are matters that really go to the heart of the refugee acceptance process throughout the region. Significant organisations-I know some of them well-such as the Vietnamese Community in Australia, the International Supreme Master Ching Rai Meditation Associations, the Viet Nam News Today newspaper, the l1Vi Weekly Vietnamese newspaper, the Vietnamese-Australian Welfare Association of New South Wales, the Vietnamese Refugee Supporting Committee of Victoria and the Australian Catholic Refugee Office, have been the most vocal in their criticism. It was for this reason that, at the conclusion of the debate in another place, it was moved that Senator Bolkus, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, would be required to:
. . . table in the Senate by no later than 1 February 1995, a report setting out details of:
(a) the Minister's written diplomatic and other approaches to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees requesting the Commissioner to re-examine and evaluate its mechanism for reviewing claims of boatpeople seeking asylum, to better identify those who have been erroneously processed;
(b) the Commissioner's response to those approach-
es-,
(c) the Commissioner's examination and evaluation of the mechanism for reviewing such claims; and

The coalition recognises that all people who (d) the Minister's response to the Commissioner's arrive by boat without authorisation will still examination and evaluation.

be interviewed by departmental officers. On the basis of this interview it will be decided whether they come within the scope of this legislation. The department has stated that, if it is discovered at this interview that a potential applicant has new information in support of his or her previously assessed case, he or she will be allowed to apply again. However, the only area for such flexibility lies in the minister's non-compellable discretionary powers, which may be exercised only in the public interest. To allay such concerns, the minister agreed to outline his understanding of what constitutes 'public interest'.
Representations were made to the coalition by a number of people and community or-

The opposition regards that inquiry as an
important part of the cooperative approach
that has been taken in relation to this matter. I have no doubt that the minister appreciates that that motion, having been carried by the Senate, puts a very important obligation on him to report back to the chamber of which
he is a part. I am sure he understands that he
could be in serious contempt of the Senate if
he does not meet that obligation. That is a
matter that my colleague Senator Short, the shadow minister for immigration and ethnic
affairs, raised. I do not intend to resubmit that
motion to the House because I think the
Senate has more than sufficiently dealt with it. I am sure that the minister is cognisant of

2838

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

it. It is the opposition's intention to support the bill as amended. I signify that that is the approach we will be taking on that matter.
Mr FERGUSON (Reid) (6.51 p.m.)-I would initially like to concede that the thrust of the opposition's amendments to the Migration Legislation Amendment Bill (No.4) have been very constructive and of value. I personally associate myself with the concerns expressed by the previous speaker, the honourable member for Berowra (Mr Ruddock), that Australia has problems with a large number of people who feel that they can travel through a variety of countries before making a claim of convenience in this country.
When we go to conferences at Bogor and discuss these matters with ASEAN nations it is perhaps necessary to reiterate the concern that as of the beginning of this year we still find in our region that the only countries that have acceded to both the United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees 1951 and the United Nations Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees 1967, which Australia acceded to as far back as 1954 and 1973, are China, Fiji, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines and Tuvalu. We have a very real problem in this region because of the lack of action of a large number of countries with which we have increasing connections and with which we are stressing closer ties and enmeshment.

and that the situation is not of long-term concern.
Essentially, the legislation seeks to deny people who have been through primary and secondary processing at the UNHCR camp in Galang access to Australia's refugee processing system. As has been pointed out, theoretically we could be talking about 100,000 plus people who could put themselves in such a situation. Two boats have already arrived and a third was intercepted. This situation has given rise to the legislation we are considering.
At the moment, Australia has no way of disallowing widespread participation in our legal system by these people. This is despite the fact that the body that dictates or prescribes refugee standards has said that the people concerned were not refugees within its determination. Whilst many community groups say that we should liberalise the current provisions because the world has changed and the current provisions no longer have adequacy, we should remember what the convention requires. The convention defines a refugee as any person who:
... owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country ...

The opposition spokesman quite correctly referred to concerns about the allegations relating to Galang. I am actually quite reassured by the comments of Mr Pierre Michel Fontaine, the regional representative for Australia and the South Pacific at the UNHCR, because he is a ready critic of our detention policies in this country. He is a readily available witness and always rushes to appear before parliamentary committees to say how dreadful our detention policies are in Australia.
On that basis, I have great faith in his determination that these practices at Galang are of concern but have been thoroughly investigated. On the basis of his genuine concern about the supposedly harsh practices of this country, I have great confidence that he has looked into these matters thoroughly

Those provisions still apply. The UNHCR has determined that if, after the two levels of processing investigation, people are not so determined there is no reason in the world why we should then say, 'Come into Australia and have another go.' The first aspect of this legislation is the determination that if there are processes, systems or methods to deal with these people then at the end of day, if people have had a go in the system, it should count for something.
Essentially, there are two issues that the legislation attempts to cover. Firstly, the legislation attempts to cover those people who are covered by the comprehensive plan of action negotiated in Geneva in 1989 which gave a first stage of asylum in Indonesia, Malaysia, Hong Kong and Thailand to Laotian and Vietnamese refugee claimants and

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2839

then offered resettlement through the UNHCR in other countries such as Australia. In general, those people will not have access to an appeals process in Australia.
The second provision created a degree of concern for a large number of people who are interested in the integrity of our migration system and the integrity of our system of refugee claims and also those who have a genuine concern about the variety of groups suffering human rights abuses around the world. There was a concern that the safe third country provisions might not protect these refugees.
I believe the system has a significant number of safeguards. The minister has the discretion to allow people to make these appeals. There is a requirement that the various safe countries report to the parliament. After two years the declaration becomes ineffective. Under section 910(3) there is a requirement that the minister must, within two days of a regulation being laid before each House, provide a statement on the countries that he has determined as safe third countries. That statement has to cover whether and to what extent those particular countries subscribe to international human rights conventions, the degree to which they will adhere to relevant human rights standards for the non-citizens to whom we are seeking to apply this third country provision and the willingness of that country to permit people covered by these provisions to return to the country and remain there whilst their quest for asylum is examined.
There are a large number of protections to make sure that this system is not abused, that we do not send people off to face severe harassment, repression and torture and that we have a genuine process whereby a country is safe and does protect these people. They are the essential features that the government has set out to cover in this legislation.
There is increasing need for the legislation. As late as 4 March this year an assistant secretary with the compliance branch of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs gave evidence before the Human Rights Subcommittee of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade detailing the admittedly very slow growth in

the trafficking of people to Australia. This is a phenomenon that has been reported on in America, but the compliance branch of the department sees that phenomenon occurring in our region.
What we are seeing is a world in which such things as transportation and communications guarantee people more access and movement around the world. We have seen in Europe the initial pleasure at the fact that eastern Europe has collapsed, with West Germany originally welcoming back vast hordes of Germans, whether they be Volga Germans from Russia or the German minorities in Romania. There was this mass movement of people.
The increase of environmental degradation around the world and the inability of the developing countries to really make fundamental gains in their standards of living impact upon migration internationally and impact upon the ability of countries to control their refugee provisions. These provisions are there in that context.
In our own country, I think what we are trying to do is simply an extension of the kind of philosophy that was articulated in paragraph 3.175 of the report Asylum, Border Control and Detention of the Joint Standing Committee on Migration of February this year. It states:
In many instances, the proliferation of legal challenges can begin to distract from the real issues of the case. The interests of asylum seekers are best served if those who need protection are given that protection as soon as possible, and if those who are determined not be refugees are advised of that fact as expeditiously as possible. Although some claimants have legitimate grounds for seeking review, such reviews should be undertaken only where the case has merit. If the person is not eligible to remain in Australia, in fairness they need to be made aware of this fact at the earliest opportunity, in order that they can make alternative plans for their future.
We have an extension of that philosophy in the case of people who have a right. They have been through a process and they have been examined. To the knowledge of people interested in this field and on the information of the regional representative of the UNHCR, the applicants claimed that the only reason

2840

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

they were not found to be refugees was that they were not corrupt or were not willing to bribe people or to demean themselves. On the evidence, the reality is more that the vast majority of them had minimal claims. The applicants see the opportunity to resettle, to have a better life. The provisions of 1951 and 1967 are still not fundamental grounds for refugee status.
I commend the legislation to the House. It does, as indicated earlier, provide a variety of protections. I associate myself with the opposition's call for the matter to be further investigated and to be constantly monitored to ensure that the system we do have some faith in is indeed genuine.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Baldwin) read a third time.
FAMILY LAW REFORM BILL 1994 [No.2]
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mr WILLIAMS (Tangney) (7.04 p.m.)- The aims and principles of the Family Law Reform Bill 1994 [No.2] are not opposed by the coalition. There are, however, several outstanding areas of concern which in the coalition's view require further examination. I will refer to these issues in detail later, but I mention now that one that is of particular concern is the extent to which the Family Court should take a positive role in scrutinising agreements that parents make regarding their children. Because of these areas of concern, the coalition will be seeking to have the bill referred to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee.
The reform process has been continuing for some time. I certainly understand the desire of many that changes to the law occur as expeditiously as possible. However, as noted by the Law Council of Australia's family law section in its comments on the bill:

. . . the changes intended to be effected by this bill represent such a significant restructuring of family law that timetabling considerations which are seen as desirable by government must give way to the greater need to ensure that the amendments are not rushed and that they bring about an improvement in both the quality of, and access to, justice in this important area of law which touches upon so many lives in Australia on a daily basis.
I will deal first with the background of the bill and its specific provisions. This bill is the first of two planned legislative responses by the government to the recommendations of the 10int Select Committee on Certain Aspects of the Operation and Interpretation of the Family Law Act. After a 1112 year inquiry, the committee tabled a report in November 1992. The report contained 120 wide-ranging recommendations for the reform of the Family Law Act and for changes to the family law system in Australia.
The committee's recommendations range over the areas of counselling services, interpreters, mediation as a form of alternative dispute resolution, custody, guardianship and access, judicial education in matters such as domestic violence, child sexual abuse, enforcement of financial and property orders, perjury, distribution of superannuation entitlements, the wearing of wigs and gowns by judges and advocates, costs orders and costs agreements, and the publication of proceedings.
In December 1993, the government responded to the committee's report. When the Attorney-General (Mr Lavarch) tabled the government's response, he said that the government would be acting on the major thrust of the committee's findings that the family law system needed to be simpler and more affordable. The Attorney-General said that the first and most fundamental shift in family law would be a move towards encouraging mediation and other forms of alternative dispute resolution rather than litigation. I will return to this aspect later.
Some of the key recommendations contained in the committee's report are now sought to be implemented in the provisions of this bill. The bill deals with the areas of the Family Law Act relating to mediation and other forms of alternative dispute resolution

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2841

and children. Much of the bill is directed to avoiding, if possible, adversarial proceedings in the Family Court and its undesirable consequences on the parties, their children and even the court. Mediation, if conducted properly, can be quick, inexpensive, confidential and non-confrontational.
One of the main areas of concern and dissatisfaction with the Family Law Act 1975 is its provisions affecting children. In this area, the bill is intended to effect a philosophical shift away from the concepts of custody and access. The committee did not itself recommend such a change, concluding that there was insufficient evidence that a change in approach would reduce disputes. But it has been a criticism of the act that the language used in connection with children encourages adversarial proceedings and perpetuates the notion that children are possessions to be divided up in divorce proceedings along with the other matrimonial assets.
As part of its response to the committee's report, the government asked the Family Law Council to examine and report on the operation of the United Kingdom Children Act 1989. That act had reformed the terminology used in family law in the United Kingdom. Under the Children Act, each parent is assigned specific obligations and responsibilities. The Family Law Council endorsed the UK approach and recommended a move away from custody and access terminology in Australia.

mediation, counselling and arbitration in the resolution of family law disputes, both within the court and in approved organisations in the community; secondly, to provide for an approval mechanism for community based counselling and mediation organisations to become approved mediation and/or counselling organisations under the Family Law Act; thirdly, to expand the opportunity for approved organisations to undertake mediation and counselling that arises under the Family Law Act; fourthly, to extend the immunity provisions that presently exist from court based personnel to approved mediators; and, fifthly, to extend the secrecy and admission provisions that presently exist from court based personnel to approved community mediators and counsellors.
The bill also replaces the part of the Family Law Act dealing with children. The stated object of the proposed new provisions relating to children is to ensure that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and to ensure that parents fulfil their duties and meet their responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. The bill states a number of principles that are expressed to underlie the stated object. As the Parliamentary Secretary to the Attorney-General (Mr Duncan) said in his second reading speech, the principles are drawn from the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.

The bill uses expressions such as 'parental responsibility'. The return of this concept to the law is very welcome. These changes are designed to reinforce the idea that the interests of the child are paramount when a marriage which has produced children subsequently breaks down. The second bill, which I understand is due to be introduced this session, will deal with matrimonial property. The bill will amend the parts of the act dealing with marriage counselling organisations, counselling and reconciliation, and mediation and arbitration.
The stated aims of these amendments are fivefold: firstly, to facilitate greater use of

The fundamental change that this bill introduces is the elimination of the terms 'custody' and 'access'. The objection to these terms is that they connote ownership of children by the parents. In particular, the terminology can have the effect of exacerbating the distress of a non-custodial parent in a contested custody application. At present, as we heard in the parliamentary secretary's second reading speech, the custodial parent is automatically given responsibility for the dayto-day care of the child. The bill allows orders for daily care as well as long-term care to be made separately. The purpose is to emphasise the joint responsibilities of both parents. In place of custody and access orders,

2842

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

the court may make residence and contact orders.
One of the most significant aspects of the bill is in the area of parental responsibility, to which I alluded earlier. It may come as a surprise to anyone who has had no contact with or involvement in the family law system to learn that this bill has been heralded for introducing a notion called 'parental responsibility'. People could be forgiven for believing that parental responsibility is an ancient concept in human society, and one that is recognised as fundamental to creating a happy and successful family. It is an indictment on our society that we need to legislate for this sort of responsibility. It is even more of an indictment that we have a four-section division in the bill headed 'Parental responsibility', a new section 61B called 'Meaning of parental responsibility', and a 15-line paragraph in the explanatory memorandum to explain the concept further.
Having said that, I welcome the explicit recognition that, in relation to children, the emphasis of the Family Law Act be on the duties and responsibilities of both parents and that there be no reference to 'parental rights'. In contrast, it is the right of the child to have the continuing involvement of both parents in the child's care and upbringing. It is a pleasing reform that this is expressly recognised in the bill. There can be no doubt that it is a great advantage to a child to have the love and care of both parents and, through them, involvement with the parents' respective families-the grandparents, aunts, uncles and cousins.
In providing a mechanism for parents to devise a parenting plan, the bill encourages parents to seek agreement about matters concerning the child. In reaching agreement, the best interests of the child are to be the paramount consideration. Where agreement cannot be reached, the bill allows the Family Court to make appropriate orders. The court may make 'residence orders', 'contact orders', 'child maintenance orders and special purpose orders'. In doing so, the bill breaks the automatic nexus between custody and responsibility for daily care and control. It is intended that the special purpose orders will include

provisions for the long-term care, welfare and development of the child, or for the day-today care, welfare and development of the child. The bill also provides a list of factors to be considered in determining the best interests of the child; it covers the relationship between contact orders and state family violence protection orders; and other miscellaneous matters.
The bill is not a solution to all the ills of the family law system. The bill does not propose to do away with the role of the courts and litigation in the family law system. The reforms to terminology and the proposed enhancement of alternative dispute resolution measures will provide a fertile ground for agreement between the parties only where there already exists some degree of goodwill and willingness to negotiate and compromise.
In cases where the relationship has broken down to the extent that this is not possible, the bill will not improve the status quo. In such a case, there will usually be an acrimonious legal battle. It is not necessarily a criticism of the bill but it is nonetheless inevitable that, where no agreement between the parties is possible, one parent will be given primary responsibility for the child. While recognising its shortcomings, the aim of the bill is worthwhile.
The shift in emphasis away from litigation towards alternative dispute resolution is a welcome development. The Family Court demonstrated the benefits of alternatives to orthodox litigation by its very successful pilot mediation program that was conducted in the Family Court at Dandenong in Victoria. In my view, all the evidence gathered shows that the earlier the parties are introduced to mediation in their journey through the family law system, the better for all concerned.
I add a caveat to my endorsement of the enhanced role of mediation in family law. My concern is for the role of the court in the process. It is fundamental to the public perception of the impartiality and independence of judges that they not be involved in any activity other than the adjudication of the dispute. Association of the court with alternative dispute resolution might have this effect. The judges of the court would not be in-

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2843

volved in mediation. But my concern is that the fact that mediation is done in the name of the court or is perceived to be a requirement of the court might have an impact on the perception of the impartiality of the judges. Any perception of this kind would be counterproductive and detrimental to the court and the family law system.
It is vital that bureaucratic empire building within the family law system be avoided. The court itself should not convey any image that it is a social service outlet or in fact that the judges do anything except perform judicial services. It is also important that the court not be put in a position where the perception could be conveyed publicly that the court would not strictly enforce any orders it makes. Muddying the perception like that could occur if the judges who decide the cases of parties who cannot agree are seen to be mediation agents.
The details of the now withdrawn bill and this bill have been subject to significant comment, particularly by the family law section of the Law Council of Australia and the Family Court of Australia. Both these bodies have outstanding concerns that warrant further consideration. In particular, the Law Council is concerned about the failure of the bill to provide for court scrutiny of consent orders and parenting plans. In the making of an order in relation to a contested application before the court, the court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. The bill specifically excludes the granting of consent orders from this requirement. The Law Council is concerned that where there is a significant inequality of bargaining power between the parties, as is often the case, the parents may reach an arrangement concerning their children which a court would consider most unacceptable. When the arrangement is then sealed by the court as a consent order, it has the official sanction of a court order without the benefit of the court's scrutiny.
The countervailing argument is that it is unduly paternalistic to require the court to intrude into arrangements between the parties, and there is every opportunity for parties unhappy with consent orders to have them

reviewed by the court. The response of the Law Council is that initial scrutiny of arrangements would prevent subsequent litigation between the parties.
However, the Chief Justice of the Family Court sees the review mechanisms as being sufficient protection. His Honour sees the resource implications of universal scrutiny by the court as an additional factor. The Family Law Council is of the view, too, that a lack of resources prevents the court from being able to scrutinise all consent orders.
I have been in contact with Mr Rod Burr, the chairman of the family law section of the Law Council of Australia, and I am convinced that the concerns of the Law Council have merit. Mr Burr impressed that the interests of children justify a re-allocation of resources if that is necessary to ensure that consent orders for residence and contact, and parenting plans, are scrutinised by the court. Our children are too important to miss out on this vital protection by the court.
No-one can be certain at the moment of the extent to which further resources will be required to implement this submission of the Law Council of Australia. But it is clearly a matter that needs to be explored. At risk is the possibility that a child could be ordered to be placed in the care and control of someone who has been violent towards or has otherwise abused that child, merely because the residence or contact order has been made by consent. These provisions may, as a result, be in conflict with Australia's obligations under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, to which the parliamentary secretary referred in his second reading speech.
This government has often used the desire to implement our obligations under international covenants and treaties as a justification for legislation. In view of this, it is expected that the government would have had more regard to the provisions of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. In particular, paragraph 1 of article 3 provides:
In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or

2844

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.
If parties wish to make arrangements with respect to children enforceable through court order, there is a responsibility on the court to ensure that the arrangements are in the best interests of the children. However, as I have indicated, both the Family Court and the Family Law Council have said that an amendment to the bill imposing such a requirement would have significant resource implications for the Family Court and, therefore, is not justified. Specific thought would need to be given to the degree of supervision and the mechanisms to facilitate it.
One thing at least is clear: these issues need further airing. This is one of the most significant reasons why the coalition believes that the bill needs to be referred to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs for consideration.
Mr Price-What about the joint select committee that you are a member of!
Mr WILLIAMS-I think the joint select committee really has quite enough on its plate at present. In addition, there is a number of more technical concerns that have been raised and that warrant further examination. The Family Law Council has commented that the bill has many positive elements. However, the council had several reservations, to which I will refer generally.
First, the council has commented on the phrase 'special purpose order'. As I mentioned earlier, this is a type of parenting order that deals with an aspect of parental responsibility for a child other than an order dealing with child maintenance, the place of residence of the child and the contact between the child and another person or persons. The council's view is that the use of the word 'special' indicates to the court that such an order is to be made only in exceptional or unusual circumstances. The council's criticism could be met simply by the use of an expression such as 'general parenting order', and I encourage the government to amend the drafting of the bill accordingly.
Another concern of the Family Law Council is that it is an explicit principle underlying the objects of the bill that both parents have

access to, or contact with, their children. In the view of the council, this principle should be subject to contact being in the best interests of the children. This recognises that, in some hopefully rare cases, the court will need, for the sake of the child, to bar a parent from having any contact with the child.
A third concern expressed by the Family Law Council is that the effect of these proposed changes be monitored in the community. The council points out that the bill, if enacted, will implement profound changes to the Australian system of family law. The council has suggested that a body, such as the Australian Institute of Family Studies, be charged with the task of comparing the effect of the existing Family Law Act with the effect of the provisions of a reformed Family Law Act. While the coalition endorses the recommendation that the effect of these changes be monitored and evaluated, the Australian Institute of Family Studies may not be the only appropriate body for the task.
The family law section of the Law Council of Australia has also pointed to the continuation of an existing anomaly relating to variation of child maintenance orders. While the court may take into account the circumstances of the child and the circumstances of the person liable to make the payment, it may not take into account the circumstances of the person liable to receive the payment. This means, for example, that a substantial windfall by the payee could not be taken into account. There seems no good reason not to change this.
A number of areas of specific concern with the bill in its final form have been raised with Senator Vanstone, the shadow Attorney General, in consultations with the Chief Justice and other judges and representatives of the Family Court of Australia. I am informed that the court had not, as of last week, raised those matters with the government. It is important that those matters are properly considered prior to the passage of the bill.
In conclusion, for this and for the other reasons I have highlighted, while the coalition does not oppose the aims and principles of this bill, it is the coalition's view that the bill should be referred to the Senate Legal and

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2845

Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee for consideration.
Mr Dodd-Filibuster. Mr WILLIAMS-Mr Speaker, I am invited to continue. It is a fairly peremptory form of invitation. Perhaps I can accommodate the member. In a similar situation, he might accord a similar response to a similar invitation. Mr SPEAKER-If you feel that you would like to sit down, I am sure we can accommodate you in the House tonight. It being almost 7.30, I think we can go to an adjournment. Mr WILLIAMS-I want to expand on the interjection made by the honourable member for Chifley (Mr Price) and explain the reason why the coalition did not suggest that the bill be referred to the Joint Select Committee on Certain Family Law Issues. The burden faced by that committee in its inquiry on the Child Support Agency is enormous. It has required a great deal of work from the committee over an extended time. In the context of expedition, the Senate committee seems to be a better bet. I commend the principles of the bill to the House and the coalition's proposal that the bill be referred to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee for consideration.
ADJOURNMENT Mr SPEAKER-Order! It being almost 7.30 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Regional Economic Development Organisation
Mr ABBOTT (Warringah) (7.28 p.m.)- I rise to support an initiative proposed by councils within my electorate, namely, the establishment of a regional economic development organisation. The councils in question have formed themselves into something called Shoreroc: the North Shore of Sydney regional organisation of councils. United in this organisation are Manly, Warringah, Pittwater and Mosman councils. It is an area covering 250,000 people. It embraces some of the best beaches, some of the best residential areas, and some of the most innovative industrial

conglomerations and tourist attractions of the great city of Sydney.
The task that this regional economic development organisation proposes to undertake is, first of all, to do a full audit of the economic potential and the economic challenges facing the area; secondly, to set up an ongoing office, the job of which will be to create more economic activity in the area, in particular, by matching opportunities that are there with companies that are currently outside; and, further, to put companies in touch with people to create more jobs and more economic fizz in a part of Sydney which, whatever its current benefits, can certainly do with more jobs and more economic activity.
I am pleased to say that I have discussed this matter over the last few days with the mayors and the general managers of those four councils and, just this afternoon, with councillors Gavin Anderson, Bob Page and Paul Couvre of Warringah Council. The beauty of the proposal that these councils are putting together is that they have been prepared to stump up a major part of the money themselves. They have already put up $50,000 to support this important local initiative.
It is not easy for cash strapped councils. We all know that their rate base is being squeezed. We all know that they are being asked to take on more and more tasks all the time. It is not easy for them to find extra money for discretionary spending, but they have done it to back this exciting and innovative regional economic development office. Now they are asking for $300,000 over three years from the federal government.
They are asking for the money out of a regional initiative that the government has established under which $150 million has been committed over the next four years-in other words, $1 million more or less for each electorate. The $300,000 that these councils are asking for, given that they basically cover two federal electorates, is a very modest amount indeed. This needs to be seen in the context of an ever increasing squeeze on the federal funding of metropolitan councils. For instance, Mosman council's funding has dropped from just over $500,000 a year five years ago to something like $350,000 a year.

2846

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

In the context of federal support for metropolitan councils, this request for $300,000 to support this regional economic development office is extremely reasonable.
I support this application because, if the government has the money to spend on things like demolishing the Cahill Expressway and a $250 million gift to the artistic community, surely it has $300,000 to spend responsibly on something which will produce concrete results, and in particular jobs for Australia's young people. Just because the Warringah peninsula is not an area that normally votes Labor is no reason to deny it its fair share of federal government funding.
I am told that the mayors and general managers have had some discussions with the government. Those discussions went well, and I am thrilled. But I put the government on notice that I am watching what goes on here. If this $150 million is not allocated fairly, we will have to conclude that this regional initiative is sports rorts on an even grander scale. I am sure the government, having burnt its fingers once, does not want to do that again.
Municipal Libraries Mr DODD (Leicbhardt) (7.33 p.m.)-On Monday I spoke to the motion moved by the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Latham) on the public funding of libraries and the new information superhighway. Unfortunately, time ran out and I was cut off in my prime, so I will continue my remarks now. I was halfway through a quote from Margaret Colmer in the Australian Library Journal of May 1994, which states:
It is possible that in the information age there will be three categories of citizen. The information poor who cannot afford to access any fee based information services and become marginalised within society, excluded from participating; the information informed who can afford basic cable television links to the world of information and have a token kind of consultative political participation; and the information elite who use all the capabilities of the superhighway via television, phone and computer. The information elite would be in a very privileged position to control and manipulate politics and decision making.
In Australia, because of the extensive use of municipal libraries as a source of information

for all citizens, we can avoid this scenario. Members of the community and, importantly, community groups should have access to public access points in municipal libraries, including networks. Such an aim is a national one and should not be left to local government to fund. If it were left to local government, it would generally tend to perpetuate the current inequities. I suspect that my constituents in remote areas would get little or no access to the new technology.
This initiative to provide funding to municipal libraries, with the initiatives announced today by the Minister for Communications and the Arts (Mr Lee) in relation to providing telephone services to those people in Australia who do not have a phone, will assist in providing a new social justice agenda for the next century. I congratulate the honourable member for Werriwa for putting the motion before the House.
I listened to that debate and was amazed to hear that coalition members opposed this proposition. They opposed the principle that municipal libraries should be funded by the Commonwealth government. They seemed also to oppose the proposition that the new technology should be provided to municipal libraries so that ordinary people could have access to that technology. This is just amazing. In other words, the coalition seemed to support the federal government's role in providing the haves in society with access to technology.
Opposition members do not seem to have any problem with that. They seem to want the government to hurry up with pay TV and things like that, but when it comes to the less well-off in the society, when it comes to community groups and people in my electorate in remote areas, it is not a national priority for the coalition. The honourable member for Wakefield (Mr Andrew) is nodding his head. That was the whole point of the argument that the opposition put forward during that debate. It was not a national priority; the municipal councils could fund themselves, or perhaps the states could fund them. That is just absurd.
People on this side of the House welcome a bipartisan approach. Politically, I am quite

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2847

happy to go to remote areas in my electorate and say, 'If you vote for the coalition, you will get nothing to extend the services of libraries and the infonnation superhighway to those people in Australia who live in remote areas, but the coalition will provide those services to people who live in the capital cities, in particular business and strong vested interest groups.' I am quite happy to take the coalition's view on this issue to my constituents, especially those in remote areas.
It is an important area that I hope the government will take up. I hope that the government will fund municipal libraries right throughout Australia, extend the services to areas in my electorate such as Cape York Peninsula and the Torres Strait and seriously consider providing additional funding so that the new technology is available to average people through the system. (Time expired)
Sales Tax: Fruit Juice
Mr HICKS (Riverina) (7.37 p.m.)-Mr Speaker, you would know that, over the last several years, the citrus growers of Australia, particularly those in southern Australia, have been doing it pretty tough. This is due to a number of reasons. I suppose the most important reason is the introduction of imported frozen concentrate from overseas. It is cheap, and the local product has to compete against it. There are other reasons, such as the cost of production, costs of water and fertiliser, fuels and sprays, and added labour costs. They all add up to make the growing of citrus in Australia very tough indeed. In some instances, some of the citrus growers would be getting $50 to $80 for their product where it takes at least $120 to break even-in some cases, some would argue that $150 is required.
A horticultural task force was set up, and a citrus task force was involved in that, headed by Senator Nick Sherry. That task force made a number of suggestions to the federal government. Now the citrus growers are waiting for a reply from the government that will enable them to continue with a citrus industry. This morning all federal members and senators received a package from the citrus growers in a fonn of a peaceful demonstration, unlike some other demonstrations that we

have witnessed. They have realised that they must get the message through.
I have a package here. In that package are a number of common breakfast items: a nice fresh roll, fresh milk, cornflakes, which are on many tables in Australia for breakfast, a tea bag, table margarine, mannalade and honey in packages, superfine sugar, Vegemite and coffee. There is also this wonderful lOOper cent Australian orange juice. The difference between all those foodstuffs is the fact that the only one that is taxed is orange juice. Citrus juice differs and it currently carries a sales tax, if you like a GST, of 11 per cent.
We have all received a letter from Michael Crook, the President of the Australian Citrus Growers Federation, who is a constituent of mine, and I am very pleased to say that he lives not far from where I live. His letter states:
The anomaly is that no other food items in the pack carry any sales tax-
as I said before-
The Australian Citrus Growers Federation is calling on the Federal Government to abolish sales tax on fruit juice as part of its package of changes to comply with GATT international trade agreements.
This would help to balance the removal in January 1995 of the current sales tax support for Australian fruit juice products with 25% or more local fruit content.
Without balancing sales tax arrangements as proposed by ACGF, the enormous decrease in demand and prices for juicing oranges will cripple the industry.
The citrus industry is currently undergoing massive restructuring to still further improve production efficiencies and to develop strategies to further expand its export markets, particularly in Asian countries.
Despite enormous pressure from low-priced orange juice concentrate imports, that de-stabilize our domestic market base, we are making headway.
But we need a commitment from the Government that supports the industry, allowing it to build on its initiatives and achieve long-term viability.
The industry cannot survive any further imposts that would make it non-competitive nationally and internationally.
Currently, fruit juice products carry a 21 % sa!es tax, with a lower rate of 11 % for products contaming 25% or more Australian content.

2848

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

The Government should take advantage of the GAIT-enforced sales tax changes to remove the illogical situation that puts a pseudo-GST on a staple food item-fruit juice. They have the chance to put fruit juice where it belongs-in the same sales tax exempt category as fresh milk, tea, coffee and other staple food items including, paradoxically, fruit from which fresh fruit juice is made. Consumers had demonstrated their acceptance of fresh orange juice and we know they would welcome the ACGF proposal to abolish sales tax on this healthy natural product. The citrus industry accepts the challenge to become even more efficient after the loss of historic sales tax and tariff policies, but the industry cannot cope with the pendulum swinging the other way with further barriers to our international competitiveness. For citrus farmers in the Riverland, the Riverina and Sunraysia, it is not drought, but GAIT related changes to sales tax arrangements that could destroy the industry's attempts to "stand on its own two feet". Australian citrus growers only want a "fair go". The citrus industry must not be allowed to become an innocent victim of Australian compliance with The GAIT. Yours sincerely Michael Crook President, Australian Citrus Growers Federation
I know the member for Wakefield (Mr Andrew), the member for Mallee (Mr Forrest) and other members in this House would agree wholeheartedly with Michael Crook's words.
Statement by Mr Schulze Mrs SILVIA SMITH (Bass) (7.42 p.m.)- Mr Speaker, I should apologise to the House and to you in particular for having such a small brain. The reason for that comment is that it appears that women have small brains, much smaller than men, so we do not really understand some of the things that men talk about. Mrs Moylan-No, they are just coloured pink. Mrs SILVIA SMITH-Is that right? I make that apology because of some comments made by a member of the Legislative Council in Tasmania last week. An article in the Examiner of 4 November, which was last Friday, talked about a Mr Schulze, who is the

legislative councillor for Gordon in Tasmania. The article states:
Mr Schulze said yesterday that women's brains were 400 grams smaller than men's as a compensation-
may I dare say-
against the more rapid decline of males' brains with age.
He was speaking against the government's sex discrimination legislation. But he got a bit of help, did he not? The article goes on to say:
Mr Hiscutt (West Devon) also attacked the Bill, saying it had been drawn up by-
the honourable member sitting at the table should listen to this-
"myopic, fast-talking, sad-faced women".
Mr Andrew-Heavens! Mrs SILVIA SMITH-It is absolutely disgusting, is it not? I am glad to hear your comment. The article also states:
Mr Schulze said that genetically men and women were vastly different . . .
For goodness sake, I thought we all knew that much.
Mrs Moylan-Thank goodness for the difference.
Mrs SILVIA SMITH-Yes, thank goodness for the difference. As I was saying, the article states:
Mr Schulze said that genetically men and women were vastly different, which should be recognised and "not wiped away" by legislation. "The reality is-
listen, this is good-
men are basically more aggressive ... work harder, live a shorter period of time ...
If they are like Mr Schulze, I agree that they should live a shorter period of time. The article goes on to quote him:
Nature has designed men as the protectors and providers while women are carers, mothers and homemakers.
He has forgotten that some of us are actually politicians too. His comments are archaic, out of touch, sexist and patronising in the extreme. No-one who would make such comments belongs in any parliament of this

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2849

nation, and I trust there are none similar in this parliament.
I put a media release out that stated I would punch Mr Schulze on the nose. That was to make the point that women can be aggressive and are hard working. Aggression and work ethics are not determined by sex, I can assure honourable members. I would like to read my media release for their benefit. It states:
Bass MHR Silvia Smith has expressed absolute outrage over yesterdays comments by MLC's Peter Schulze and Hugh Hiscutt.
Commenting on Mr Schulze' assertion that women have smaller brains Mrs Smith said: "It's pretty obvious that its Peter Schulze who's got the tiny brain and not Tasmanian women."
I add here: not any Australian woman either. The media release continues:
I find it absolutely appalling that an elected parliamentary representative could be so sexist in the extreme.
This is the best argument yet for reforming the Legislative Council. There has to be something radically wrong with a political system that could elect such a Neanderthal-
And a Neanderthal he is-
These comments are so bad that they make the most sexist of Federal Parliamentarians look like sensitive new age guys or even radical feminists.
Mr Schulze has made the assertion that men are more aggressive and work harder. Well if I could spare the time from my seven day a week work schedule I'd go to see Mr Schulze just to punch him on the nose. I think that would put paid to his argument.
Mr Schulze is the sort of politician that makes Tasmania a National joke. He does himself and his state an absolute disservice.
He should lurch into the 1990's or lurch out of parliament, knuckles scraping along behind.
Fortunately, some women came to my rescue, stood up and opposed what he had to say. The Burnie City Council mayor, Alderman Sandra French, for whom I have great respect, said that she is now convinced she should stand for a Legislative Council seat. She was quoted in an article as saying:
There should be women in the Legislative Council-and this type of thing makes me say yes, I am going to stand.
I will stand firmly behind Sandra French and any other woman who would like to stand up

against these Neanderthals that are in some of our parliaments. I sincerely hope that we have none in this parliament.
Sales Tax: Fruit Juice
Mr ANDREW (Wakefield) (7.47 p.m.)- I reassure the honourable member for Bass (Mrs Silvia Smith) that all of us on this side of the House would agree wholeheartedly with her that there should be women in parliament no matter which state they are located in.
Mr Knott-You won't do anything about it.
Mr ANDREW-Yes, we will. I rise in support of my colleague the honourable member for Riverina (Mr Hicks) and his comments about the breakfast pack introduced into the parliament and made available to all senators and members. I trust to you, too, Mr Speaker-by representatives of the Australian Citrus Growers Federation. The member for Riverina, the honourable member for Mallee (Mr Forrest) and the Australian Citrus Growers Federation make the legitimate point that it is quite inequitable to find ourselves in a situation in which a number of foodstuffs carry a sales tax while others have no tax on them at all. The most dramatic illustration of this inequity is the citrus industry, which, as an interjection from the member for Bendigo (Mr Reid) revealed, is the one industry in which fruit has no sales tax but pure fruit juice does carry sales tax.
That is an inequity that cannot be defended. No-one, I presume, on the government benches would deny that there is a need to reform the way in which sales tax is administered in Australia to ensure that it is more equitably applied. The Minister for Employment, Education and Training (Mr Crean), who is at the table, indicated that he thought it was sad that dried sultanas had not been included in the breakfast pack. I entirely agree with him. That further illustrates that here we have what is a food item that ought not to carry a tax being compared with another food item, 100 per cent fruit juice, which currently does carry a tax.
The reason I rise today is that, while the Australian Citrus Growers Federation makes

2850

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

a very valid point, the point can be addressed by the government at any time and in any budget. The federation's plea is simply that the government recognise that if people squeeze a particular food product out of a cow and call it milk, which is sales tax freewe believe that is as it ought to be-then it is equally fair to squeeze a particular food product out of an orange, call it lOOper cent fruit juice and treat it as if it were a food. The change to the sales tax regime that is involved, if we take the 100 per cent fruit juice product and deal with it as a food, can be applied by the government at any time. In fact, it ought to be a part of any budget measure because the inequity is currently being perpetuated.
The Australian Citrus Growers Federation pack has been made available to members and senators not only to reveal that there is this inequity but also to highlight that the privileges the Australian citrus growers once enjoyed are being taken away from them under the GATT legislation. The law which enabled fruit processors to tax fruit juice at 11 per cent provided it contained 25 per cent Australian pure product can no longer stand because clearly, under GATT, it is no longer appropriate for Australian product to attract a differential sales tax.
The government has introduced into this legislation the taking away of the designation 'Australian' in that law. So any fruit juice which has 25 per cent pure product in it will now be taxed at 11 per cent. If fruit juice comes in from Brazil and is used as part of a 25 per cent or more pure product in Australia, it will be taxed at 11 per cent-distinctly to the disadvantage of the Australian citrus industry.
The point that needs to be made is that the Australian citrus industry is an efficient industry. Whole fruit are placed in cartons and sent overseas, sent to Asian markets and sent to the American market, in competition with all other people. The citrus industry finds it difficult to compete in the area of juice because, in common with all other processors around the world, Australian growers cannot match the sort of competition currently being dished out by Brazil. The opportunity current-

ly presented to the parliament is to say to the Australian citrus industry, 'We recognise the obligations we have under GATT'-obligations that are accepted by every parliamentarian- 'and we recognise that these obligations are unfair on the Australian citrus industry, and we intend to amend the sales tax package to counter for those obligations or, in some other way, to compensate the Australian industry for the disadvantage it currently faces.' We are still waiting for an indication from cabinet about what it precisely proposes to offer by way of a compensation package.
Forests Mr KNOTT (Gilmore) (7.52 p.m.)-In view of the protests out the front of Parliament House, I would like to make some comments about forests and forestry. My seat, fortunately, does not have the warfare that is taking place in the south-east and north-east forests where people are destroying capital equipment-a situation which is unacceptable. People are putting their lives at risk to protect what they believe is the heritage of this nation -those old-growth forests. Many people say that this matter belongs in the too-hard basket and they go away. I am not one of those people. I have tried to do something about it for my area. I have tried to take some initiatives to create a situation where that warfare will never enter my electorate. I am grateful that the Minister for Employment, Education and Training (Mr Crean) is at the table. Under an initiative that was put through with DEET, we have been able to look at employment generation for the forest industry in my electorate. The forest industry, in times past, was one of the great employers in my electorate. It provided a great deal of employment in the small and regional areas within my electorate. My first preference for the forest industry and its management is selective logging. It seems to me to be a crime not to use a resource to its maximum potential, but I am opposed to the clear-felling of an area for woodchipping on the basis that it does not, irrespective of the source of product of that clear-felling, give the highest maximum return from the resource. Selective logging, however, does that.

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2851

I am not in favour of the total abolition of the woodchip industry. I say that because, having taken it as my role as a member to go and look at the forest industry within my area-I have a hands-on approach-I see a need for a woodchipping industry in terms of mud logs and the off-cuts from those logs which have been pulled for the timber-getting industry.
The forestry industry in my area has taken advantage of some local factors. The Shoalhaven City Council has been in conflict with its residents over ocean outfall. It has proposed and kept ocean outfall for a long time. The drought that we are going through-and hopefully it is breaking-has been fortunate in that it has focused the Shoalhaven City Council and the people of that area on water conservation and reuse.
I am pleased to say that part of the outcome of a conference was a commitment by all parties concerned-local government in the form of Shoalhaven City Council, the Department of Agriculture, CALM, the New South Wales Department of Forestry, DEET and a delegate of the Minister for Resources (Mr Beddall); the corporate sector involved in forest investment was amply represented in this discussion also-to put forward a corporate structure involving the Shoalhaven City Council, the landowners and the corporate sector. A corporate entity will be created which will then market and manage the effluent created from the system in the Shoalhaven City Council area.
The great enthusiasm that came from council, state and federal colleagues, plus the corporate sector and landowners, leads me to believe that in the future I will have a warfree zone in the forest industry. If my father had been involved in planting forests 20 and 30 years ago, I would not have to confront this. Mr Speaker, I can assure you that my sons are not ever going to have to stand up here and say, 'If my father had done something about it, we would not be in this position.' We intend to do something about it in my electorate of Gilmore.
The resolve is there and the cooperation is beginning to come on line. I look forward to an industry which will employ my people for

a long time in the future. I thank the minister for the wonderful attention that has been given to our area and for the assistance which has been given. (TIme expired)
Answers to Questions on Notice Mr WAKELIN (Grey) (7.57 p.m.)-I want to quickly look at the role of the Speaker and refer to page 197 of the second edition of House of Representatives Practice:
One of the hallmarks of good Speakership is the requirement for a high degree of impartiality in the execution of the duties.
Australian Speakers have striven to discharge their duties with impartiality.
Members are entitled to expect that, even though he is politically affiliated, the Speaker will carry out his functions impartially.
Just to round it off, I believe that, although the most quoted standing order is 145-that 'an answer shall be relevant' -we really should look at applying the conditions of standing order 144 which relates to questions.
Mr SPEAKERI would like to join with the honourable member for Grey and suggest that he might like to take that very suggestion forward to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Procedure. It would help me and Speakers that follow me.
Bendigo
Mr Reid (Bendigo) (7.59 p.m.)-In the brief time that is available to me, I want to make some comments on the building better cities program. I understand that the Minister for Housing and Regional Development (Mr Howe) will be visiting the golden city of Bendigo shortly. I have been talking for some time now about regional issues with commissioner Peter Ross-Edwards, Les Crofts, Gordon McKern and the chief executive officer, Mr Peter Seamer, from the city of greater Bendigo.
The program should really be entitled the 'capital cities program' because, up to date, the government has directed all of the money to roads, transport, housing and technology centres in Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, Brisbane and Perth. It is time to redress that situa-

2852

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 8 November 1994

tion and help Bendigo achieve its 2001 vision -infrastructure development, roads, transport, the Calder Highway, communications, heritage and historic building refurbishment, additional land care funds and tourism projects.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! It being 8.00 p.m. the debate is interrupted.
House adjourned at 8.00 p.m.
NOTICES The following notices were given: Mr Gear to present a bill for an act to repeal the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (Financial Support Fund) Act 1976.

Mr Walker to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918, and for related purposes.
PAPERS The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 8 November 1994:
Defence Act-Detennination under section 58B 1994 No. 49. Natural Resources Management (Financial Assistance) Act-Copy of agreement for the provision of financial assistance for projects relating to natural resources management between the Commonwealth of Australia and the Northern Territory. 30 September 1994.

sday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2853

ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Department of the Treasury: Budget 1994-95

Department of the Treasury: Budget 1994-95

(Question No. 1180)
Mr Costello asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 30 May 1994:
Did his Department analyse a submission on the 1994-95 Budget made to the Government by Senators Chamarette and Margetts for the Greens (WA); if so, (a) which (i) divisions, (ii) branches and (iii) sections were involved, (b) how many departmental officers were involved, (c) will he provide all results and details of the analysis, (d) on whose authority was the analysis undertaken and (e) what was the total cost of the analysis.
Mr Willis-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes, my Department did provide an analysis of a submission on the 1994-95 Budget made to the Government by Senators Chamarette and Margetts for the Greens (WA). The submission was made, at the Government's request, under the consultative arrangements agreed between the Government and the Greens (WA) as part of the 1994-95 Budget processes. The analysis undertaken by Treasury, at my request, formed part of the deliberative process associated with those consultations. Responses on other elements of the question are as follows:
(a)&(b) A total of 32 departmental officers have been identified as having made some input to the analysis. Those officers were drawn from 6 of Treasury's 7 Divisions (all but the Investment and Debt Division) and, specifically, from the following Sections: Fiscal Policy Review; Budget Policy; Government Expenditure; Development Finance; Primary Industry and Environment; Manufacturing and Industry Policy; Employment Policy; Wages and Industrial Relations; and Business Structures.
(c) As the analysis formed part of the deliberative process associated with the Budget, it would not be appropriate for it to be released.
(d) See above. (e) The diverse nature of the exercise did not facilitate the preparation of useful costing.

(Question No. 1181)
Mr Costello asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 30 May 1994:
Did his Department analyse a submission on the 1994-95 Budget made to the Government by the Australian Democrats; if so, (a) which (i) divisions, (ii) branches and (iii) sections were involved, (b) how many departmental officers were involved, (c) will he provide all results and details of the analysis, (d) on whose authority was the analysis undertaken and (e) what was the total cost of the analysis.
Mr Willis-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes, my Department did provide an analysis of a submission on the 1994-95 Budget made to the Government by the Australian Democrats. The submission was made, at the Government's request, under the consultative arrangements agreed between the Government and the Democrats as part of the 1994-95 Budget processes. The analysis undertaken by Treasury, at my request, formed part of the deliberative process associated with those consultations. Responses on other elements of the question are as follows:
(a)&(b) A total of 56 departmental officers have been identified as having made some input to the analysis. Those officers were drawn from 6 of Treasury's 7 Divisions (all but the Investment and Debt Division) and, specifically, from the following Sections: Public Sector Finances; Fiscal Policy Review; Budget Policy; Government Expenditure; Development Finance; International Trade and Finance; Infrastructure and Public Enterprise Policy; Resource Allocation and Transport; Primary Industry and Environment; Manufacturing and Industry Policy; Technology and Economic Development; Quantitative Analysis; Business Base; Business Structures; International Tax; Personal Income; Employment Policy; and Wages and Industrial Relations.
(c) As the analysis formed part of the deliberative process associated with the Budget, it would not be appropriate for it to be released.

2854

REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

(d) See above.
(e) The diverse nature of the exercise did not facilitate the preparation of useful costing.
Department of the Treasury: Budget 1994-95
(Question No. 1182)
Mr Costello asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 30 May 1994:
Did his Department analyse any submission on the 1994-95 budget made to the Government by any organisation other than the Australian Democrats or the Greens (WA); if so, in each case, (a) for which organisation, (b) which (i) divisions, (ii) branches and (iii) sections were involved, (c) how many departmental officers were involved, (d) will he provide all results and details of the analysis, (e) on whose authority was the analysis undertaken and (t) what was the total cost of the analysis.
Mr Willis-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Formal Budget Submissions were referred to the Economic Planning Advisory Council (EPAC), as has been normal practice since 1984. EPAC published a summary of these Budget Submissions in its publication 'Strategy for the 1994-95 BudgetSubmissions from Business, Labour and Community Organisations' released in March 1994. The Treasury drew upon that publication, and upon some of the formal submissions, at various stages of the Budget process. Discussions were also held with some organisations and individuals associated with Submissions. However, no formal analyses of Submissions were undertaken.
Australia Council: Projects
(Question No. 1396)
Mr Slipper asked the Minister for Communications and the Arts, upon notice, on 24 August 1994:
(1) What projects did the Australia Council fund in the (a) City of Caloundra, Qld, and Queensland Shires of (b) Maroochy, (c) Noosa, (d) Caboolture, (e) Kilcoy, (t) Esk, (g) Rosalie, (h) Nanango and (i) Kingaroy in (i) 1989-90, (ii) 1990-91, (iii) 199192 and (v) 1993-94.
(2) What was the (a) expenditure upon, (b) location of and (c) purpose of each project referred to in part (1).
Mr Lee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) & (2) Information in respect of the matters referred to in the honourable member's question is

not readily available. The Australia Council does not keep records of grants by local government areas. It would be a major task to collect and assemble this information and I am not prepared to authorise the expenditure involved.
Department of Veterans' Affairs: Grants
(Question No. 1419)
Mr Richard Evans asked the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 24 August 1994:
(I) How many grants did the Minister's Department make to individuals or organisations in the electoral division of Cowan in (a) 1992-93 and (b) 1993-94.
(2) With respect to each grant made in (a) 199293 and (b) 1993-94, (i) under what program was it made, (ii) what was its value and (iii) what was the name of the recipient.
Mr Sciacca-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) There were no grants made to the electoral division of Cowan during 1992-93 or 1993-94.
(2) Not applicable.
Department of Veterans' Affairs: Grants
(Question No. 1441)
Mr Slipper asked the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 25 August 1994:
(I) How many grants did the Minister's Department make to individuals or organisations in the electoral divisions of (a) Fisher, (b) Fairfax and (c) Wide Bay in (i) 1990-91, (ii) 1991-92, (iii) 1992-93 and (iv) 1993-94.
(2) With respect of each grant made in the electoral divisions of (a) Fisher, (b) Fairfax and (c) Wide Bay in (i) 1990-91, (ii) 1991-92, (iii) 1992-93 and (iv) 1993-94 (A) under what program was it made, (B) what was its value and (C) what was the name of the recipient.
Mr Sciacca-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I)(a) Fisher
(i) 199O-91-nil
(ii) 1991-92-1
(iii) 1992-93-1
(iv) 1993-94-3
(b) Fairfax
(i) 1990-91-nil
(ii) 1991-92-nil
(iii) 1992-93-nil

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2855

(iv) 1993-94-nil (c) Wide Bay (i) 1990-91-1 (ii) 1991-92-1 (iii) 1992-93-2 (iv) 1993-94-3 (2)(a) Fisher (ii) 1991-92 JOINT VENTURES RSL War Veterans' Home, Bribie Island$17,500 (iii) 1992-93 JOINT VENTURES Caloundra RSL-$48,449 (iv) 1993-94 JOINT VENTURES Bribie Island RSL-$2,OOO Nanango RSL-$51,198 Caboolture Totally & Permanently Disabled Soldiers Assoc-$2,300 (c) Wide Bay (i) 1990-91 MINISTER FOR VETERANS' AFFAIRS DISCRETIONARY FUND Gayndah Sub Branch RSL-$I,OOO (ii) 1991-92
JOINT VENTURES Incapacitated Servicemen & Women Association Maryborough/Hervey Bay-$8,200 (iii) 1992-93 HOSTEL DEVELOPMENT Maryborough Veterans' Homes Association Incorporated-$30,OOO
MINISTER FOR VETERANS' AFFAIRS DISCRETIONARY FUND
Z Special Forces 'Back to Fraser' Commemoration Committee-$500

(iv) 1993-94
JOINT VENTURES Maryborough/Hervey Bay TPI-$1,270 Maryborough Legacy-$1,300 Incapacitated Servicemen & Women Assoc Maryborough/Hervey Bay-$9,31O
Training Programs (Question No. 1478) Mr Slipper asked the Minister for Employment, Education and Training, upon notice, on 1 September 1994: (1) How many persons registered as unemployed with the Commonwealth Employment Service (CES) and residing in (a) the electoral divisions of (i) Fisher, (ii) Fairfax and (iii) Wide Bay, (b) Caloundra, (c) Kawana, (d) Nambour, (e) Maroochydore and (f) Noosa, Qld, have been redirected into training programs established under initiatives announced in the Working Nation statement. (2) How wi\l the success of the training programs be measured. (3) Is a person undertaking a training program listed as unemployed with the CES; if not, how is the person classified.
Mr Crean-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The following table sets out the number of people who have commenced a labour market program between 4 July 1994, when a number of Working Nation initiatives started, and 30 September 1994.
The table identifies commencements in all labour market programs. Even programs focusing primarily on employment usually involve an element of training. Existing programs have been included as Working Nation provides additional places for unemployed jobseekers under these programs.
The Job Compact initiative, which provides individual case management and access to a range of labour market programs, involves an offer of a job placement for those unemployed for more than 18 months. Commencements in labour market programs for persons who are covered by the Job Compact are identified separately in the table.

2856

REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

Question
(a)(i) (a)(ii) (a)(iii)
(b) (c) (d) (e) (f)

Location
Fisher Division Fairfax Division Wide Bay Division
Caloundra Kawana Nambour Maroochydore Noosa

Corresponding CES Regions and Branches
Caboo1ture Region and Caloundra Branch Maroochydore and Nambour Regions and Noosa Branch Maryborough and Gympie Regions and Hervey Bay Branch Caloundra Branch Included in Caloundra Nambour Region Maroochydore Region Noosa Branch

Commencements

Job

Compact

All

254

663

426

951

414

966

139

409

212

447

214

504

83

176

(2) The success of training and other labour market programs will be measured through the Department of Employment, Education and Training's Post Program Monitoring Survey and through program evaluations.
The Post Program Monitoring Survey gathers information on the labour market status of clients around three months after they have left program assistance. The survey provides data on positive outcomes, that is, the proportion of clients in unsubsidised employment, education and training (other than that provided by the Department of Employment, Education and Training). In addition, it is planned to conduct further surveys six and twelve months after clients have left program assistance.
(3) The employment classification of CBS clients participating in labour market programs varies among programs. Where a program involves placement in an employment or wage subsidy program (Jobstart, National Training Wage, Jobskills, LEAP, NElS, New Work Opportunities), the client is no longer registered as unemployed with the CES. Participants in training programs such as Jobtrain and SkillShare currently remain registered as unemployed for the duration of the program, although many, if not all, would not be available for work while participating in the training program.
The Things that Matter: Treasury Costings
(Question No. 1513)
Mr Cameron asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 19 September 1994:
Have any staff from his office or Department been seconded to cost the Coalition policy set out in the document titled The Things that Matter; if so:
(a) how many; (b) what are their (i) names, (ii) titles and (iii) pay levels;

(c) are any office or departmental staff who are involved in the costing also members of the Australian Labor Party;
(d) has the cost to the Commonwealth of seconding the office and departmental staff to cost the Coalition's policy been calculated; if so, what is the cost; if not, will he ensure that the cost is calculated and made public; and
(e) have additional staff been employed in his office while permanent staff have worked on the costing; if so, what are the entitlements of each.
Mr Willis-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No staff from my office or the Treasury have been seconded to cost policy set out in The Things that Matter document.
Department of Housing and Regional Development: Stress Counselling
(Question No. 1585)
Mr Connolly asked the Minister for Housing and Regional Development, upon notice, on 10 October 1994:
(1) Did the Department or an agency for which the Minister has portfolio responsibility spend any sum on stress counselling services for Commonwealth employees or their families in 1993-94.
Mr Howe-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Not known. Counselling services are provided for Commonwealth employees and their families. However, due to privacy provisions, specific types of counselling cannot be identified.
Department of Finance: Stress Counselling
(Question No. 1589)
Mr Connolly asked the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 10 October 1994:

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

REPRESENTATIVES

2857

Did the Department or any agency for which the Minister has portfolio responsibility spend any sum on stress counselling services for Commonwealth employees or their families in 1993-94?
Mr Beazley-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In 1993-94, the Department of Finance spent $22,510 on Employee Assistance Programs for general counselling and $5,060 on additional counselling for excess officers. Separate figures for stress counselling are not available.
The Australian National Audit Office spent $6,500 on Employee Assistance Programs for general counselling and $10,935 on stress counselling services in 1993-94.
The Commonwealth Superannuation Administration spent $750 on stress counselling services in 1993-94.
Department of Industrial Relations: Stress Counselling
(Question No. 1596) Mr Connolly asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 10 October 1994: Did the Department or any agency for which the Minister has portfolio responsibility spend any sum on stress counselling services for Commonwealth employees or their families in 1993-94.
Mr Brereton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Department of Industrial Relations and some portfolio agencies have in place Employee Assistance Programs (EAP), provided by private sector counselling firms. These programs provide free, confidential counselling to staff and members of their immediate families for a wide range of personal and/or work related problems, including stress. The amounts spent on these EAPs in 1993/94 are as follows:
Department of Industrial Relations (includes Mfmnative Action Agency, Remuneration Tribunal and Defence Force Remuneration Tribunal)- $16,000
Australian Industrial Registry-$4,200 Comcare Australia-$12,000 Worksafe Australia $15,680 The Department of Industrial Relations also paid $3,536 for Critical Incident Debriefing after the incident at the Jolimont Centre on 29 November 1993. Following a selective tendering process the Trade Union Training Authority (TUTA) contracted consultants to deliver stress management services,

including delivery of workshops and individual counselling to staff during a period when the Authority was undergoing an extensive restructure and down sizing. The amount expended during 1993/94 was $31,984.66.
Department of Tourism: Stress Counselling
(Question No. 1600) Mr Connolly asked the Minister for Tourism, upon notice, on 10 October 1994: Did the Department or any agency for which the Minister has portfolio responsibility spend any sum on stress counselling services for Commonwealth employees or their families in 1993-94. Mr Lee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows: During 1993-94, Departmental staff had access to an employee assistance service for general counselling as required and this may have included stress counselling services. The cost of the service for 1993-94 was $6,750. The Australian Tourist Commission did not spend any sum on stress counselling services for its employees or families in 1993-94.
Department of Finance: Liaison Officers
(Question No. 1610) Mr Connolly asked the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 10 October 1994: How many departmental liaison officers are employed by the Minister and the Minister's Parliamentary Secretaries, where applicable, and what is the (a) cost, (b) place of work and (c) job description as given in the current ministerial directory for each officer. Mr Beazley-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows: There are no departmental liaison officers currently employed by the Minister for Finance.
Department of Tourism: Liaison Officers
(Question No. 1621)
Mr Connolly asked the Minister for Tourism, upon notice, on 10 October 1994:
How many departmental liaison officers are employed by the Minister and the Minister's Parliamentary Secretaries, where applicable, and what is the (a) cost, (b) place of work and (c) job description as given in the current ministerial directory of each officer.
Mr Lee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

2858

REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, 8 November 1994

The Minister for Tourism employs two departmental liaison officers:
(a) both receive an annual salary of $47,814 and an annual departmental liaison officer allowance of $10,392;
(b) both work at Parliament House, Canberra; (c) Departmental Liaison Officer.
Department of Finance: Staff under 21 years of age
(Question No. 1649) Mr Cameron asked the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 13 October 1994: What percentage of Australian Public Service staff was under the age of 21 in (a) 1960, (b) 1965,

(c) 1970, (d) 1975, (e) 1980, (t) 1985, (g) 1990, (h) 1991, (i) 1992 and (j) 1993.
Mr Beazley-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Department of Finance's Career History Database, the Continuous Record of Personnel holds data back to 1966 for permanent officers only. Therefore the above question has been answered from this point in time.
The percentage of APS permanent staff under the age of 21 as at June of selected years was:
1966-22.1 per cent; 1970-21.6 per cent; 1975-13.2 per cent; 1980-8.4 per cent; 19856.9 per cent; 1990-2.7 per cent; 1991-1.9 per cent; 1992-1.6 per cent; 1993-1.0 per cent


