House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 210, 1996 Tuesday, 19 November 1996
THIRTY-EIGHTH PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-EIGHTH PARLIAMENT
FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD
Governor General
His Excellency the Han. Sir William Patrick Deane, Companion of the Order of Australia, Knight of the Order of the British Empire
House of Representatives Officeholders
Speaker-The Han. Robert George Halverson OBE, MP Deputy Speaker-Mr Garry Barr Nehl MP
Second Deputy Speaker-Mr Harry Alfred Jenkins MP Members of the Speaker's Panel-The Han. Godfrey Harry Adams MP, Mr John Neil Andrew MP, the Han. Janice Ann Crosio MBE, MP, Mr Colin Hollis MP, Mr
Frank William Mossfield AM, MP, Mr Harry Vernon Quick MP, the Han. Nicholas Bruce Reid MP, Mrs Kathryn Jean Martin Sullivan MP,
Mr Warren Errol Truss MP and Mr Mark Anthony James Vaile MP Leader of the House-The Han. Peter Keaston Reith MP
Deputy Leader of the House-The Han. Peter John McGauran MP Manager of Opposition Business-The Han. Simon Findlay Crean MP
Party Leaders and Whips Liberal Party of Australia Leader-The Han. John Winston Howard MP Deputy Leader-The Han. Peter Howard Costello MP Chief Government Whip-Mr Alan Glyndwr Cadman MP Government Whips-Mr Fergus Stewart McArthur MP and Ms Patricia Mary Worth MP
National Party of Australia Leader-The Han. Timothy Andrew Fischer MP Deputy Leader-The Han. John Duncan Anderson MP
Whip-Mr Noel Jeffrey Hicks MP Assistant Whip-Mr Mark Anthony James Vaile MP
Australian Labor Party Leader-The Han. Kim Christian Beazley MP Deputy Leader-The Han. Gareth John Evans QC, MP Chief Opposition Whip-The Han. Leo Boyce McLeay MP Opposition Whips-Mr Edward Laurence Grace MP and Mr Rodney Weston Sawford MP

Members of the House of Representatives

Member
Abbott, Hon. Anthony John Adams, Hon. Godfrey Harry Albanese, Anthony Anderson, Hon. John Duncan Andren, Peter James Andrew, John Neil Andrews, Kevin James Anthony, Lawrence James Bailey, Frances Esther Baldwin, Hon. Peter Jeremy Baldwin, Robert Charles Barresi, Phillip Anthony Bartlett, Kerry Joseph Beazley, Hon. Kim Christian Beddall, Hon. David Peter Bevis, Hon. Archibald Ronald Billson, Bruce Fredrick Bishop, Hon. Bronwyn Kathleen Bradford, John Walter Brereton, Hon. Laurence John Broadbent, Russell Evan Brough, Malcolm Thomas Brown, Hon. Robert James Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Eoin Harrap Cameron, Ross Alexander Campbell, Graeme Causley, Hon. Ian Raymond Charles, Robert Edwin Cobb, Michael Roy Costello, Hon. Peter Howard Crean, Hon. Simon Findlay Crosio, Hon. Janice Ann, MBE Dondas, Hon. Nicholas Manuel, AM Downer, Hon. Alexander John Gosse Draper, Patricia Ellis, Annette Louise Elson, Kay Selma Entsch, Warren George Evans, Hon. Gareth John, QC Evans, Martyn John Evans, Richard David Conroy Fahey, Hon. John Joseph Ferguson, Laurie Donald Thomas Ferguson, Martin John, AM Filing, Paul Anthony Fischer, Hon. Timothy Andrew Fitzgibbon, Joel Andrew Forrest, John Alexander Gallus, Christine Ann Gambaro, Teresa Gash, Joanna Georgiou, Petro

Division
Warringah, NSW Lyons, Tas Grayndler, NSW Gwydir, NSW Calare, NSW Wakefield, SA Menzies, Vic Richmond, NSW McEwen, Vic Sydney, NSW Paterson, NSW Deakin, Vic Macquarie, NSW Brand, WA Rankin. Qld Brisbane, Qld Dunkley, Vic Mackellar, NSW McPherson, Qld Kingsford-Smith, NSW McMillan, Vic Longman, Qld Charlton, NSW Mitchell, NSW Stirling, WA Parramatta, NSW Kalgoorlie, WA Page, NSW LaTrobe, Vic Parkes, NSW Higgins, Vic Hotham, Vic Prospect, NSW Northern Territory Mayo, SA Makin, SA Namadgi, ACT Forde, Qld Leichhardt, Qld Holt, Vic Bonython, SA Cowan, WA Macarthur, NSW Reid, NSW Batman, Vic Moore, WA Farrer, NSW Hunter, NSW Mallee, Vic Hindmarsh, SA Petrie, Qld Gilmore, NSW Kooyong, Vic

Party
LP ALP ALP NP Ind. LP LP NP LP ALP LP LP LP ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP ALP LP LP ALP LP LP LP Ind. NP LP NP LP ALP ALP CLP LP LP ALP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP ALP ALP Ind. NP ALP NP LP LP LP LP

Members of the House of Representatives--continued

Member
Grace, Edward Laurence Grace, Elizabeth Jane Griffin, Alan Peter Halverson, Hon. Robert George, OBE Hanson, Pauline Lee Hardgrave, Gary Douglas Hatton, Michael John Hawker, David Peter Maxwell Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hockey, Joseph Benedict Holding, Hon. Allan Clyde Hollis, Colin Howard, Hon. John Winston Jeanes, Susan Barbara Jenkins, Harry Alfred Johnston, Ricky Jones, Hon. Ban-y Owen, AO Jull, Hon. David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Carl Kelly, De-Anne Margaret Kelly, Jackie Marie Kemp, Hon. David Alistair Kerr, Hon. Duncan James Colquhoun Langmore, John Vance Latham, Mark William Lawrence, Hon. Carmen Mary Lee, Hon. Michael John Lieberman, Hon. Louis Stuart Lindsay, Peter John Lloyd, James Eric McArthur, Fergus Stewart McClelland, Robert Bruce McDougall, Graeme Robert McGauran, Hon. Peter John McLachlan, Hon. Ian Murray, AO McLeay, Hon. Leo Boyce McMullan, Hon. Robert Francis Macklin, Jennifer Louise Marek, Paul Martin, Hon. Stephen Paul Melham, Daryl Miles, Hon. Christopher Gordon Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Allan Agapitos Morris, Hon. Peter Frederick Mossfield, Frank William, AM Moylan, Hon. Judith Eleanor Mutch, Stephen Bruce Nairn, Gary Roy Nehl, Garry Barr Nelson, Brendan John Neville, Paul Christopher Nugent, Peter Edward

Division
Fowler, NSW Lilley, Qld Bruce, Vic Casey, Vic Oxley, Qld Moreton, Qld B1axland, NSW Wannon, Vic Riverina, NSW North Sydney, NSW Melbourne Ports, Vic Throsby, NSW Bennelong, NSW Kingston, SA Scullin, Vic Canning, WA Lalor, Vic Fadden, Qld Kennedy, Qld Dawson, Qld Lindsay, NSW Goldstein, Vic Denison, Tas Fraser, ACT Werriwa, NSW Fremantle, WA Dobell, NSW Indi, Vic Herbert, Qld Robertson, NSW Corangamite, Vic Barton, NSW Griffith, Qld Gippsland, Vic Barker, SA Watson, NSW Canberra, ACT Jagajaga, Vic Capricornia, Qld Cunningham, NSW Banks, NSW Braddon, Tas Ryan, Qld Newcastle, NSW Shortland, NSW Greenway, NSW Pearce, WA Cook, NSW Eden-Monaro, NSW Cowper, NSW Bradfield, NSW Hinkler, Qld Aston, Vic

Party
ALP LP ALP LP Ind. LP ALP LP NP LP ALP ALP LP LP ALP LP ALP LP NP NP LP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP ALP LP NP LP ALP ALP ALP NP ALP ALP LP LP ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP NP LP NP LP

Members of the House of Representatives--continued

Member
O'Connor, Gavan Michael O'Keefe, Hon. Neil Patrick Price, Hon. Leo Roger Spurway Prosser, Hon. Geoffrey Daniel Pyne, Christopher Maurice Quick, Harry Vernon Randall, Donald James Reid, Hon. Nicholas Bruce Reith, Hon. Peter Keaston Rocher, Allan Charles Ronaldson, Michael John Clyde Ruddock, Hon. Philip Maxwell Sawford, Rodney Weston Scott, Hon. Bruce Craig Sercombe, Robert Charles Grant Sharp, Hon. John Randall Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahon Slipper, Peter Neil Smith, Anthony Charles Smith, Stephen Francis Smith, Hon. Warwick Leslie Somlyay, Alexander Michael Southcott, Andrew John Stone, Sharman Nancy Sullivan, Kathryn Jean Martin Tanner, Lindsay James Taylor, William Leonard Theophanous, Hon. Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. Andrew Peter Thomson, Kelvin John Truss, Warren Errol Tuckey, Charles Wilson Vaile, Mark Anthony James Vale, Danna Sue Wakelin, Barry Hugh West, Andrea Gail Williams, Hon. Daryl Robert, AM, QC Willis, Hon. Ralph Wilton, Gregory Stuart Wooldridge, Hon. Michael Richard Lewis Worth, Patricia Mary Zammit, Paul John

Division
Corio, Vic Burke, Vic Chifley, NSW Forrest, WA Sturt, SA Franklin, Tas Swan, WA Bendigo, Vic Flinders, Vic Curtin, WA Ballarat, Vic Berowra, NSW Port Adelaide, SA Maranoa, Qld Maribyrnong, Vic Hume, NSW New England, NSW Fisher, Qld Dickson, Qld Perth, WA Bass, Tas Fairfax, Qld Boothby, SA Murray, Vic Moncrieff, Qld Melbourne, Vic Groom, Qld Cal well, Vic Wentworth, NSW Wills, Vic Wide Bay, Qld O'Connor, WA Lyne, NSW Hughes, NSW Grey, SA Bowman, Qld Tangney, WA Gellibrand, Vic Isaacs, Vic Chisholm, Vic Adelaide, SA Lowe, NSW

Party
ALP ALP ALP LP LP ALP LP LP LP Ind. LP LP ALP NP
ALP
NP NP LP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP NP LP NP LP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP LP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS
ALP-Australian Labor Party; CLP-Country Liberal Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia; Ind.-Independent
Heads of Parliamentary Departments
Clerk of the Senate-H. Evans Clerk of the House of Representatives-L. M. Barlin AM
Parliamentary LibrarianPrincipal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Templeton Secretary. Joint House Department-M. W. Bolton

FIRST HOWARD MINISTRY

Prime Minister
Minister for Trade and Deputy Prime Minister
Treasurer
Minister for Primary Industries and Energy
Minister for the Environment and Leader of the Government in the Senate
Minister for Communications and the Arts and Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate
Minister for Industrial Relations, Leader of the House and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Public Service
Minister for Social Security and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Status of Women
Minister for Foreign Affairs
Minister for Industry, Science and Tourism and Vice President of the Executive Council
Minister for Defence
Minister for Transport and Regional Development
Minister for Health and Family Services
Minister for Finance
Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs

The Hon. John Winston Howard MP The Hon. Timothy Andrew Fischer MP The Hon. Peter Howard Costello MP The Hon. John Duncan Anderson MP Senator the Hon. Robert Murray Hill
Senator the Hon. Richard Kenneth Robert Alston
The Hon. Peter Keaston Reith MP
Senator the Hon. Jocelyn Margaret Newman
The Hon. Alexander John Gosse Downer MP The Hon. John Colinton Moore MP
The Hon. Ian Murray McLachlan AO, MP The Hon. John Randall Sharp MP
The Hon. Michael Richard Lewis Wooldridge MP
The Hon. John Joseph Fahey MP Senator the Hon. Amanda Eloise Vanstone

(The above ministers constitute the cabinet)

First Howard Ministry--continued

Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
Minister for Science and Technology and Deputy Leader of the House
Minister for Schools, Vocational Education and Training and Minister Assisting the Minister for Finance for Privatisation
Minister for Resources and Energy Minister for Small Business and Consumer
Affairs Minister for Family Services Minister for Defence Industry, Science and
Personnel Attorney-General and Minister for lustice Minister for Sport, Territories and Local
Government and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Sydney 2000 Games Minister for Veterans' Affairs Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs Minister for Administrative Services Assistant Treasurer Parliamentary Secretary (Cabinet) to the Prime Minister Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Trade and Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Primary Industries and Energy Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasurer and Manager of Government Business in the Senate Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Foreign Affairs Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social Security Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Health and Family Services Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Transport and Regional Development Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for the Environment

The Han. Philip Maxwell Ruddock MP The Han. Peter 10hn McGauran MP The Han. David Alistair Kemp, MP
Senator the Han. Warwick Raymond Parer The Han. Geoffrey Daniel Prosser MP The Hon. ludith Eleanor Moylan MP The Han. Bronwyn Kathleen Bishop MP The Hon. Daryl Robert Williams AM, QC, MP The Han. Warwick Leslie Smith MP
The Hon. Bruce Craig Scott MP Senator the Hon. 10hn loseph Herron The Hon. David Francis lull MP Senator the Hon. Charles Roderick Kemp The Han. Christopher Gordon Miles MP Senator the Hon. Nicholas Hugh Minchin Senator the Hon. David Gordon Cadell Brownhill
Senator the Han. Ian Gordon Campbell The Hon. Andrew Peter Thomson MP Senator the Hon. Grant Ernest 10hn Tambling Senator the Han. Robert Leslie Woods The Han. Anthony 10hn Abbott MP
The Hon. Michael 10hn Clyde Ronaldson MP Senator the Hall. Ian Douglas Macdonald

SHADOW MINISTRY

Leader of the Opposition

The Hon. Kim Christian Beazley MP

Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Shadow The Hon. Gareth John Evans QC, MP Treasurer

Leader of the Opposition in the Senate and Senator the Hon. John Philip Faulkner Shadow Minister for Social Security

Deputy Leader of the Opposition in the Senate Senator the Hon. Nicholas John Sherry and Shadow Minister for Finance and Superannuation

Shadow Minister for Industry and Regional The Hon. Simon Findlay Crean MP Development and Manager of Opposition Business

Shadow Minister for Industrial Relations and The Hon. Robert Francis McMullan MP Assistant to the Leader of the Opposition on Public Service Matters

Shadow Minister for Health

The Hon. Michael John Lee MP

Shadow Minister for the Environment, Shadow Minister for the Arts and Assistant to the Leader of the Opposition on the Status of Women

The Hon. Carmen Mary Lawrence MP

Shadow Minister for Primary Industries and Senator the Hon. Robert Lindsay Collins Northern Australia and Territories

Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

The Hon. Laurence John Brereton MP

Shadow Minister for Education and Youth AfThe Hon. Peter Jeremy Baldwin MP fairs

Shadow Minister for Commerce and Small Senator the Hon. Peter Francis Salmon Cook Business

Shadow Attorney-General and Minister for Senator the Hon. Nick Bolkus Justice

Shadow Minister for Employment and Training Mr Martin John Ferguson MP

Shadow Minister for Defence

The Hon. Archibald Ronald Bevis MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Assistant The Hon. Duncan James Colquhoun Kerr MP to the Leader of the Opposition on Multicultural Affairs

Shadow Minister for Communications

Senator the Hon. Christopher Cleland Schacht

Shadow Minister for Veterans' Affairs and ShadThe Hon. Stephen Paul Martin MP ow Minister for Sport and Tourism

Shadow Minister for Transport

Mr Lindsay James Tanner MP

Shadow Minister for Resources and Energy

The Hon. Neil Patrick O'Keefe MP

Shadow Minister for the Aged, Family and Ms Jennifer Louise Macklin MP Community Services

Shadow Minister for Trade

Mr Stephen Francis Smith MP

Shadow Ministry-continued

Shadow Minister for Competition Policy, Assistant to the Shadow Treasurer and Shadow Minister for Local Government
Shadow Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Assistant to the Shadow Foreign Minister on Arms Control
Shadow Minister for Science and Information Technology
Shadow Minister for Administrative Services Shadow Minister for Consumer Affairs and
Assistant to the Shadow Minister for Health

Mr Mark William Latham MP
Mr Daryl Melham MP
Mr Martyn John Evans MP Mr Laurie Donald Thomas Ferguson MP Senator Belinda Jane Neal

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDER AFFAIRS: Mr Lieberman (Chair), Mr Albanese, Mr Campbell, Mr Dondas, Mr Entsch, Mr Holding, Mr Katter, Mr Lloyd, Mr Marek, Mr Melham, Dr Nelson, Mr Pyne, Mr Quick, Mr A. C. Smith.
COMMUNICATIONS, TRANSPORT AND MICROECONOMIC REFORM: Mr M. A. J. Vaile (Chair), Mr Albanese, Mr R. A. Cameron, Mrs Crosio, Mr Hardgrave, Mr Lindsay, Mr McArthur, Mr McDougall, Mr P. F. Morris, Mr Neville, Mr Randall, Mr Tanner, Mr Wakelin, Mr Willis.
EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Mr Charles (Chair), Mr P. J. Baldwin, Mr Barresi, Mr Bradford, Mr Brough, Mrs Elson, Mr M. J. Ferguson, Mrs Gash, Mr Griffin, Mr Marek, Mr Mossfield, Mr Neville, Mr Pyne, Mr Sawford.
ENVIRONMENT, RECREATION AND THE ARTS: Mr Truss (Chair), Mr Anthony, Mr Billson, Mr E. H. Cameron, Mrs Crosio, Mr Entsch, Mr Hockey, Mr Jenkins, Miss J. M. Kelly, Dr Lawrence, Mr McDougall, Mr Martin, Dr Southcott.
FAMILY AND COMMUNITY AFFAIRS: Mr Slipper (Chair), Mr R. A. Cameron, Ms Ellis, Mrs Elson, Mr Forrest, Mrs E. J. Grace, Mrs D. M. Kelly, Mr Kerr, Ms Macklin, Mr A. A. Morris, Dr Nelson, Mr Quick, Mrs D. S. Vale, Mrs West.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION: Mr Hawker (Chair), Mr Albanese, Mr Anthony, Mrs Bailey, Mr Causley, Mrs Gallus, Mr Hockey, Mr Latham, Mr McMullan, Mr Mutch, Dr Nelson, Mr Pyne, Mr Willis, Mr Wilton.
HOUSE: The Speaker, Mr Hollis, Mr McLeay, Mr Nehl, Mr Sawford, Mr Somlyay, Mrs Sullivan.
INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Mr R. D. C. Evans (Chair), Mrs Bailey, Mr R. C. Baldwin, Mr Beddall, Mr M. J. Evans, Mr Forrest, Ms Gambaro, Mr Jenkins, Mrs Johnston, Mr A. A. Morris, Mr Nugent, Mr O'Connor, Mr Reid, Mi Zammit.
LEGAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS: Mr K. J. Andrews (Chair), Mr J. N. Andrew, Mr Barresi, Mrs E. J. Grace, Mr Hatton, Mr Kerr, Mr McClelland, Mr Melham, Mr Mutch, Mr Randall, Mr Sinclair, Dr Southcott, Mr A. C. Smith, Mr K. J. Thomson.
LIBRARY: The Speaker, Mr Adams, Mr Barresi, Mr Causley, Mr Filing, Mr Jones, Mr Nugent.
MEMBERS' INTERESTS: Mr Somlyay (Chair), Mr K. J. Andrews, Mr E. L. Grace, Mr Jenkins, Mr Martin, Mr Neville, Mr Taylor.
PRIMARY INDUSTRIES, RESOURCES AND RURAL AND REGIONAL AFFAIRS: Mrs Bailey (Chair), Mr Adams, Mr Andren, Mr R. C. Baldwin, Mr Broadbent, Mr Causley, Mr Cobb, Mr Crean, Mr Fitzgibbon, Mr McLeay, Mr Nairn, Mr Ronaldson, Mrs Stone, Mr Wakelin.
PRIVILEGES: Mr E. H. Cameron (Chair), the Leader of the House or his nominee, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr K. J. Andrews, Mr Brown, Mr Holding, Mr McLeay, Mr Sawford, Mr Somlyay, Mrs Sullivan, Mr M. A. J. Vaile.
PROCEDURE: Mrs Sullivan (Chair), Mr J. N. Andrew, Mr Cadman, Mr Martin, Mr Mossfield, Mr K. J. Thomson, Mr Reid, Mr Truss.
PUBLICATIONS: Mr Leiberman (Chair), Mr Cobb, Ms Ellis, Mr R. D. C. Evans, Mr Griffin, Mr Martin, Mr Mutch.
SELECTION: Mr Nehl (Chair), Mr J. N. Andrew, Mr Cadman, Mr Filing, Mr E. L. Grace, Mr Hicks, Mr Hollis, Mr McArthur, Mr McLeay, Mr Sawford, Mr M. A. J. Vaile, Ms Worth.

JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN SECURITY INTELLIGENCE ORGANIZATION: Senator MacGibbon (Presiding Member), Mr Hicks, Mr Sercombe, Mr Somlyay, Mr Zammit, Senator J. A. L. Macdonald, Senator Ray.
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS: The Speaker (Chair), The President, Mr Adams, Mr R. D. C. Evans, Mr Hicks, Mr Lindsay, Mr Martin, Senator Knowles, Senator West.
CORPORATIONS AND SECURITIES: Senator Chapman (Chair), Mrs Johnston, Mrs D. M. Kelly, Mr Latham, Mr McLeay, Mr Sinclair, Senator Cook, Senator Cooney, Senator Gibson, Senator Murray.
NATIONAL CRIME AUTHORITY: Mr Bradford (Chair), Mr Filing, Mr Sercombe, Mr Truss, Mrs West, Senator Conroy, Senator Gibbs, Senator I. D. Macdonald, Senator McGauran, Senator Stott Despoja.
NATIVE TITLE AND THE ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDER LAND FUND: Senator Abetz (Chair), Mr Causley, Mr Dondas, Mr Entsch, Mr Melham, Mr Quick, Senator Ellison, Senator Evans, Senator Kernot, Senator Reynolds.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS: Mr Somlyay (Chair), Mr Anthony, Mr Beddall, Mr Broadbent, Mr L. D. T. Ferguson, Mr Fitzgibbon, Mr Georgiou, Mr Griffin, Mrs Stone, Mr M. A. J. Vaile, Senator Crowley, Senator Gibson, Senator Mackay, Senator Short, Senator Watson.
PUBLIC WORKS: Mr J. N. Andrew (Chair), Mr R. D. C. Evans, Mr Forrest, Mr E. L. Grace, Mr Hatton, Mr Hollis, Senator Calvert, Senator Ferguson, Senator Murphy.
JOINT COMMITTEES
ELECTORAL MATTERS: Mr Cobb (Chair), Mr L. D. T. Ferguson, Mr Griffin, Mr McDougall, Mr Nairn, Senator Abetz, Senator Bourne, Senator Conroy, Senator Minchin.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS, DEFENCE AND TRADE: Mr Sinclair (Chair), Mr R. C. Baldwin, Mr Bevis, Mr Bradford, Mr Brereton, Mr Brough, Mr Dondas, Mrs Gallus, Mr Georgiou, Mr E. L. Grace, Mr Hicks, Mr Hollis, Mr Jones, Mr Lieberman, Mr Nugent, Mr Price, Mr Slipper, Mr S. F. Smith, Mr Taylor, Ms Worth, Senator Bolkus, Senator Bourne, Senator Chapman, Senator Childs, Senator Forshaw, Senator Harradine, Senator J. A. L. Macdonald, Senator MacGibbon, Senator Margetts, Senator Panizza, Senator Schacht, Senator Short.
MIGRATION: Mrs Gallus (Chair), Ms Gambaro, Mr Holding, Mr Kerr, Mr Martin, Mr Sinclair, Senator McKiernan, Senator Stott Despoja, Senator Tierney, Senator Troeth.
NATIONAL CAPITAL AND EXTERNAL TERRITORIES: Senator McGauran (Chair), Ms Ellis, Mrs Johnston, Mr Nehl, Mr Neville, Dr Southcott, Senator Allison, Senator Colston, Senator Ferguson, Senator Lundy.
TREATIES: Mr Taylor (Chair), Mr Adams, Mr Bartlett, Mr L. D. T. Ferguson, Mr Hardgrave, Mr McClelland, Mr A. C. Smith, Mr Tmss, Mr Tuckey, Senator Abetz, Senator Bourne, Senator Cooney, Senator Denman, Senator Ellison, Senator Neal, Senator O'Chee.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk of the Senate-H. Evans Deputy Clerk of the Senate-A. Lynch Clerk-Assistant (Table)-J. Vander Wyk Clerk-Assistant (COIporate Management)-P. O'Keeffe Clerk-Assistant (Procedure)-R. Laing Clerk-Assistant (Committees)-c. J. C. Elliott Acting Usher of the Black Rod-A Griffiths
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Deputy Clerk of the House-I. C. Harris
First Clerk Assistant-B. C. Wright Clerk Assistant (Procedure)-I. C. Cochran
Clerk Assistant (Table)-J. W. Pender Serjeant-at-Arms-D. Elder
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Templeton Chief Hansard Reporter-B. A. Harris
Assistant Chief Reporter (Committees)-Y. M. Barrett Assistant Chief Reporter (Chambers)-M. A. R. McGregor
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-M. W. Bolton

REPRESENTATIVES

7047

Tuesday, 19 November 1996
Mr SPEAKER (Hon. R. G. Halverson OBE) took the chair at 2.00 p.m., and read prayers.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
Russian Space Probe
Mr BEVIS-My question is addressed to the Minister for Defence. Is the Minister aware that Emergency Management Australia was aware of the Mars probe emergency by 7 a.m. or possibly earlier yesterday morning? As the responsible minister was he or his office advised by EMA of the Mars probe emergency? If they were advised, at what time were they advised and at what time did the Minister or his office inform the Prime Minister or his office? If the Minister's office was advised and did not inform the Prime Minister or his office, why did they not? Finally, did not the failure of you and your department to provide a timely brief cause significant embarrassment when President Clinton rang yesterday?
Mr McLACHLAN-I think the honourable member knows all the answers to those questions himself. Nevertheless, I will go through them with him. I have seen some reports in the media as well which claim that the ADF and Emergency Management Australia were placed on yellow alert without reference to the government. Many of the facts in those reports were wrong.
The facts are these: at 5.44 a.m. yesterday morning, the ADF Command Centre received a general alert from US sources that the Russian Mars satellite was likely to re-enter the atmosphere and there was no indication of the impact area. At 6.00 a.m., the Command Centre was alerted to a predicted impact in the Timor Sea. This was passed to EMA which, as you know, coordinates responses to emergency situations.
At 6.19 a.m., the Command Centre was advised of the possibility that radioactive material was aboard the probe. This was passed to EMA at 6.35 a.m. The likely presence of plutonium batteries was reported and

passed to EMA at 7.50 a.m. On confirmation of radioactive content, EMA staff initiated preparatory actions in accordance with the Australian contingency plan for space re-entry debris.
When it became clear to American authorities the potential for impact in northern Australia, which was about 12 to 14 minutes after 7.50 a.m., the President of the United States telephoned the Prime Minister-that was just after 8 o'clock-to advise him of the prediction of a possible impact. The USA's top man passed that information to us as soon as he got it. As a result of the call, the Prime Minister convened the National Security Committee of Cabinet. Subsequently, the ADF was placed on alert, state yellow, at 8.50 a.m. and EMA, which is a separate process, at 9.15 a.m.
The ADF and EMA then initiated the ADF's support plan and EMA's management plan. Following this, the Prime Minister gave a press conference in which he advised of the possibility of impact, but warned of the unpredictability of the final impact points. In accordance with the existing plan, the situation was monitored through the morning. There was continued liaison with the ADF and the appropriate state and Commonwealth authorities.
Mr Bevis-When was your office told?
Mr McLACHLAN-We will come to that. Later in the morning, as the time of impact came closer and the likely potential impact in Australia was identified as the Tibooburra region, a decision was made to alert the region through the state authority. In fact, I instructed the director of EMA to do that. That process was already taking place. Fortunately, as everybody knows, the satellite passed over the Australian territory and fell into the south-west Pacific 1,300 kilometres west of Santiago.
I might say that at various stages of the morning the impact point was the Timor Sea, east central Australia, south-east Queensland, the Timor Sea again, Tibooburra and the West Darling area, the south-east of New Zealand and, finally, 1,300 kilometres west of Santiago.

7048

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

Mr Melham-It sounds like the direction the Liberal Party is taking-all over the place.
Mr Howard-Yes, we are all over the place.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! We might impact on the member for Banks in a moment.
Mr McLACHLAN-It is a very good question and I am delighted you asked it. I would like to emphasise that the procedures for implementing the ADF plan and the EMA plan were appropriate and effective, but I acknowledge-
Mr Martin Ferguson-It took you a lifetime to get to it.
Mr McLACHLAN-If you want the answer to the question you have to listen.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr McLACHLAN-This is very important information. I acknowledge that there should have been a more timely information flow to ministers.
Mr Martin Ferguson-He thinks he is opening against the West Indies.
Mr McLACHLAN-Well, I have done it. And now that we are on that subject, I point out that the important thing to remember when they are bowling bouncers is to make sure your back foot does not move towards the square leg umpire.
Mr Tanner-The trouble is you would not play with a helmet.
Mr McLACHLAN-I did not play with a helmet either, exactly. There should have been a more timely flow of information to ministers. It seems that with the press of events duty officers got on with their duties, focused their attentions downwards on operations at the expense of fully reporting upwards. That I acknowledge.
Reporting shortcomings will be remedied. I have asked the CDF to review procedures and set in train appropriate reporting systems both internally and with the United States. However, I want to thank all involved who got on with the job and emphasise that the predictability of the impact points of wandering space material is, as yet, an inexact science. The next time we will make sure that

the President of the United States rings you first so that you get the information.
Member for Fremantle
Mr EOIN CAMERON-My question is addressed to the Attorney-General and Minister for Justice. I understand from press reports that there has been a claim by former solicitors of Dr Lawrence that the Commonwealth should pay all of Dr Lawrence's legal costs in relation to the Marks Royal Commission and her challenges to it. Can the minister advise the House whether it is correct that there has been a claim by former solicitors and, if so, what the government proposes to do about the claim?
Mr WILLIAMS-I thank the honourable member for his question.
Mr Martin Ferguson-We did not think you would get into the gutter, Daryl. You are in the gutter now, Daryl.
Mr SPEAKER-The member for Batman.
Mr Latham-They put Daryl up to this.
Mr Melham-There must be an election in the air.
Mr SPEAKER-The member for Banks and the member for Werriwa are interjecting far too much.
Mr Howard-John Langmore has resigned.
Mr SPEAKER-Order!
Mr WILLIAMS-I can confirm that there has been a claim by the former solicitors of the honourable member for Fremantle for payment by the Commonwealth of all of the outstanding legal costs incurred in representing her. Costs in relation to the commission fall into three categories. First, there are the costs incurred in representing the member before the Marks Royal Commission. Secondly, there are the costs of her court challenges to the appointment of the royal commission. Thirdly, there are the costs of the Western Australian government which the member has been ordered to pay by courts in respect of the failed challenges.
In opposition, the coalition agreed to payment of such of Dr Lawrence's legal costs in relation to the royal commission as were not paid by the Western Australian government.

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7049

The coalition did not agree to the payment of costs, as this was the reason stated for the

any costs of challenges to the validity of the defence fund being set up.

royal commission. The then government agreed in this House to a coalition amendment reducing the amount of money to be appropriated by parliament to pay for Dr Lawrence's legal costs by the amount of those court costs. It was upon this basis that parliament appropriated moneys to pay for the royal commission costs only. In the Senate, the wording of the appropriation was amended explicitly to exclude the payment by the

Additionally there are questions about any interest on those funds and whether administration charges have been made. The fund was set up to pay the costs and should be applied accordingly. If any payment has been made from the fund, it would be expected the member for Fremantle would make the appropriate declaration on the register of members' interests.

Commonwealth of any costs other than the royal commission costs.

Imports Mr GARETH EVANS-My question is

In considering the claim by the former addressed to the Treasurer. Has the Treasurer

solicitors, this government intends to comply seen today' s import figures showing that

with parliament's decision to approve paycapital imports fell by seven per cent in the

ment of only so much of the costs as were last month and are down by 15 per cent in the

reasonably incurred in appearing before the first four months of this financial year com-

Marks Royal Commission. Not all of those pared with the final four months of last year?

costs were in fact paid before the appropriDoesn't this slump in capital imports further

ation approved by parliament lapsed on 30 confirm that the economy is flat and that the

June 1996. The previous government did pay government's forecasts for business invest-

an amount of $319,927.

ment in plant and equipment and for econom-

In these circumstances, the government intends to introduce a new appropriation bill seeking parliament's approval for the payment of approximately $50,000 to the solicitors. This amount represents the balance of the royal commission costs after making allowance for the amount of those royal commis-

ic growth are going to have to be revised downwards?
Mr COSTELLO-The answer to the first question is yes. The answer to the second question is no. And the answer to the Deputy Leader is: your attempts to talk down the Australian economy are without foundation.

sion costs for which we understand the Western Australian government will accept responsibility.

Mr GARETH EVANS-Has the Treasurer seen the bulletin of BT this morning saying-
Mr SPEAKER-What is the point of your

The government intends not to pay any of rising?

the court costs, in accordance with parliament's previous explicit decisions in relation to those costs. We understand that these costs were to have been paid by the Carmen Lawrence Defence Fund, which was set up spe-

Mr GARETH EVANS-I am asking him a supplementary question, in light of his last comment. I ask whether he has seen the bulletin from the BT this morning saying:

cifically to pay those costs which the parliaIt is bad news to the extent that it constitutes one ment refused to authorise the Commonwealth more sign of a soft economy. . .

to pay. I understand this fund is administered Mr SPEAKER-The supplementary

by the ALP national secretariat, and I have question is out of order.

seen a media report suggesting that the fund has raised about $240,000 from public donations. As far as I am aware, no payment has been made by the fund. No doubt the Austral-

Mr Gareth Evans-Are you the only one in step on this issue of talking down the economy?

Ian public and the donors will ask why these Mr SPEAKER-The question is out of

funds have not been used to pay those wurt order.

7050

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

ANZUS Alliance
Mr SINCLAIR-I ask a question of the Minister for Foreign Affairs. The minister would be aware of recent questioning of the value and relevance of Australia's security alliance with the United States. Would the minister advise the House of, firstly, the ongoing significance and strength of the ANZUS alliance; and, secondly, the contribution to regional security of the Sydney declaration concluded between Australia and the United States in July this year?
Mr DOWNER-I thank the right honourable member for New England for his question. The government's position on these matters is very clear. The principal aim of the government's foreign policy is, of course, to ensure that Australia remains firmly committed to strong and productive relations with countries in our own region, but also to support a continued and close relationship with the United States of America. We want to go on developing that relationship so that it remains one that works effectively and to the benefit of both sides, as well as to the region as a whole.
The Prime Minister has said on several occasions that we should not have to choose between enjoying close and constructive relations with the United States and close and constructive relationships with the countries of our region. Indeed, the two should be mutually reinforcing.
The critical significance of maintaining ongoing United States engagement in the region is widely recognised and needs to be properly understood. It is widely recognised and supported within Australia but, importantly, by our key regional neighbours. The Singapore foreign minister, for example, in a speech he made in the United States in April said:
. . . the United States remains an indispensable factor of any configuration for peace, security and economic growth in the Asia Pacific.
The right honourable member asked about the Sydney declaration made at the time of the AUSMIN talks in Sydney in July of this year. That declaration's objective was really perfectly clear. The Sydney declaration affirmed the two countries' intention to work to-

gether-and with others in the region-to promote common security interests. The Sydney declaration is intended as an instrument to project a regional security environment which promotes stability and prosperity. But, importantly, it has to be understood that the Sydney declaration is not about the containment of any country. The Sydney declaration is about enhancing the cause of regional security cooperation and is an important component in the overall security architecture of the region, which includes a web of bilateral and multilateral security arrangements, as well as the multilateral forum, the ASEAN regional forum.
The government is committed to maintaining direct engagement with Asia. At the same time, we recognise that economically and militarily the United States is-and I am sure will remain-a major player in the region. We want to keep it that way. The United States underwrites regional growth and security as no other country can. For that reason, policies to promote its presence and to promote strong relations between the United States and East Asia remain a high priority for this government.
China
Mr BRERETON-In the light of the minister's answer, I ask him the following questions: is it the case that the government has asked the Chinese government to repudiate articles in the official Chinese press critical of Australia's foreign policy? What has been the response of the Chinese government to these representations? Is it also the case that planned visits to China by Australian ministers have been postponed to unspecified dates next year? Which planned visits have been postponed and has this been done at the behest of the Chinese government? What is the minister's explanation for the deterioration of Australia's relationship with China during the 8V2 months that he has held the position as foreign minister of our nation?
Mr DOWNER-Let me just say that Australia's relationship with China is of great importance to us and our multifaceted relations abroad and of substantial benefit to both sides. At the same time, it is true that we do have different perspectives on some issues

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7051

from time to time, which is not surprising, given our different historic circumstances and political systems.
I don't think it is in the interests of the bilateral relationship and, importantly, I don't think it is in Australia's national interest for me to use this opportunity now to labour those differences. They have been well discussed; they have been analysed-sometimes accurately; often inaccurately-in the media and elsewhere. As I have said, I don't think there is great value in continuing down that path.
I would simply say that the Australian government does not pursue a policy of the containment of China. We have not and we will not. We do not believe that is an appropriate direction for regional security policy, let alone Australia's own domestic policy. Suggestions from anywhere that the Sydney declaration and the alliance we have with the United States are somehow directed towards China is an analysis which is simply wrong. I made that point clear in answer to the previous question.
I will say two things: one is that you obviously just think relationships with China and with countries in the region are some sort of game for the Labor Party, which underlines, I suppose, the relevance deprivation syndrome that you are all suffering from.
The big issue here is that of course there have been some difficulties in the bilateral relationship and, as I have said, of course they are well-known. But, importantly, the Prime Minister will be meeting with the Chinese President, Jiang Zemin, during the APEC summit meeting. I look to that meeting and beyond that to the development of a successful and constructive relationship.
Australian-New Zealand Studies Centre, Georgetown University
Mr ANDREWS-My question is also directed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. In light of the visit by President Clinton and the special relationship between the United States of America and Australia, which the right honourable member for New England referred to, could the minister comment on the significance of the Australian and New

Zealand Studies Centre, recently established at Georgetown University, in Washington DC-the university that President Clinton studied at-in promoting relations between Australia and the United States?
Mr DOWNER-I thank the honourable member for his question. I know that one of the reasons why he asked the question was not only his particular interest in educational issues and the promotion of education about Australia around the world, including in the United States, but also President Clinton himself was at one time a student at Georgetown University. So, on the eve of his visit to Australia, it is entirely appropriate that the honourable member should ask a question about the Australian-New Zealand Centre at Georgetown University.
The centre was established in 1994. Georgetown University, as members will know, is one of the most prestigious educational institutions in the United States. There are very strong linkages between Georgetown University and the Washington community, government, academic, business and media sectors. It was therefore seen as a strong choice to situate the Australian centre.
Although the centre is relatively new, it has the potential to be a major instrument in the advancement of Australia's standing and profile in the heartland of government in the United States. It has so far received some seed funding from the Australian government and that has been aimed at putting the centre onto a sound financial footing to enable it to attract long-term support from non-government sources so in the end it becomes a selfsustaining entity.
Let me also add that both I and the Deputy Prime Minister have visited the centre during this year, as I know others from the Australian Embassy have as well. The embassy itself, in addition, has provided a range of assistance to the centre.
In conclusion, my colleague the Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs is responsible for administering the program of overseas studies, which is the channel for this funding. She is best placed to provide any details on further funding from the government for the centre. The centre is

7052

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

certainly proving to be a valuable contribution to the bilateral relationship because it does something that is always important in international relations-that is, to advance people to people contacts and understanding not just to depend on ministerial contacts and government to government contacts.
Universities
Mr BEAZLEY-My question is addressed to the Prime Minister. I refer the Prime Minister to his answer in this place yesterday when he said:
The higher education system that you are defending is a system that duds the low income earners of Australia.
Is the Prime Minister aware that there has been a collapse in university enrolments around the nation but, most particularly, in those universities such as the University of Western Sydney that draw a high proportion of their students from the families of battlers-precisely the universities which in recent years under Labor began to see an influx of students from low income families redressing the historical bias in favour of students from wealthy families? Is he aware that for this university-that is, the University of Western Sydney-science and technology applications are reported to have fallen by 14 per cent and for engineering by 41 per cent? Is it not the case that the people he claims to represent no longer get a decent education because of the harsh measures this government introduced in the budget?
Mr HOWARD-I, of course, reject the claim made at the tail end of the Leader of the Opposition's question. The point that I sought to advance yesterday, and I repeat again today, is that an education system which seeks to minimise as much as possible any direct contributions from students and funds that subsidy from the state inevitably falls far more heavily on low income earners than middle or high income earners. I think that is a self-evident point.
Second Sydney Airport
Mrs VALE-My question is directed to the Minister for Sport, Territories and Local Government representing the Minister for the Environment. Can the minister advise the

House of the role to be played by the independent environmental auditor, appointed last week by the Minister for the Environment, to oversee the EIS being conducted on the proposed second airport for Sydney?
Mr WARWICK SMITH-I thank the member for Hughes for her question. She obviously has a keen interest in issues relating to the prospect of the airport. The matter to which the member for Hughes refers is the recent decision by the government to take steps to appoint a special environmental auditor to oversee the environmental impact study relating to the choice of Sydney's second airport at Badgerys Creek or Holsworthy.
This is the product of a detailed report, which members will be aware of, into the whole issue of Sydney airport where there was a recommendation made that there be a special environmental impact auditor appointed, and that recommendation has been accepted by the government. I am pleased to indicate to the House, following that recommendation's acceptance by the government, that the Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation has been chosen to determine and set up a special team to audit the whole process of the environmental impact study for the Holsworthy or Badgerys Creek proposals.
Mr Latham-Is that because of the ravines-similar terrain?
Mr WARWICK SMITH-This is the first time that this has been undertaken by a government in this country and it adds significantly to the value of the EIS process. I would point out to those members who are interjecting that this is a bipartisan recommendation from the Senate committee.
The report will also appoint a series of specialists, one of whom is Rosemary Howe, who has an extensive experience in the field of community negotiations and mediation. She will be directly responsible for community consultations through this very important process.
Mr Adams-So where will the airport go?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The member for Lyons! If you are going to interject, do so from your place.

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7053

Mr WARWICK SMITH-Many members will be aware of SMEC-the Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation-and the wonderful reputation it enjoys in this country. For 25 years it has contributed its expertise to multi-disciplinary consultative and environmental assessments and its project management capacities are legendary. The company has been responsible for project work and management for the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and AusAID and is currently responsible for some of the largest infrastructure projects in the world-in China, Pakistan and Malaysia.
As I have said, this is the first time this has been undertaken. It is an indication of this government's determination to consult widely to make sure that the EIS process will satisfy the electors of the member for Hughes and, of course, all members in the House who need and recognise it as we go forward on the selection of the second Sydney airport that every opportunity has been taken for the widest possible consultation.
My colleague the Minister for Transport and Regional Development is involved in this process extensively as well, as indeed is the member for North Sydney, who has been conducting a range of detailed consultation processes. Quite clearly, this government will listen to the community and this decision is evidence of that fact.
Migrants
Ms HANSON-I direct my question to the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security. Are newly arrived migrants who have been in Australia for fewer than 26 weeks-
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order!
Mr Albanese-You are a disgrace, Hanson.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! Members on my left!
Ms HANSON-Gentiemen, please! We are here to represent the people of Australia.
Mr SPEAKER-The member for Oxley!
Mr Griffin-Get into them.
Mr SPEAKER-The member for Bruce!

Ms HANSON-Are newly arrived migrants who have been in Australia for fewer than 26 weeks and, therefore, unable to claim unemployment benefits eligible for special benefits? How many newly arrived migrants who are ineligible for unemployment benefits are currently in receipt of special benefits? How much has the Australian taxpayer had to pay to provide special benefits for newly arrived migrants?
Mr RUDDOCK-The information that the honourable member seeks is not information that I would have readily available to me to be able to answer in detail. But the government does place considerable importance on ensuring that those people who come to Australia both through the economic categories for migration and particularly through the family reunion program where sponsorship is an important element of it do not have access to benefits. That is something that ought not to be encouraged.
We have sought with legislation that we have introduced to ensure longer preclusion periods than have been available before. We have also sought approval by way of extension of the assurance of support arrangements through regulation to be able to contain some of the public expenditure in this area and, where public expenditure was incurred, we have sought to be able to recoup it from those people who are benefiting from the sponsorship arrangements. One of the aspects that I regret is that the opposition saw fit to oppose those measures in the Senate. It will lead to increased costs that taxpayers will have to bear.
Child Sex Abuse
Mrs DRAPER-My question is addressed to the Attorney-General and Minister for Justice. In relation to my previous question on 17 September 1996 concerning sexual abuse of children and paedophilia, I wish to commend the Attorney-General in announcing the establishment of a national register of paedophiles.
Mr SPEAKER-Let's get on with the question.
Mrs DRAPER-My question is: why, in the Commonwealth Law Enforcement Board's

7054

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

recent 1995-96 report, was there no identification of child sex abuse as a Commonwealth law enforcement priority in its law enforcement planning document? Could the minister advise the House what action he proposes to take to remedy these omissions from the Commonwealth law enforcement priorities?
Mr WILLIAMS-I thank the honourable member for Makin for her question. Yes, I do remember her previous one. I would remind her that, in response to that, I pointed out that primary responsibility for child sexual abuse criminal investigations rests with the states rather than with the Commonwealth, which is a partial explanation as to why she did not see it feature in the law enforcement planning document to which she referred. But let me say that the Commonwealth is not shirking its responsibilities. As I also mentioned on 17 September, the responsibilities in respect of child abuse extend beyond my portfolio. The Minister for Family Services also has responsibility and has recently through the Community Services Ministers Council taken steps to establish a national framework dealing with the subject.
In relation to the national paedophile index that the honourable member for Makin mentioned, the Australasian Police Ministers Council at its meeting on Friday last week endorsed in principle the report from the Australian Bureau of Criminal Intelligence. The proposal is for the establishment of an index to be administered by the bureau, with the object of maximising cooperation between law enforcement agencies in this area.
The establishment of an index gives rise to some privacy and civil liberties issues which must be balanced against other competing interests, including the protection of children. It is anticipated that access to the index will only be available to law enforcement agencies. It has been determined that there should also be a record of suspected paedophiles on the index. I can understand that, without careful consideration, this might give rise to concern. Law enforcement agencies often gather information on persons suspected of criminal offences. It is difficult to see how they could undertake an investigation at all if

they did not. But the proposed inclusion of suspects on the index does have to be dealt with especially carefully in relation to privacy.
The matter will be advanced by the Bureau of Criminal Intelligence. It is anticipated that a report will be produced to the heads of criminal intelligence meeting in March 1997 and that in due course it will report to the Police Ministers Council.
Higher Education Contribution Scheme
Mr SAWFORD--My question is addressed to the Prime Minister. I remind the Prime Minister that his education minister, Senator Vanstone, has said that a $12 a week increase in a HECS repayment for a person on a wage of $20,700 is insignificant and is no more than the cost of a movie ticket per week. Is it the case that in South Australia 80 per cent of teachers will be unable to receive the $8 a week safety net increase? Why is it that your government, which claims to represent battlers and families struggling to get ahead, is pun~ . ishing the very people educating the children of battling families?
Mr HOWARD-I do not pretend to know offhand what the award rates of pay for teachers are in South Australia. If that is a criticism you want to make of me, well, go ahead and make it. I am not going to make it up on the run. Nonetheless, I do take the opportunity which the honourable gentleman's question affords me of saying something again about the decision the government takes in relation to safety net wage increases.
We made it clear as a coalition before the election that we would support safety net wage increases. In fulfilment of that promise to the working men and women of Australia, we are going to put to the Australian Industrial Relations Commission the proposal that I foreshadowed and which was detailed by the Minister for Industrial Relations. As a member who represents a wide cross-section of people in the Adelaide community, the honourable member will know that low and modest income families are affected so far as their living standards are concerned not only by their wages but also by the level of interest

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7055

rates, by the level of prices and by the level of inflation.
That is why we have been able to draw attention to the fact-and I take the opportunity again of drawing attention to it-that a person on a $100,000 loan, which is close to the average in some parts of Australia, has enjoyed a fall of something like $145 a month in their mortgage repayments as a result of the reductions that have occurred over the past six or eight months.
If the honourable gentleman wants to honestly address the impact of policy changes on low and middle income families in Australia, the honourable member has to take into account not only the wage component, where we have the fulfilment of a commitment to a safety net; he also has to take into account the fact that prices continue to moderate in Australia. I do not pretend that all of that moderation has occurred over the last eight months-plainly it has not, and I am quite happy to acknowledge that. But you also have to acknowledge, in taking all of those things into account that, if the cost of servicing a loan falls by $145 a month in many cases, that has an enormously beneficial impact on the living standard of that family.
The decisions we have taken in relation to HECS represent a belief on our part that that sector could make a contribution towards the fiscal consolidation challenge which we could not avoid. However much you may squirm and try to amend it and rewrite it, the fact is that your party left us with a deficit of $10 billion. It was your party that left us with that problem. You had 13 years. You left us with high unemployment; you left us with a huge deficit. And you therefore don't have a lot of credibility, you know. After 13 years, you don't have a lot of credibility getting up and asking us questions about the impact of policy on the battling families of Australia.
My suspicion-and I think the suspicion of the member for Lindsay and of a lot of other people on this side of the House-is that right at the moment you don't have any credibility at all with the battlers of Australia and right at the moment the last thing you want to hear from us or from anybody else is things that indicate that under this government the

position of the battling families of Australia is being treated in a fair and a sensitive fashion.
The contribution that is being made by the HECS changes to the fiscal consolidation challenge is a reasonable one. I would remind the honourable gentleman of what I said in answer to a question asked by the Leader of the Opposition. To illustrate the point I made, both in answer to that and in answer to your question, I am informed, for example, that 38 per cent of the higher education dollar has been distributed to the top 25 per cent of income earning families with a median income of $81,000 a year or more. Some of our measures in that area are designed to give a fairer deal to the battling taxpayers of Australia-something that you are completely overlooking.
Universities
Mr CHARLES-My question is directed to the Minister for Schools, Vocational Education and Training. Is the minister aware of continuing strong demand by Australia's schoolleavers for places in universities? Can the minister confirm such contentions?
Dr KEMP-I thank the member for La Trobe for his question. This is a matter in which he has had a very deep interest. He has personally contributed to the development of the Berwick campus at Monash University. I understand that there has been an increase in demand by this year's school Ieavers of over 30 per cent over last year for the places at this very campus.
The Labor Party have been consistently attempting to misrepresent the situation in relation to enrolments, to talk down the future of young Australians and to discourage them from enrolling at university. Recent estimates obtained from state admission centres indicate that applications from school leavers for university places have risen in Victoria and Western Australia. They have remained stable in Tasmania and fallen slightly in other states.
If there was any inclination on the other side to interpret the facts, they would realise that the HECS policies of the government, which they are trying to imply have led to a fall in enrolments, apply around Australia;

7056

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

they don't just apply in New South Wales. It is a very hard concept for them to grasp, I know, but the fact is that they apply in Victoria; they apply in Western Australia; they apply in Tasmania; and there has been no fall in applications for school Ieavers in those states.
Indeed, in Victoria the university applications have increased by about two per cent, despite a fall in that state of the 16to 17year-old population. So enrolments are up and yet the relevant cohort of the population is actually down. As I say, enrolments have also gone up in Western Australia. Could there be some factor in the other states where there have been very slight falls? The falls from school leavers in Queensland, for example, are within one per cent.
In New South Wales and South Australia, for the first time this year, an infoline application system has been introduced. These computerised application systems may well have a significant effect on enrolments because they reduce the number of applicants who are only marginally interested. In previous years, enrolments were done in the classroom under the supervision of teachers. Of course, one would expect higher enrolments under those circumstances. When a state moves to a computerised application system, it is quite inevitable that a number of marginal enrolments will falloff and that may well be a factor-
Mr Beazley-Mr Speaker, on a point of order of relevance: if it is relevant to raise this point in answer to this question, is it also relevant to point out that those people he described-
Mr SPEAKER-What is your point of order?
Mr Beazley-as marginally interested, are all in the working-class districts of Australia?
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order. Resume your seat!
Dr KEMP-Another factor which could well apply in New South Wales is that the Carr Labor government has been giving young people a consistent message that students from low income families should hesitate before they enrol in university be-

cause of the HECS changes. That is totally misleading these students about the financial effects of the HECS system-and we supported the HECS system; it was a bipartisan system. As you well know, its quality is that a student, regardless of income, can afford to enrol in a university course and will not have to repay that fee until they are earning an adequate income to do so.
So by trying to talk down the educational opportunities for young people, you are in fact discouraging, very probably, a number of young people from low income families from enrolling. But, if that is so, it is because of your colleagues in New South Wales.
But I draw the attention of the House to the fact that there are very specific reasons in the enrolment system why we should expect a decline in enrolments and marginal enrolments in certain states. But, overall, in states like Victoria and Western Australia, we see significant rises in enrolments from school leavers. And that gives the lie to your scare campaign.
Mr Sawford-Mr Speaker, would the minister table the document from which he was quoting?
Mr SPEAKER-Is the minister quoting from confidential information? The documentation is confidential and, therefore, will not be tabled.
Wage Increases
Mr GRIFFIN-My question is directed to the Minister for Industrial Relations. Has the minister seen a report in today's Melbourne Age about the unfavourable reaction of workers in the Fitzroy Gloweave factory to the government's offer of an $8 a week pay rise? Is it not a fact that the difference between the government's offer of $8 per week and the previous government's offer of $14 will cause these workers to be $1,000 per annum worse off?
Mr REITH-The fact of the matter isand I have not seen the details of that report-that people will not be $1,000 worse off.
Mr Crean-Ha, hal
Mr SPEAKER-The member for Hotham!

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7057

Mr REITH-And it is a complete nonsense to say so. It is also a complete nonsense to say that $14 was the figure that was going to be provided by the previous government. Your policy position was a range and you had not decided on a final position to put to the Industrial Relations Commission.
Lastly, the truth of the matter is that the comparisons that you are making are inadequate in the sense that you are not comparing apples with apples. You do not yet seem to appreciate that not only are we making a different application or submission to the commission from that which you would have made, but that we have changed the system entirely which you ought to be aware of because you are opposed to the changes over there in the Senate.
One of the reasons it is the second longest debate in the Senate's history is that you are basically running a filibuster campaign against the very changes which will provide people with a chance to actually earn more in the future. The hypocrisy of you people is doubled up when you walk out of industrial relations and look at what you are doing to fiscal policy. We are trying to get interest rates down and all you are trying to do is keep them up. That is your policy.
We have delivered $145 into people's pockets since 2 March and all you can do is complain about people's circumstances. Of course, just to cap off your misery, you talk about the person in average circumstances in Australia. I can tell you that, on 1 January, those Australian families will be the beneficiaries of a $1 billion tax cut-something which you could never have delivered in your time in the fiscal inadequacies and mismanagement of Labor.
This is nothing but a futile scare campaign exaggerated by the Labor Party, trying to claw back a constituency you lost on 2 March-and you are going to go on losing.
Lyssavirus
Mr NEVILLE-My question is directed to the Minister for Health and Family Services. Is the minister aware of the death in Rockhampton of a resident from an episode of lyssavirus thought to have been carried by

flying fox? Although the Queensland health department has acted promptly, are there any national implications arising from this sad incident? Are consultations envisaged with the state and territory health ministers on the one hand or, on the other, with the environmental movement or the horticultural industry whose workers might conceivably be at risk?
Dr WOOLDRIDGE-I am aware of the circumstances that the honourable member raises. Sadly, a woman in her late 30s was scratched by a fruit bat and developed an illness from which she subsequently died.
This is a new virus. We received confirmation about three weeks ago from the centre of disease control in Atlanta that it was a virus related to one known in Europe but it was itself actually new. Fortunately, it has not turned out to be rabies. It was thought for some time it might be: it is not. The other good side is that the rabies vaccine is protective.
We have largely left this up to Queensland health, but the Commonwealth does have some angles on it. Firstly, we have to make sure there are adequate supplies of rabies vaccine-and also rabies immunoglobulin-in the country because it can be treated if people are caught early. This has proved somewhat difficult as there is a worldwide shortage of rabies immunoglobulin, but we believe procedures are in place to provide adequate amounts.
I say to honourable members that this virus has probably existed for thousands of years. While it is a new discovery, it is not something that is recent. Fruit bats are found from Victoria to Darwin. We are not sure of the full extent of the distribution of this virus in the bat, so for that reason we have asked the National Health and Medical Research Council as a matter of urgency to undertake research to determine the extent of the virus.
I would hope that this is an isolated case, but again we do not know. We are currently having records searched for similar cases that may have occurred in the past and may have gone undiagnosed. As I said previously, given that it is something that has probably existed for thousands of years, the risk is very small. Nonetheless there is a risk. The prudent thing

7058

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

for people to do is to avoid bats, and avoid handling them closely. If they are scratched, they should consult a medical practitioner.
It is not something that health ministers per se have discussed, but health officials around the country have discussed it. I have convened an expert working group of clinicians and academics in the field to keep us informed so that we can make sure the response to this is as good as possible.
Regional Development
Mr CREAN-My question is addressed to the Minister for Transport and Regional Development. Is the minister aware that today, as Max Moore-Wilton's latest sumptuous office renovation is completed, the regional development office closes its doors for good? Can the Minister for Transport and Regional Development confirm that from tomorrow he will simply be known as the Minister for Transport? Doesn't this confirm his July statement that 'there is no clear rationale or constitutional basis for Commonwealth involvement in regional development'?
Mr SHARP-Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable gentleman for his question. In regard to the quote that I notice the member for Hotham has been toting around the countryside as being a quote of mine-
Mr Crean-Which was in your press release.
Mr SHARP-can I point out that that is actually a quote that comes from the Commission of Audit that undertook a review of all of the government's activities following the last federal election campaign, a review which was required because of the enormous debt that you left this government to deal with-a debt which we have been working very hard in order to overcome, a debt which you increased dramatically throughout your time in office.
Mr Beazley-Could I take a point of order, Mr Speaker? It goes to relevance. In the course of his remarks he referred to a level of indebtedness that we are supposed to have left them with as an 'enormous debt'. If it is appropriate for him to define it so, under relevance he ought to point out that it is the

second lowest public debt in the industrialised world.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
Mr Reith-If I could take a point of order, Mr Speaker, this is a repeat of a constant tactic from the Leader of the Opposition. That was obviously not a point of order; it was simply an opportunity for a mini-speech whiCh we get from the Leader of the Opposition whenever he is hurt politically by a minister at the dispatch box. Mr Speaker, I invite you to warn the Leader of the Opposition that points of order should be exactly that, and not mini-speeches.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I have listened carefully to the points of order raised by the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of the House. I thank them both for their contributions. I think the minister was answering as directly and as comprehensively as he could. Warnings that emanate from the chair are usually inspired from the chair.
Mr SHARP-I just add further that the changes to the government's regional development program have been inspired by your failures in government which have forced this government to deal with one of the largest debt problems that this country has ever seen. Can I make the point that in this year's budget there is $80 million going towards regional development programs around Australia.
Mr Crean-Because we locked it in place.
Mr SPEAKER-The member for Hotham!
Mr SHARP-In addition to that, there is a further $10 million identified in this year's budget for additional and new programs that this government is interested in funding and supporting throughout regional Australia. Can I also point out that this government has undertaken a number of very meaningful initiatives such as, for example, the subsidy on the passenger ferry between Victoria and Devonport in Tasmania which has led to an enormous uptake in the use of that ferry, which will be a major regional development initiative in Tasmania.
Can I also highlight other development initiatives which will create real jobs in

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7059

regional Australia, rather than the bureaucracy that you created throughout Australia under your regional development program-things
 such as the $3,100,000 that is being spent
over the next 1 years on the Pacific Highway. This will create real jobs in regional Australia. Can I also highlight further initiatives of this government which will create real jobs in regional Australia such as those initiated by the Prime Minister through his Supermarket to Asia Council-an initiative which will create real jobs, lasting jobs, throughout regional Australia. What you created, what the Labor government created throughout its time in office, was nothing more than a burgeoning bureaucracy which did nothing to create jobs in regional Australia.
Mr Kerr-You want to claim credit for what we have done.
Mr SHARP-If Labor believe that their policies for regional Australia were so good whilst they were in office for 13 years, how is it that regional Australia during their 13 years in office was at its lowest point in the history of this country? How is that so? I noticed just recently-and I brought this document in to quote it-that the Labor shadow cabinet had a meeting in a regional area of New South Wales.
Mr Howard-It took them 13 years.
Mr SHARP-It took them 13 years to discover the bush. I noticed that they had the meeting in regional New South Wales, in Bathurst, Orange or thereabouts. I read an editorial that followed that shadow cabinet meeting undertaken by the Labor Party. That editorial, in a local paper in the region, responded to a Labor claim that the shadow ministry cared for those in the bush. It states:
It was that little bit that almost had us choking on our morning tea . . . Come on now-when they were in power in Canberra most of them obviously didn't even know that there was a regional Australia and the few that did know couldn't have cared less. Hence the mess the regional areas are in now.
I think that editorial sums up the views of most regional Australians, that you did not care a damn about regional Australia. This government does.

Mr Crean-I seek to table the minister's press release which quotes him as saying, 'There is no clear rationale or constitutional basis for Commonwealth involvement.'
Mr Reith-No.
Mr SPEAKER-Leave is not granted. Resume your seat.
Australian Defence Force: Medical Officers
Ms GAMBARO-My question is directed to the Minister for Defence Industry, Science and Personnel. Can the minister inform the House as to the importance of the new second field hospital facility at Enoggera and the enhanced opportunities that this improved facility will offer to clinical support and training for the Australian defence forces? Will this facility assist in addressing the alarming shortages of medical officers in the Australian defence forces?
Mrs BISHOP-I am pleased to say that I opened the second field hospital at Enoggera on Sunday. I am particularly pleased to say that this facility means that there will be an attraction to encourage doctors to join the permanent forces and for reservists to also be involved in using this facility. It is true that, after 13 years of Labor government, we have a shortage of doctors and dentists. It is true that the morale of the forces was let go down under the previous government.
As I said before, the change in philosophical attitude to our defence forces by this government means that there is an improvement in morale. We no longer regard them as public servants in uniform. We regard them as separate and distinct. Accordingly, in opening this hospital and saying that we expect the men and women in uniform to go overseas and to defend us and causes important to us, it is incumbent upon us to look after them properly with correct medical treatment.
Another, more important aspect of this facility is that it has the ability to deploy an operating theatre into the field, which in tum means that, if we are required to take an operating theatre overseas with one C130, we can with tented facilities and an entire medical team.

7060

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

I thank the member for her question. It is a commitment of this government to see that we are not only ready and able to defend this country but also able to give real meaning to regional engagement and to treat our service men and women, our service personnel, in a way in which they truly know they are valued and valuable, unlike the way they were treated by the last government.
Gun Control Advertising Campaign
Mr KELVIN THOMSON-My question is addressed to the Attorney-General. The Attorney will be aware that documents tabled in the Senate reveal that Mr Gerard Wheeler, an official of the Liberal Party secretariat, participated in the initial gun control education campaign strategy meeting held on 28 June. How does the Attorney explain the presence of a party official at a meeting to decide the direction of what is meant to be a bipartisan initiative paid for by the taxpayer? Given that the gun control ads launched on Sunday bear no resemblance whatsoever to DDB Needham's 'Bite the bullet' proposal, can the Attorney explain whether further meetings have been held to change the intended campaign strategy and can he guarantee that Mr Wheeler or other Liberal Party officials have had no further involvement in setting the campaign strategy?
Mr WILLIAMS-The first part of the question relates to a meeting which the member alleges related to the education campaign on firearms control. I am advised that in fact it was not a meeting directly related to that. It was a meeting simply to inform people about the methods used by the Office of Government Information and Advertising, which is not my responsibility but that of the Minister for Administrative Services. It was not therefore inappropriate for anybody, any taxpayer, to be there to hear the way the government operates. It was not a gun buyback campaign meeting as I am advised.
The second part of the question related to the recently launched television advertising buyback campaign. The first advertisement went to air on Sunday night, as I understand it. I did not actually see one on television, but it was an advertisement that was developed on the basis of research, on the basis of consulta-

tion with the advertising consultants and the public relations consultants. It is the first step in a three-phase campaign.
As I explained before, it is an ambulatory campaign that will respond to research as it progresses. The first phase is a limited phase where information is provided to firearms owners. It has limited objectives. Its purpose is simply to provide information of a basic nature at this stage. There will be further phases later.
Small Business
Mr SOMLYAY-My question is directed to the Treasurer. Yesterday I asked the Treasurer whether the government's fiscal and financial stance brought any benefits for consumers. Could the Treasurer inform the House how these benefits have assisted and will continue to assist small business?
Mr COSTELLO-As members would be aware, in the budget the government announced exciting new developments for small business. The government reduced the provisional tax uplift factor from eight per cent to six per cent and locked it in in perpetuity.
Mr Beazley-We locked it in in perpetuity.
Mr COSTELLO-Wrong! Absolutely wrong!
Mr Beazley-We did.
Mr COSTELLO-Would you like to make that interjection again or just sit there in silence? We have locked in the reduction from eight per cent to six per cent in perpetuity in relation to growth in the economy, returning to small business $180 million, which Labor was only too content to take by sleight of hand. In the budget this government announced capital gains rollover relief of $150 million for small business. We actually announced an increase in the minor benefits exemption threshold for fringe benefits tax to $100.
Taking pressure off monetary policy has been the great success of fiscal consolidation. We have already seen two reductions in official rates over this last year. Part of the reason why we have been able to take pressure off monetary policy was locking in the agreement on monetary policy with the

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7061

Reserve Bank, setting the target, making it transparent, making it independent-the policy that gave Australia the opportunity to lock in long-term low inflation expectations, the policy which, incidentally, the Labor Party threatened to try to undo by suing the government. We are still waiting for the writ, by the way.
I can report that, in relation to the two official easings we have seen in relation to the four major banks, the four major banks, on their indicators rates, have passed on the official cuts in their entirety. We can report that the ANZ, the Commonwealth Bank, the NAB and Westpac have cut both small business indicator rates-
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Members on my left!
Mr COSTELLO-and large business indicator rates by one per cent. If one compares the easings of monetary policy with the tightenings of monetary policy-
Mr Adams interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-I warn the member for Lyons.
Mr COSTELLO-If one compares the easings of monetary policy with the tightenings at the end of 1994, when official rates went up by 2% per cent, one can observe that the banks were much quicker in passing on the tightenings, the rises in official rates, than they were in passing on the falls. If one looks at the tightenings of monetary policy in August, October and December of 1994, one can see that the tightening in official rates was reflected in the indicator rates generally within 20 days.
But, in relation to the easings on 31 July 1996 and 6 November 1996, some banks took up to 47 days, in one case 40 days and in another case 54 days to pass on the benefits on the indicator rates of the easing of official cash rates. The government has made it clear that it believes that the benefits of the easing of official rates should be passed on to small business and passed on with all due hastethe same kind of time frame one would expect as for the tightenings of the official rates back in 1994. Having said that, however, the fact is that, if one looks at the business

sector as a whole, with business borrowings in Australia of $50 billion, that one per cent reduction in indicator rates represents a stimulus to business of $500 million.
I want to make two subsidiary points in relation to this. The fact is business has had the benefit of only the official rate cuts; it has not had the 1% per cent on the standard variable, which was caused by increased competition. As a result, there appears to still be room for increased competition in the banking sector and for business to obtain the benefits from that.
The second point we make is that many businesses enter into fixed term arrangements rather than variable arrangements. Those businesses that do have fixed term business loans will not have had the benefit of the cuts in official interest rates. I say to businesses that they have the opportunity to go to their banks and renegotiate their fixed term rates in light of the official interest rate cuts. Businesses can exercise and should be exercising their market power by approaching banks to take the benefits of the reductions in official interest rates and the easings of monetary policy.
This government believes that the benefits of official interest rates, the benefits of the government's budget policy, the benefits of the monetary policy which Labor opposed, the benefits of the fiscal setting and the benefits of the taxation changes should be the stimulus to business and passed on in full. We urge business to take advantage of those opportunities.
Minister for Industry, Science and Tourism
Mr CREAN-My question is addressed to the Minister for Industry, Science and Tourism. I seek clarification of an earlier answer relating to the minister's share trading company, Ralsten Pty Ltd. Is it not the case that the company's new director, Mr Wilde, holds the only other share in the company not held by you but that he is not the beneficial owner of that share? Minister, whom does he hold that share for?
Mr MOORE-All declarations in relation to that company have been made. But, for the

7062

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

interest of the honourable member, he is the beneficial holder.
Suicide
Mr LLOYD-Is the Minister for Family Services aware of the tragic suicide toll happening on the central coast of New South Wales and in fact throughout Australia? Has the minister been informed of the findings of the first community organised Suicide Summit, attended by over 300 concerned central coast residents, held last Friday, 15 November? What steps has the minister taken to stop this tragic waste of human life?
Mrs MOYLAN-I thank the honourable for Robertson for his question and also for his active interest in seeking to help members of the communities in his electorate confront the terrible tragedy of youth suicide. I am also pleased to say that the member for Robertson has reported back to me on the activities, as has my staff member who attended the Suicide Summit held at Gosford on the New South Wales central coast on Friday. This is a clear demonstration of the concern and commitment of a community that has experienced a high rate of suicide amongst all age groups.
The government's response to the issue of youth suicide was outlined in our national youth suicide strategy announced in the budget: $19 million has been committed to fund services that will provide for rural youth counselling services, support for telephone crisis lines, programs for parents and training for professionals. The government will also provide long-term improvement for services through the funding of research. It seeks the cooperation of the media in its reporting of these events. This is in addition to funds already committed under the existing care for life program.
I am pleased also to announce the government's offer of $6 million to support phone help lines operated by Lifeline and the kids help line operated by Boystown, and those offers have been accepted by those organisations.
These services are well known to young Australians and are providing a reference point for young people in need of someone to

talk to when they are experiencing difficulties in their lives. During 1995, one of these organisations alone received approximately 3,000 calls from young people expressing suicidal tendencies. On average, there are two calls per day received where there is an emergency relating to self-harm actions needing to be resolved.
I understand from the member for Robertson that this conference was also about suicide in general. I am sure that the policies we are putting in place will raise community awareness of those issues and will go a long way to help communities recognise that there are problems out there for many of their citizens and that support needs to be offered by governments and communities in partnership.
There is potential, though, for the youth suicide prevention strategy to reduce the youth suicide rate in Australia. The initiative of communities in the Robertson electorate illustrates a broad community willingness to confront the difficult issues around suicide in general as well as, specifically, youth suicide. This government's policies will assist in providing valuable support in that direction.
Mr Howard-Mr Speaker, I ask that further questions be placed on the Notice Paper.
HANSARD
Mr SPEAKER-I present for the information of honourable members a copy of a letter received by fax from the firm of solicitors Arthur Robinson & Hedderwicks seeking leave of the House for the production of certain extracts from Hansard in evidence in proceedings before the High Court. I will have copies of this request passed to the Leader of the House, the Manager of Opposition Business and Independent members.
QUESTIONS TO MR SPEAKER
Hansard Report
Mr McLACHLAN-I have a question for you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday the honourable member for Werriwa made a personal explanation in which he advised the House that in the Hansard of 5 November he was recorded as interjecting during a speech I was making

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7063

on the Hindmarsh Island Bridge Bill. He claimed his interjection was wrongly recorded, and after discussion with Hansard they agreed to completely reverse the meaning and change the words of the interjection. Anyone reading Hansard would see that my reaction to his interjection and the words that came before it seem to make no sense at all with the changed words.
Mr Tanner-That would be right.
Mr McLACHLAN-This is backed up by a call to my office from a person who heard the honourable member's personal explanation on radio yesterday and by a number of people who were in the gallery that night. Mr Speaker, you and other members would be fully acquainted with the rules laid down in House of Representatives Practice covering alterations to Hansard. I would ask that you look into the matter and, as well, advise the House at what stage the honourable member advised Hansard that he wanted the change. Was it by 12 November as required and printed on the front page of the following day's Proof Hansard? Do you agree to his request that his request was inside or outside the conditions laid down regarding alteration of the sense of words used in the debate being inadmissible? I do not believe in any way that this change should have been made.
Mr SPEAKER-I will take the question on notice and report back to the House at a later date.
PAPERS
Mr REITH (Flinders-Leader of the House)-Papers are tabled as listed in the schedule circulated to honourable members. Details of the papers will be recorded in the Votes and Proceedings and Hansard.
The schedule read as follows-
Affinnative Action (Equal Employment Opportunity for Women) Act-Affinnative Action AgencyReport for period 1 June 1995 to 31 May 1996Erratum.
Australian Horticultural Corporation Act-Australian Dried Fruits Board-5th report, for 1995-96.
Au.stralian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Act-Safety Review Committee-Report for 1995-96.

Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act-Agreement between the Commonwealth of Australia and the State of Western Australia for an arrangement under section 4, 31 October 1996.
Defence Housing Authority Act-Defence Housing Authority-Report for 1995-96.
Motion (by Mr Reith) proposed:
That the House take note of the following papers:
Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation Act-Safety Review Committee-Report for 1995-96.
Debate (on motion by Mr Crean) adjourned.
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Mr TIM FISCHER (Farrer-Minister for Trade) (3.23 p.m.)-It is with pleasure I table for the information of honourable members Australia's 1996 APEC individual action plan which will be presented, along with the lAPs of all other APEC members, at the APEC ministerial and leaders meetings to be held in the coming days in the Philippines.
Under the Osaka action agenda agreed by APEC leaders in 1995, all APEC members are required to prepare lAPs to show the steps they are taking to meet their trade and investment liberalisation commitments agreed at the Bogor APEC leaders meeting in 1994. The government is fully committed to the Osaka objectives consistent with the need for Australia to be actively associated, through APEC, with the move by the growing AsiaPacific economies to consolidate the liberalisation of the region and underpin its future prospects.
Members' lAPs are to conform to the general principles of the Osaka action agenda, including comprehensiveness, WTO consistency, comparability and transparency. Also, members are to address 15 areas in their lAPs, including the core liberalisation areas of tariffs, non-tariff measures, services and investment.
The Osaka action agenda provides for the lAP process to be ongoing, with members submitting revised lAPs on an annual basis assisted by a process of informal consultations and review among members. The 1996 lAPs

7064

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

to be submitted by APEC members later this month will therefore be the first step in a long-term progressive process leading to the Bogor objective of free and open trade and investment in the Asia-Pacific region by 2010 for industrialised economies and 2020 for developing economies. As such, they represent the start of the difficult process of translating the rhetoric from Bogor and Osaka into real and detailed commitments.
The plan that I am tabling today is the final version of Australia's 1996 lAP and will be taken through to the final stage of consultation at senior officials and ministerial level at the APEC meetings in Manila over the coming weekend which the Prime Minister (Mr Howard) will be attending. Honourable members may recall that I announced in May that Australia had submitted a draft form of the lAP. All other members also submitted drafts in May, and the process of consultation and review has been under way throughout the year.
The government has had wide ranging consultations with Australian industry, as well as the state and territory governments, on the development of Australia's lAP. The Australian lAP reflects the fact that the Australian economy has been moving down a liberalising path and is well placed to conform with the guidelines for the preparation of lAPs as agreed by leaders in Osaka. It also reflects the expectation by all economies that the lAPs will, understandably, contain more detail on the near-term liberalisation than on the longer-term, and that economies will be undertaking their own assessment of comparability as the lAP process evolves.
On tariffs, the Australian lAP includes the existing tariff reduction programs to the year 2000 in the textiles, clothing and footwear and passenger motor vehicles sectors but does not prejudge the outcome of the reviews of tariff levels beyond 2000 in those sectors. The lAP also reflects the fact that Australia's general tariff has been phased down to a level of no higher than five per cent. It includes a commitment to review zero to five per cent tariffs by 2000 or earlier subject to an assessment of progress in the liberalisation commitments by others in APEC and the WTO.

The lAP also includes previously announced policy directions on micro-economic reform in the services sectors-for example, the introduction of full and open competition from 1 July 1997 in the telecommunications sector, the winding back of maritime coastal protection by 2000 and the progressive liberalisation of access to the Australian aviation market.
Other measures addressed in the lAP include investment and important trade facilitation issues such as standards and customs procedures, intellectual property rights, competition policy and deregulation. On business mobility, Australia is working with its APEC partners to develop the APEC Business Travel Card to allow the equivalent of visa-free travel for eligible business persons.
Consistent with the comparability element of lAPs, Australia will be seeking, through the lAP process, to use the liberalisation of the Australian economy to argue for enhanced market access of interest to Australian exporters in other APEC economies. The government has used all opportunities for ministerial and official level contact with our APEC partners to urge improvements in their lAPs. We have stressed Australian market access priorities as determined in consultation with Australian industry. We have also encouraged the Philippines, as chair of APEC in 1996, to exercise its leadership role in urging members generally to improve their lAPs.
As for 1996, I expect modest outcomes as this year is only the beginning of the process. But we have set the platform to pursue Australia's interests as lAPs are reviewed and modified in the coming years. We have tabled this document before proceeding to Manila.
There has been a gradual improvement in the quality of lAPs during the year. I expect that the 1996 lAPs will represent a modest improvement in access for Australian exporters and will illustrate the wide range of liberalisation under way in the region. Importantly, the lAPs will signal a commitment by APEC members to continue further opening of their economies. The tabling of lAPs in final form at the time of the forthcoming APEC ministerial and leaders meetings in

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7065

Manila and Subic will be an opportunity for a more detailed assessment.
The results for 1996 are broadly in line with realistic expectations at the beginning of what is a sustained process which will go out to 2010 and beyond. APEC has made a reasonable start and has helped to reinforce an overall trend towards liberalisation in the region, although there are sectors of export interest to Australia which remain to be addressed. The government will report further on the lAPs in the context of reporting on the outcome of the ministerial and leaders meetings.
Mr STEPHEN SMITH (Perth) (3.28 p.m.)-by leave-I thank the House and the Minister for Trade (Mr Tim Fischer). Welcome back to APEC, Mr Fischer. We are pleased that you have rediscovered it. With your deafening silence since 2 March, we thought APEC had fallen off the agenda, fallen off the priority list.
Mr Tim Fischer-We appointed an ambassador.
Mr STEPHEN SMITH-Look at the contrast-the deafening silence that we have seen this year contrasted with the flow of information to the parliament, to the community and to industry. I took the opportunity this morning of printing out the speeches that former Minister McMullan made in a comparable period last year. That contrasts with the deafening silence this year.
What does that deafening silence lead to? That deafening silence leads to the fact that Australia's leading role in APEC, established by the previous government, is at risk. We are falling by the wayside. That is the great danger. It is not good enough for the minister and the Prime Minister (Mr Howard) to simply tum up at the meeting. They have got to lead as well. That is the great danger that nationally we now face with APEC.
At this meeting Australia needs to restore i~s image of being a leader in this organisatIon. Why is that the case? That is the case because APEC is crucial to Australia's prosperity-APEC equals growth, equals jobs, equals prosperity.

We are generally pleased to see that the government has adopted our approach, with one exception. There are three threads to the individual action plan for Australia, which has just been tabled. Firstly, the current liberalisation program put in train by the previous government will continue. Secondly, there is reference to the economic reforms of the current government, which are in place courtesy of the budget. Thirdly, there is a commitment of no further reductions in tariffs but a review sometime between now and the year 2000 provided there is complementarity so far as our trading partners are concerned. The minister stated:
It includes a commitment to review zero to five per cent tariffs by 2000 or earlier subject to an assessment of progress in the liberalisation commitments by others in APEC and the WTO.
So far as continuing liberalisation is concerned, I point out that that was set in train by the previous government and we obviously have no difficulty with that. The government prides itself on the inclusion of microeconomic matters in the individual action plan. The key point is that the budget papers show that that will have a net negative contribution to growth in GDP.
The key point in relation to the review of our tariff levels by the year 2000 if there is some form of complementarity by our partners in APEC and WTO is to ensure that our trading partners are ferociously up to the mark. Australia will get the benefit from APEC and trade liberalisation provided we are ferocious about ensuring that the multilateral obligations which our trading partners enter into are absolutely extracted so that the maximum benefit applies to Australia.
The tabling statement included the individual action plan. A cursory reflection on that by our sides shows no difficulty. That will be subject to detailed consideration and further comment if required or necessary. What will be more important will be the individual action plans of other nations which will become available publicly at the leaders meeting on 25 November. Those individual action plans need to be the subject of detailed, ferocious assessment by Australia. They will also be the subject of detailed assessment by

7066

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

the opposition, to the extent that our resources allow, to ensure that our trading partners are up to the mark.
The minister has indicated that he proposes to report further on these matters. I assume and hope he means that he will report to the House. I expect that to be the case. I do not wish to open up these areas today. There are other matters of interest arising from the APEC meeting such as the extent to which the APEC meeting may be of some use to the WTO meeting in December and the extent to which the question of new members to APEC may arise given that the moratorium expires this year and we have countries such as India and Vietnam knocking on the door.
Whilst I have made the point that, in this area, the government has put Australia at risk of not being seen to be a leader in this area as the previous government did, these are matters of great national interest and great national importance. They go to the heart of our economic growth and our jobs. In that respect, the minister and the Prime Minister have our best wishes for those meetings as they act in Australia's national interest.
MATTERS OF PUBLIC IMPORTANCE
Education
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Nehl)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable me'mber for Sydney (Mr Peter Baldwin) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The impact of the government's budget decisions on enrolments and education opportunities, particularly for the children of average Australian families.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number a/members required by the standing orders having risen in their places-
Mr PETER BALDWIN (Sydney) (3.34 p.m.)-During its 13 years in office, the federal Labor government worked very hard to expand educational opportunities for all Australians. The achievements that flowed from that effort were very significant and undeniable. That is the case whether you are

talking about school education where we saw a virtual doubling of people going through to year 12, whether you are talking about higher education where, as a result of government decisions, particularly the green and white papers of the late 1980s, we saw the number of university students in Australia grow from around 350,000 to in excess of 600,000 or whether you are talking about vocational education where, as a result of a string of initiatives, particularly in the early 1990s, we saw a major new commitment of resources to vocational education and moves to comprehensively overhaul the system of entry level training.
I do not suggest that we achieved everything we wanted to achieve, but we certainly achieved a great deal. There were a number of other significant initiatives in hand to improve our overall effort. I give as an example the area of early literacy for which the current minister has sought to claim complete credit. The reality is that just about everything he is doing in that area is simply a continuation of initiatives that were set in train by us-whether it be the comprehensive national survey of literacy which we provided funding for in Working Nation and the methodology for which we were testing towards the end of last year, whether it be expanding vocational educational opportunities in schools or whether it be reforming entry level training arrangements to put them on a modernised and more flexible basis. We were doing a great deal.
What we say is that this government has taken a number of decisions that will severely compromise those achievements, will severely diminish access to the full spectrum of education and training opportunities and will be particularly adverse for people from disadvantaged backgrounds. There are a number of decisions that have been taken in the budget context that are particularly relevant. In most cases, it is going to take some time before the full impact of these changes becomes clearly apparent. However, we are already starting to see some early signs of some very disturbing developments.
During question time today, presumably in anticipation of this MPI debate, the minister

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7067

answered a dorothy dix question in which he made certain claims about what had been going on in terms of applications for university enrolment. I have to say that the minister has developed a facility-I will not say for lying with statistics, because that would be unparliamentary-for a certain economy of truth where the usage of statistics is concerned. I could give a number of examples of the selective way he quoted statistics on enrolment trends.
In the last couple of days or so my staff have rung around the tertiary admission centres as well as contacted universities to find out exactly what the picture is. It is interesting to compare these numbers with the numbers being cited by the minister. For example, he mentions Victoria and says there has been no significant change in Victoria for school leavers. He fails to mention the minor detail that there has been a 12 per cent fall in applications for enrolment by non-school leavers. One of the key objectives we sought to achieve in the tertiary education area was to open up access to tertiary education to people other than school leavers so that we could make a reality of the oft cited objective of achieving a society where lifelong education is the norm.
So there has been no movement in applications from school leavers in Victoria, but there has been a 12 per cent drop in applications from non-school leavers, which is very hard to isolate from the impact of the reduction in the HECS repayment threshold. We are talking here about older people who, in the main, will be earning some income. They might have dependants to support. They are obviously going to be affected by the drop in the repayment threshold to $20,700. I could go through a number of other specific points about the minister's use of enrolment statistics-and I will-a bit later in the course of my remarks.
I would like to say something on this matter of statistics. One does not like to get bogged down in arguments about statistics, but in dealing and debating with this minister, you really have no option. Take the various claims that have been made in recent weeks about what the government is going to do for

funding for schools. The minister has made a whole sequence of different claims about this over the last few weeks. In the immediate aftermath of the budget he said there would be $167 million extra for government and non-government schools, which is a five per cent increase. I made the point that the great bulk of that was driven by the standard adjustments for indexation, price movements, enrolment growth, and so forth. These are standing arrangements that this government inherited when it came to office. It is preposterous for him to be claiming these are flowing from discretionary government decisions. Anyway, that was a fairly modest sort of a claim, compared with what came later.
A couple of weeks ago on the occasion of his department making a submission to the Senate committee looking at the schools funding bill, suddenly we find him claiming there is $1.5 billion extra for schools by the year 2000. Again, the way that figure is derived is by adding together what are overwhelmingly inflation and enrolment driven increases for government and non-government schools, citing the increase to the year 2000. He implied that this represents an additional real commitment, but it just represents the effect of standard inflation adjustments on grants. It is not real.
A couple of days later on the Lateline program, the figure suddenly became $2.3 billion for government schools alone. Where does he get that from? He does not satisfy himself with just taking the inflation driven growth up to the year 2000; he decides to accumulate it over the whole four-year period to derive that $2.3 billion figure. These are simply preposterous claims. It would be analogous to me, when I was Minister for Social Security, claiming increases in nominal amounts paid out for pensioners over a fouryear period as a result of indexation adjustments and growth in pensioner numbers, and somehow presenting that as if it were a real increase.
The reality is, notwithstanding the repeated denials by this minister, that funding for government schools-the tied payments, the specific purpose payments-is declining in real terms. His own department has provided

7068

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

figures showing that. That real terms decline translates into around about a five and a half per cent real terms decline in the level of funding per student. The minister then says, 'We have to add in a proportion of financial assistance grants to the states.' It is, of course, true that the Commonwealth assists schools partly by providing general revenue assistance, a proportion of which ends up with schools. But how does he get this 4 per cent real growth figure he cited in question time the other day?
The fact is that, if you look at what happens to financial assistance grants over the next four years, you get this sudden step up in 1997-98. Why is there this step up in 199798? It is because of the absorption into FAGs of over $400 million a year of identified road funding grants. Is the minister seriously suggesting that you can legitimately apportion 24 per cent of money that has been absorbed in identified road funding grants as if the same proportion of that would go to schools as would be the case prior to that absorption? It is a simply preposterous suggestion. On and on it goes. He quotes the figure of 17 per cent for growth in funding for government schools. It is all nonsense, all distortion.
On the question of higher education enrolments, it is still early days. We will not know the ultimate impact of these government decisions: Certainly we will need to wait until we see what proportion of people accept offers of places next year. That is the real litmus test-whether people decide to go ahead. Let us look at the states. We know that the minister selectively cites state figures.
In New South Wales there has been a very clear fall in enrolments, both in relation to school leavers and overall. The fall is around about four per cent for school Ieavers and about 2.6 per cent overall. That figure includes quite a few TAPE courses, and the figure for universities alone is undoubtedly substantially larger than that. In Victoria there is not much of a change in the case of school leavers but there is a pretty precipitous decline in the case of non-school leavers. In Queensland there is around about a two per cent drop. According to the South Australian Tertiary Admissions Centre, when we in-

quired today, South Australian enrolments are down 10 per cent in the case of year 12 applicants and down 20 per cent for other undergraduates and postgraduates. In Western Australia there is not much change. The minister quoted that one. The latest figures I have got for Tasmania are that enrolments are down by 2.2 per cent. The University of Tasmania issued a press release earlier last year in which they said there was a four per cent fall. They actually had to extend the date for applications. They had to go out and canvass business in order to get people to put in applications. In the Australian Capital Territory enrolments are down by 3.5 per cent.
If you look across the nation, there is clearly a decline in enrolments. But what is more striking and what really confirms the concerns we had about this whole business is when you look below the surface at what is happening with institutions that specifically meet the needs of people from relatively disadvantaged backgrounds.
Look specifically also at the sorts of courses that we were particularly concerned about when the proposition was put to us years ago that we ought to introduce a differential HECS. We had a particular concern with courses like the science and technology courses, which are relatively expensive to teach but are not necessarily all that fashionable at the moment and are not perceived as leading to lucrative careers.
If you look at institutions where those characteristics are combined, you get a pretty disturbing picture. I give the instance of the University of Western Sydney. The Deputy Vice-Chancellor, Professor Chris Duke, was quoted in the Sydney Morning Herald recently. He confirmed that the Nepean campuses had recorded falls of 41 per cent in applications for engineering, 40 per cent for nursing and health, 39 per cent for humanities and social sciences, 24 per cent for education, 14 per cent for science and technology and 10 per cent overall.
Unlike you, when we introduced HECS in the first instance we were very concerned to ensure that it did not constitute a barrier to participation for people from low income

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7069

backgrounds and we commissioned a body of research to see what the picture was. It did show that, at the level at which we pitched it, the impact was fairly slight, but that certain subgroups within the potential student population were starting to show effects. When you combine certain characteristics, such as low socioeconomic background and coming from a rural background, for example, you start to get some significant effect. It is simply absurd to say that you can ramp the level of HECS payments, as well as accelerate the repayment schedule, by an order of magnitude and not expect to see some impact.
The reality is that this government could not care less whether there is an impact or not. Unlike us, they have not sought to commission a body of credible research to identify and test what those impacts are likely to be. I referred to the University of Western Sydney, but the story recurs across the board. There is a particularly worrying trend in the whole area of science and technology enrolments. In the Australian recently Dr John Rice, who is the President of the Australian Council of Deans of Science, was quoted as attributing the major fall-off in science applications-at some institutions of up to 20 per cent-directly to the introduction of differential HECS.
There is a problem also when you look at the training of science and mathematics teachers. The President of the Australian Council of Deans of Education, Professor Kym Adey, is on the record as saying that what the government has done through differential HECS is going to substantially exacerbate the problem of ensuring an adequate supply of appropriately qualified and trained teachers of science and mathematics.

to the HECS structure that we put in place. Professor Bruce Chapman, who was the designer and architect of the original HECS, in a recent paper that he gave at the ANU said:
The changes to Australia's higher education system announced in the 1996/1997 budget have more potential to transform financial arrangements than any other funding policy variations introduced over the last 30 years. This includes the abolition of fees in 1974 and the introduction of HECS in 1989.
He went on to say:
There are three important points: there is now a different basis determining the relative charge of courses; there are increased effective charges for not just all future students, but also all current HECS debtors; and there will be an inevitable-
(Time expired)
Dr KEMP (Goldstein-Minister for Schools, Vocational Education and Training and Minister Assisting the Minister for Finance for Privatisation) (3.49 p.m.)-We have just had a very clear image of a shadow minister who is lost in the thickets of the budget and who seems confused by the fact that, depending on which table you look at, there are many different numbers. It is hard for him, obviously, to keep up with statistics which refer to completely different concepts.
It is hard to go past the hypocrisy of a shadow minister who has issued press release after press release claiming quite misleadingly that there will be substantial reductions of up to $300 million in funding for schools as a result of the decisions of the last Premiers Conference in the middle of the year. Yet, when one looks at the facts, one finds that funding for schools through the state budgets has gone up six per cent. There have been no reductions. There have in fact been increases.

These are very significant impacts and the government has done nothing to assess them and to make a proper judgment about the impact of its decisions. You might have thought that at least before the government made changes of this magnitude it would have conducted its own review to try to have a better handle on that.
In conclusion, occasionally those arguing the government case in here have suggested that the changes are minor incremental ones

Of course, the shadow minister objects to the government referring to the total Commonwealth funding for schools through the financial assistance grants and the specific purpose grants. Yet his party has on a number of occasions made the point that those figures are indeed essential to be combined if one is to get a true assessment of the Commonwealth contribution to education.
All this is on account of two specific campaigns that the opposition is running at

7070

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

the present time. One is that the government is unsympathetic to government schools and that its decisions will impact adversely on government schools. That is totally false. The absurdity of that claim becomes more evident when one considers that, after 13 years of being in power, the net impact of the Labor Party's policy on government schools was to accelerate the outflow of parents making choices to send their children to non-government schools. That was the net effect-a declining government school sector. I want to say a few things about that.
The other campaign that the opposition is currently waging is to suggest that in some way students from low income and average income families are being disadvantaged by the educational decisions of the government. Nothing could be further from the truth. In these responses to the speech of the member for Sydney (Mr Peter Baldwin) to this House, I want to draw attention firstly to the disastrous impact that the previous Labor government's policies had on the education of low income students and on the way in which educational disadvantage was entrenched.
There is an absolutely enormous gulf between the rhetoric which doubtlessly inspires that warm inner glow that the previous Prime Minister advised us bums fiercely in the stomachs of the Left of the party and the reality of the educational impact of the ideology of the Labor Party on education. In schools, they forgot absolutely the fundamentals of education. We have found, and I was able to announce this to the community recently, that some 30 per cent of l4-yearolds have unsatisfactory reading skills after 13 years of Labor.
They forgot those who wanted vocational education options, those 30 per cent of students who drop out before finishing year 12, the 65 per cent of students who enter school and do not go onto full-time university or TAFE. Many of them have gone onto the unemployment rolls because of the complete failure of the previous government to encourage the development of relevant curricula for these young people.
The educational reforms of the Dawkins era gave far too many young Australians the

message that, if they are not going on to university, they are not going anywhere. Everyone will remember they got rid of the colleges of advanced education with their vocational emphasis. They have made some 65 per cent of students in the senior years of school feel like failures because they failed to get a sensible message about the appropriate kinds of destinations for students and the opportunities that people could take through vocational options to build careers that would take them anywhere in life.
If we are talking about misleading statistics, we can look at the failure of the previous government to build confidence in the government school system. At the end of their period and after 10 years of their new schools policy designed to build walls around the government schools and to stop parents exercising choice and their policies taken at the behest of the teacher unions to pull down the blinds and stop the schools releasing information about the literacy achievements of their students, had they built up confidence in the government school sector? No, they had not. The outflow from that sector was greater than ever.
They forgot to talk to the teachers. They forgot to talk to the principals. They talked only to the unions. The union agendas, of course, always had educational issues out of perspective because the bottom line in their agendas was always 'more teachers, more members for the unions' and not educational outcomes for the students.
The effect of their policies, in other words, was to disadvantage all those children from battling Australian families who sought to gain quality education through the government schools. So many of them ended up unable to read and write and on the unemployment rolls. We had youth unemployment reaching a peak of 32 per cent. Throughout the entire Working Nation period, with all its focus on short-term shabby solutions, there was not a move in the 28 per cent full-time unemployment rate for teenagers-a total failure and betrayal of young people.
Then we go on to training. The whole training sector was disadvantaged while John Dawkins was wreaking his will on the educa-

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7071

tion system because 'everyone had to be in university' at that time, but it was not the slightest surprise that by 1995 the number of young people in apprenticeships and traineeships as a proportion of the work force was the lowest for three decades. This was the party that believed in universities, but Australian students were not entitled to the same access as overseas students.
The current shadow minister was the minister who, year after year, had to explain away why tens of thousands of qualified young Australians, mainly drawn from schools in the lower income and socially disadvantaged areas, were unable to get access to universities. He had shut the doors against them. He would not let them in. He would not let them in although he was letting in students from Asian countries. He was letting in students from around the world, but he would not let Australians in on the same terms as those students. He preferred to shut them out because his ideology said it was better to disadvantage youth for life than to give them equal opportunity to access Australian universities paid for by the money of Australian taxpayers. Tens of thousands of qualified students were shut out.
If a university decided to increase numbers above their profile, did you fund those extra places? Did you allow the universities to receive even a HECS payment for those places? No, you did not. Of course, the coalition is allowing that. So again and again what we see from the Labor Party is the colossal gulf between their rhetoric, their ideology and their disgraceful performance.
Through the new apprenticeship and traineeship system, the coalition is opening up opportunities for all those students who have been denied those vocational options. We have pioneered the concept and will see these coming through in the next year of school based apprenticeships and traineeships.
It is the coalition which has the agreement at last of all the states to the proposition that every child should be literate by the end of primary school. We will be ensuring that the $635 million allocated in the budget for disadvantaged students in the literacy area will be spent in a way which will produce

results, and we will monitor those in a way that the Labor Party for ideological reasons absolutely refused to do.
In higher education we are opening up the doors of the universities, giving those institutions the flexibility to take charge of their future to meet the demand that is out there in the community. They will be able to provide equality of education to a wider range of Australians than they have ever been able to do before. It is absolutely contrary to the picture that has been painted by the Labor Party. I draw this House's attention to the real fact of the matter: the overall funding of universities, the operational grants of the universities-while they are being asked by the government to look at their efficiencies, as every part of the government and as every government department is-will be up next year.
That happens to be true for the University of Western Sydney as well. In 1997 the University of Western Sydney will be receiving operating grants which are up 1.8 per cent. The government expects that the number of undergraduate places at the University of Western Sydney will rise by around 1,000 between 1996 and 1999 because of the growth funding which the university has received over recent years. There is every opportunity within the decisions that we have taken in the budget for the university sector to take off.
It is the expectation of the government that the number of HECS liable undergraduate places for Australian students will increase by around 6,000 between 1996 and 1997 across the system as a whole. We have the Labor Party claiming that the HECS changes in the budget are going to discourage both young people and older people from accessing the universities. But when one looks at the facts, one finds no evidence in the figures to support that proposition. The HECS changes affect every state; yet we find in states like Victoria and Western Australia that the numbers of schoolleavers enrolling in university are increasing. If the HECS changes were the relevant factor, the numbers would be falling.

7072

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

I have already drawn the attention of the House during question time to the specific factors in New South Wales and South Australia which may well be affecting enrolments from school leavers in those states. These relate to the establishment of the Infoline application system, because before that applications for universities were generally filled out in the classrooms under teacher supervision. When you move to a computer based system, it is almost inevitable that some of the more marginal applications will drop out.
The shadow minister has made some effort to find out what the situation is. I am very pleased to tell him the information that the government has been able to obtain through its department from the various state agencies responsible for applications. The picture is one which simply does not support the proposition that the Labor Party is putting forward: that the HECS changes are having an impact on the willingness particularly of low income students to access university.
The shadow minister in the course of his speech to the House quoted enrolment figures in different faculties at the University of Western Sydney. He quoted figures which suggested that there had been falls across a number of those faculties. The interesting thing about those figures is that those falls seem to be uniform regardless of whether the HECS charge was one of the third tier or the first tier charges. This would suggest that the differential HECS has no impact whatsoever on enrolments at the University of Western Sydney.
It is a matter of simple logic, which clearly escapes the Labor Party. If you have a universal factor but you find changes in enrolments only in certain situations, it is quite clear that that universal factor is not going to be the one which will bear the burden of the explanation. You will have to come up with something a great deal better than you have been able to come up with in your remarks to support the propositions that you are trying to sustain.
The decisions that we have put forward are going to open up educational opportunities in schools, in training and in universities in a way that was never possible under the policies which the former Labor government put

forward. You were so concerned to implement your ideology which regulated institutions, which undermined government schools, which restricted universities from offering the quality education that they wanted and which, ultimately, disadvantaged the low income students and those who are educationally disadvantaged in this society.
Mr LATHAM (Werriwa) (4.04 p.m.)-The image makers of the Liberal Party really took on their toughest task when they tried to change the image and appearance of the member for Goldstein (Dr Kemp). They really took on their toughest brief when they tried to soften up his appearance and image. But, of course, the image makers of the Liberal Party were missing the mark. Their real target should have been to try to find his heart. Don't worry about trying to change his image and appearance, try to find his heart. If they could find his heart, then there might be a chance that they could change the policies of this government. If they could find his heart, there would be a chance that they could have more compassionate and fairer policies in higher education. If they could find this minister's heart, then there might be one chance for the young people of Australia to have better access to Australian universities.
The government's line on higher education is entirely regrettable and, indeed, false to the extent where the Prime Minister of Australia (Mr Howard) is engaged in the shallow activity of divide and rule. He was at it in the House again today, saying that if the burden ir:. higher education funding does not fall on students, it falls on low income taxpayers. Everyone in this House should know that that was false. That was untrue in terms of a progressive tax system. We all know that a progressive tax system based on capacity to pay means that the heaviest burden, the hardest burden, falls on the rich. It is the rich who pay for the universal provision of services-unless, of course, the Prime Minister has got in mind a flat tax regime a la Joh Bjelke-Petersen. If he does not have that in mind, then he should recognise that, if the burden is not falling on students, it falls on the rich under the terms of the progressive taxation system in Australia.

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7073

But if it is true, as the Prime Minister told the House in question time, that the burden should fall on students, what is he sayinguser pays? The only rational extension of the Prime Minister's argument in question time today is the full introduction of user pays. Where does user pays leave the poor in terms of access to higher education? It leaves them locked out, which is what you are finding across the country today. We are seeing 800 places being abolished at the University of Western Sydney in my region and two-thirds of those students would have come from the region itself. So as a product of this government's changes in higher education, there are 500 young people in western Sydney today who are going without the great Australian dream for working people of a university education.
Of course, enrolment figures show a 14 per cent first preference application enrolment fall for campuses throughout the University of Western Sydney-41 per cent for engineering and high figures in science. So much for a clever country. So much for a country that thought it would be internationally competitive with its economic base. So much for a country which thought it would train and skill working-class people to take an active place in the world economy. So much for those things under this government's policies.
The Prime Minister was at it again just yesterday. He told the House that higher education in Australia is a system that 'duds the low income earners of Australia' and he said that 'the taxes of the working men and women of Australia can be used to subsidise free education for high income earners'. What the Prime Minister is trying to say to working-class people is: 'You might pay your taxes, but another group will benefit down the track from higher incomes.'
This of course denies totally the possibility, the very strong likelihood, that working-class parents are paying their taxes within a progressive regime so that their sons and daughters might have the opportunity to get into university and be the people who benefit in their working career from a higher income.
It is a shameful day in the history of public policy in this country when the Prime

Minister of the nation is denying the likelihood of social mobility. The Prime Minister is denying the likelihood-indeed, the desirability-of social mobility and eliminates from the role of government the tools of social mobility: providing every Australian child, every Australian young person, with a good education, the way they can get ahead in their life.
Whatever you might say about the Australian Labor Party, whatever you might say in this Liberal Party attempt to redefine Australian politics, there is one thing about the Labor Party that has always been there and will always be there, and that is that we believe passionately in social mobility. We worship at the altar of social mobility. We believe in bringing people up in society and giving them their fair chance.
There is no group in our society who better deserves their chance in life than young, working-class people who want to get into an Australian university-like the 500 that you have locked out of the University of Western Sydney through your callous, hard-nosed policies. The Australian Labor Party will always stand for social mobility. No matter how many Menzies lectures we get from the Prime Minister, no matter how many redefinitions of Australian politics, there will always be the Labor Party doing the things that stand for social mobility.
I know these things, Minister. I know these things because I grew up in a western Sydney suburb called Green Valley. We were not called battlers back then; we were working class people and proud of it. And every parent in that suburb paid their taxes, hoping and praying that it would be their sons and daughters who would gain access to a university for the first time in their family. They paid their taxes off a progressive regime hoping and praying that they could gain access to a university-
Dr Kemp-And what did you do for them?
Mr LATHAM-The minister asks what we did for them. The Whitlam government abolished the up-front fees that you introduced in the 1960s. That is what the Australian Labor Party did for them. The Australian Labor Party made that dream possible in the

7074

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

1970s by abolishing the up-front fees that the Menzies government had in place. That is what the Australian Labor Party did for them, and the Australian Labor Party did it because we believe in social mobility. We believed in social then, we believe in social mobility now and we believe in social mobility for the future.
What did a Labor government then do for working-class people in western Sydney? We undertook the novel idea of building them a university-the university that was recommended by the Whitlam government but not built under Treasurer Howard in the 1970s. We built it in the western suburbs where most of the young working-class people live. They are the things we did for social mobility: the great ideal of working-class people and the rich contributing to a progressive tax system in Australia-with the heaviest burden falling on the rich-and opening up, through universal service provision and opportunity, the social mobility for young working-class people to get through to a university education. That is what we have done for them.
Not only that: there was the very important social justice principle of opening up access on a locational scale-actually building universities. There were 23,000 university places in western Sydney because the Hawke and the Keating governments built the university, funded it and put those places there so that young, working-class people could fulfil their dream of social mobility.
They are the things that the Labor Party has always done, but now we come back to an old tory government in 1996 and the Prime Minister talking of a new Liberal constituency. Really, it is an old tune, an old tune played by an old-timer back down at the Trocadero. It is the old tory way of trying to convince people that they can benefit only at the expense of others. That is what your Prime Minister is about. He is trying to convince working-class people that they can benefit only at the expense of others. And that is the old tory way.
But the good thing for this country and for this parliament is that it has never been the Australian way, Minister. We settled this country by sticking together. We can build

fair institutions and a smarter country by sticking together. That is the ideal of universal service provision. If there is a common need and the potential for share benefits, then governments should provide the service and do it universally. That is the fair and decent thing for active government in the 1990s.
Let me just repeat the principle for the benefit of the minister. If there is a common need and potential for share benefits, then governments should provide the service and do it universally. It is not the Prime Minister's way-trying to convince working people that they can benefit only at the expense of others-but doing the things that are an expression of collective and common need in our society and doing the things that provide share benefits-share benefits for those who use the facilities directly and share benefits for those who get an indirect benefit.
If you want to be a clever country, if you want to be competitive, if you want to have a place on export markets, you need the skills, the technology, the innovation and the upgrading. And that is the great economic folly of this government's decision to downgrade university funding and opportunity. Shame on you, Minister, for taking away opportunities for young people in Australia. It is a callous thing to do. It is the wrong thing to do. And if you had any sense at all, you would recognise that it was also the economically incorrect thing to do-incorrect because it drives down the dream and agenda of a clever country and, even worse, it shatters the dream and aspirations of all those Australian working people who believe and trust in social mobility.
Mr BRADFORD (McPherson) (4.14 p.m.)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I should be so lucky. Two debates in a row, I have followed the member for Werriwa (Mr Latham). What a team! The luminaries of the opposition frontbench: the member for Sydney (Mr Peter Baldwin) and the member for Werriwa in tandem here for everyone to see today. With friends like the member for Sydney and the member for Werriwa, there is no doubt that the people of Sydney do not need enemies.
The member for Werriwa talks about the altar of social mobility. He tells us today that

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7075

he falls down before the altar of social mobility. Let me tell you what happened to his altar of social mobility. On 2 March it came crashing down on top of him. It collapsed right on top of the ideology that you trotted out again for us today. You were rejected on 2 March because of your outdated ideas about social mobility. We had 13 years of your ideas of social mobility jammed down our throats and, fortunately for the people of Australia and for Australia, it came to an end on 2 March.
After 13 years of your version of social mobility, what did we actually have in Australia? The rich getting richer and the poor getting poorer. What sort of altar of social mobility did that result in? The rich got richer and the poor got poorer. That was the result of your version of social mobility which was jammed down our throats for 13 years.
He talked about the Trocadero. I remember the Trocadero when I was a young boy. It was not so bad for the people of Sydney to be able to go down to the Trocadero. What is in its place today? The Trocadero has gone, like so many of our other valued institutions and things that people held dearly.
Education is a matter of public importance. I think we have had a very worthwhile debate today. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Beazley), in a question that he posed today, asked about enrolments at Western Sydney. Western Sydney University certainly impinges on the electorate of the member for Werriwa, but probably not so much on the electorate of the member for Sydney. But, as the minister responded, could there be other reasons why there is less demand for enrolments at Western Sydney University? One possible explanation could be that a number of young people leaving school now recognise that there are options other than going to university.
The minister made the point that under your regime there was an unrealistic expectation. Under your scheme, you almost had to have a university degree to become a taxi driver. In fact, many taxi drivers, by default, have university degrees. As far as university education was concerned, those were the unrealistic expectations that you thrust upon us. Now young people realise that they have other

options such as apprenticeships and a job, which was not available to them under your regime. Those are the sorts of explanations you might like to think about as to why enrolments at Western Sydney University are falling.
Minister Kemp spoke of the Dawkins years when those expectations were built up-those dark days for higher education which have largely been discredited and, hopefully, will be reversed. On the Gold Coast, we experienced the very best of the Dawkins years. We have Bond University, virtually the only private university in Australia, which was constantly attacked by him when he was minister for higher education. In fact, every year around enrolment time he would come out and make some spurious remarks about the viability of the university.
We have the Gold Coast campus of Griffith University, which has never been allocated enough funds to meet anywhere near the demand for places. The ACT has three public universities. While the population of the catchment area for the Gold Coast campus of Griffith University is actually greater than the whole of the ACT, it has one public university. So we have had to survive the Dawkins reorganisations and the years of higher education policy under the former government. Let me tell you, it was not too good and it will be a big job to fix it up.
Interestingly, the member for Werriwa trotted out the Whitlam years. That was also a mistake because that was when things really started to change in this country. The prospect of free university education was held out as part of your experiment to provide equity in access to universities. But what happened? What is the situation as at this time? Nothing has changed very much, despite all of your efforts to promote what you call social mobility. It just has not worked. It did not work and it will not work. The Whitlam 'dream', as you called it, became a nightmare in so many respects for this country and we have hardly recovered from it since.
The member for Sydney reminded us of his days as Minister for Social Security, as if we needed any reminding of his capacity for obfuscation. As I sat here I thought, 'This is

7076

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

deja vu, except I am on this side now instead of that side listening to the member for Sydney making a speech'-and we had not heard him for a while. In terms of the actual MPI we have been given, he clearly failed to make a case for his proposition. We can excuse his style because we all have different styles, but we cannot excuse the lack of substance in his debate.
You argued a little bit about statistics, although you apologised for doing that, but you were always good at doing that. When you were Minister for Social Security, we could be sure that we would get a statistics lesson every time you stood up to answer a question or make a speech. We knew we were going to be earbashed with statistics for the next five minutes.
Mr Bevis-You don't want to talk about tertiary places in Queensland, do you? You don't want to talk about tertiary places in your own state.
Mr BRADFORD-Queensland is still short of university places-way short of university places. It will be a very big job for us to attempt to make up for 13 years of waste.
Let me tell you, Mr Deputy Speaker, some of the things that have been done, and there have been some very significant changes. Total funding for the higher education sector will increase by more than $50 million in 1997. Additional money over three years is being put into research. An additional $39.3 million is being put into additional Australian postgraduate awards and research grants.
As far as fee paying students are concerned, the minister made the point by asking why, for years, you discriminated against Australian students in that respect. There was never any logic to it. It was just some ideological block that you had about giving places to Australian students who wanted to purchase places in Australian universities. Overseas students could come here and do it but Australian students could not. So the government made the right decision in that respect. The result has been additional flexibilities for universities because they must fill their quota of publicly funded places first.

With regard to HECS, we accept that HECS is a good scheme. It has always had relatively bipartisan support. We believe that we have improved the scheme. One of the obvious deficiencies that existed in the HECS that was overlooked until we fixed it up was the actual cost of the course undertaken and the likely future benefits to the individuals undertaking that course. That is logical. If the member for Sydney thought logically he could understand that, I am quite sure.
I believe that the acceleration of recovery with the lower compulsory threshold of $20,701 and the increase in the base level were responsible decisions. Let me say that they were responsible in the context-and we need to remind members opposite of this--of the very difficult budgetary situation that we were left with. We never pretended it would be easy to fill that $8 billion or $10 billion black hole, but we took the responsible decisions that had to be taken.
Because those decisions were taken, I believe that Australia is better off today. Certainly the battlers of Australia are better off; they have more money in their pockets. So we do not apologise for having taken some of those tough decisions. The pain had to be spread evenly, and the gain is already coming for Australian families, particularly for the battlers of Werriwa, the people of Liverpool out there in Sydney's west. They do not think so badly of us. Just a couple of weeks ago they voted for us in buckets. We actually got five per cent more votes in the Lindsay by-election than we got at the federal election. So they did not think we were doing such a bad job.
We are delivering on what we were elected to do. We are looking after the battlers. We are providing scholarships-l,OOO new students a year. Up to a total of 4,000 students will be given HECS-exempt scholarships to attend universities.
This is an important matter, and it is a good MPI, but opposition members have not actually debated and demonstrated their proposition. They have obfuscated, particularly the member for Sydney, around the point. Clearly this government's policies are good for higher

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7077

education and for schools, and they are good for the battlers of Australia. (Time expired)
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jenkins)- Order! The discussion has concluded.
COMMITTEES
Public Works Committee
Report
Mr ANDREW (Wakefield) (4.25 p.m.)- On behalf of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works, I present the second report of the committee for 1996, entitled CSIRO Research Interaction and Biomolecular Research Facilities, Black Mountain, ACT.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr ANDREW-by leave-The report which I have just tabled deals with a proposal to increase the scientific research capacity of the CSIRO in Canberra by constructing improved facilities for high quality biological research within the Division of Plant Industry. The proposal involves the demolition of existing laboratory facilities which are seriously substandard and outdated, and proposes to redevelop the site and construct a new research laboratory which will be integrated with a CSIRO research interaction centre. The interaction centre will offer the opportunity for members of the community to view and take part in interactive exhibits illustrating CSIRO research and its applications.
In its examination of the proposal, the committee found that existing CSIRO research facilities for biomolecular research at Black Mountain are inadequate, dispersed, overcrowded and do not meet contemporary occupational health and safety standards. Therefore, there is a need to provide modem research facilities for biomolecular research to enable the Division of Plant Industry to continue research programs aimed at enhancing Australia's multi-billion dollar agribusinesses.
The integration of the research interaction centre will provide opportunities for the CSIRO to display publicly the results of research being undertaken by all divisions and heighten the profile of the organisation and the scientists who make a major contribution

to Australia's scientific research efforts. The committee further concluded that the location of the proposed complex makes good use of the space available within the Division of Plant Industry precinct, and that the design concept integrates the proposed laboratory, research interaction centre, conference facilities and staff amenities in a functional manner.
In the public consultation process, as attested by evidence received by the committee, the CSIRO proposal has strong support from organisations and individuals with an interest in fostering public knowledge of CSIRO achievements in science. According to market research, it is estimated that the research interaction centre should attract in excess of 100,000 visitors annually. Based on admission charges, the interaction centre will be self-funding.
In approving the construction of the proposed facilities at a cost of $17.1 million, the committee has recommended that further consideration be given to the provision of covered access to the complex from the kerb side to the front entrance. I commend the report to the House.
Selection Committee
Report
Mr NEHL (Cowper)-Pursuant to standing order 28, I present the report of the Selection Committee relating to the consideration of committee and delegation reports and private members' business on Monday, 2 Decemmber 1996. Copies of the report have been circulated to honourable members in the chamber.
Report-by leave-adopted.
The report read as follows-
Report relating to the consideration of committee and delegation reports and private Members' business on Monday, 2 December 1996
Pursuant to sessional order 28D, the Selection Committee has determined the order of precedence and times to be allotted for consideration of committee and delegation reports and private Members' business on Monday, 2 December 1996. The order of precedence and the allotments of time determined by the Committee are shown in the list.

7078

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

COMMITTEE AND DELEGATION REPORTS Presentation and statements 1 AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTARY DELEG-
ATION TO THE 17TH ASEAN INTERPARLIAMENTARY ORGANISATION (AIPO) GENERAL ASSEMBLY, PHUKET, THAILAND: Report of the Australian Parliamentary Delegation to the 17th Asean InterParliamentary Organisation (AIPO) General Assembly, Phuket. Thailand. The Committee determined that statements on the report may be made-all statements to be made within a total time of 5 minutes. 2 NATIONAL CRIME AUTHORITY-JOINT COMMITTEE: Report on the examination of the annual report for 1994-95 of the National Crime Authority. The Committee determined that statements on the report may be made-all statements to be made within a total time of 5 minutes. 3 PROCEDURE-STANDING COMMITTEE: Report on review of reports of previous Procedure Committees to which the Government has not yet responded. The Committee determined that statements on the report may be made-all statements to be made within a total time of 5 minutes. 4 AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE 96TH INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION CONFERENCE, BEIJING, AND BILATERAL VISITS TO VIETNAM, HONG KONG AND THE PHILIPPINES: Report of the Australian Parliamentary Delegation to the 96th Inter-Parliamentary Union Conference, Beijing, and bilateral visits to Vietnam, Hong Kong and the Philippines, 1996. The Committee determined that statements on the report may be made-all statements to be made within a total time of 5 minutes. 5 FOREIGN AFFAIRS, DEFENCE AND TRADE-JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE: Report on Australia's relations with southern Africa. The Committee determined that statements on the report may be made-all statements to be made within a total time of 5 minutes. 6 TREATIES-JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE: Report on treaties tabled on 15 and 29 October 1996. The Committee determined that statements on the report may be made-all statements to be made within a total time of 5 minutes. 7 AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION BILATERAL VISITS TO INDIA AND PAKISTAN: Report of the Australian

Parliamentary Delegation bilateral visits to India and Pakistan, August-September 1996. The Committee determined that statements on the report may be made-all statements to be made within a total time of 5 minutes. 8 AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE OECD, KENYA, ETHIOPIA AND ERITREA: Report of the Australian Parliamentary Delegation to the OECD, Kenya, Ethiopia and Eritrea, June-july 1996. The Committee determined that statements on the report may be made-all statements to be made within the time remaining for committee and delegation reports. PRIVATE MEMBERS' BUSINESS Order of precedence Notices 1 Mr Fitzgibbon to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1908. (Notice given 7 November 1996.) Orders of the day 1 BURMA-THAILAND RAILWA YPRISONER OF WAR MEMORIAL: Resumption of debate (from 18 November 1996) on the motion of Mr Truss-That this House: (I) acknowledges the great heroism and sacri-
fice of Australia's prisoners of war, in particular those who worked on the BurmaThailand railway; (2) commends the Government on its initiative to construct a museum and memorial to prisoners of war near Hellfire Pass in Thailand; (3) commends Mr Rod Beattie and his associates for their work in clearing a 4km walking trail along the Burma-Thailand railway at Hellfire Pass; and (4) calls on Australian companies, ex-service organisations and other countries whose service personnel also worked on the railway to support the Prisoner of War Memorial project. Time allotted-any remaining private Members' business time prior to 1.45 p.m. Speech time limitsEach Member-5 minutes. The Committee determined that consideration of this matter should continue on a future day. Notices---continued 2 Mr Quick to move That this House: (1) notes that the United Nations has declared 1996 to be the International Year of Eradication of Poverty;

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATNES

7079

(2) notes that, in spite of significant economic progress in many countries over the last 50 years, more than one billion people continue to live in absolute poverty; and
(3) urges the Government to increase the budget allocation for aid and to take all possible measures to work toward the elimination of poverty. (Notice given 17 October 1996.)

ing Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No.3). Essentially the amendments being put forward are fair and equitable. In a moment I will continue my remarks concerning the need to simplify the taxation act to empower the average Australian, perhaps at a net loss to the Australian Taxation Office.

Time allotted-any remaining private Members' business time.
Speech time limitsMover-IO minutes. First Government Member speaking-l0
minutes. Other Members-5 minutes each.
The Committee determined that consideration of this matter should continue on a future day.
TAXATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL (No.3) 1996

Firstly, I will address my remarks to research and development tax concessions. As I said last night, in Australia we are very good at research and development. This bill will strengthen our capabilities in research and development by focusing assistance towards increasing outlays in this area and away from non-transparent and cost ineffective tax concessions. In other words, the government will encourage research and development by providing assistance directly to researchers rather than to investors.

Second Reading
Debate resumed from 18 November, on motion by Mr Miles:
That the bill be now read a second time.

The way things are at present, investors can too easily lose the plot and focus on personal and syndicate tax minimisation outcomes rather than on the main game, which of course is the R&D outcomes.

upon which Mr Latham moved by way of amendment:
That all words after "That" be omitted with a view to substituting the following words: "whilst not declining to give the Bill a second reading, the House is of the opinion that: (1) the Government has substantially increased the
tax burden on ordinary PAYE taxpayers; (2) the Government's tax and transfer policies
substantially disadvantage women who choose to have both a family and paid work; (3) the Bill will substantially reduce industry research and development in Australia, thereby eroding our competitive advantages, economic growth and employment creation; (4) the Bill will damage co-operative companies and especially damage employment, investment and local ownership in regional Australia at a time when the Government has flattened growth and economic activity; and (5) the Bill further erodes the universal health safety net provisions associated with Medicare and further leads to the creation of a two tier health system in Australia".
Mr HARDGRAVE (Moreton) (4.29 p.m.)-Before this debate was interrupted by the adjournment last night, I was making a number of comments about why I am support-

In fact the Bureau of Industry Economics found more R&D expenditure encouraged in recent years by tax concessions might only lie in the range of 10 to 17 per cent of eligible R&D expenditure. In anyone's language this is a poor return to the taxpayer. However, the government will continue to provide a very generous tax concession to R&D investors of 125 per cent. Direct assistance to researchers will be achieved by establishing the Strategic Assistance for Research and Development Program-START. Under this new program the government will provide a flexible package of assistance totalling $340 million over the next four years to encourage larger projects containing highly innovative or technically risky R&D which has strong support for commercialisation from the private sector.
The people in my electorate of Moreton are very pleased with this development indeed. In addition, the government has maintained funding for the CSIRO, the cooperative research centres and technology support centre programs. The election commitment the coalition gave to increase the CSIRO's funding base by an additional $115 million over the next four years has also been honoured.

7080

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

Funding for the CSIRO is estimated to be $444 million in 1996-97, rising to $509 million in 1999-2000. The government will also fund cooperative research centres at about $145 million in 1996-97, rising to $148 million in 1998-99.
All this adds up to a continuing and strong commitment by the government for real research and development. Total Commonwealth government support will remain in excess of $3.5 billion dollars in this current financial year. It is important to get those matters on the record because previous speakers in this debate have tried to create some fear and loathing to prop up some areas of R&D which, as I have said, have been looking more for the tax concessions rather than real R&D outcomes.

attempt to at least make sure things were done in the right way.
The problem is people do not feel confident with the sum total which is the tax act; they cannot cope with the changes and the complexity. If the output of this place had a consumer guarantee attached to it a lot of us would find ourselves in trouble. Basic consumerism would teach us people dissatisfied with a product or service they purchase have a reason to complain. It is the guarantee of Australian citizens, happily, to vote out the government they are not happy with. I suspect part of the reason the previous government crashed and burned so effectively on 2 March had something to do with 13 years of complexities added to the tax act and to many other levels of government in this country.

I would like to tum my attention to the People want this current government to do

need to simplify the overall tax act. We are a lot more than just to add on to what the

adding another layer of taxation rules and previous failed government built. The tax act

regulations as a result of this bill, even in the minds of a lot of people in my elector-

though, of course, there are some attempts to ate should simply be demolished, bulldozed,

simplify, by the way the numbering and - and" a new one built in its place. A couple of

lettering system is compiled in this bill before months ago a 'shred the tax act' seminar

us, the so-called 'snoring' numbering system devised by both chambers of commerce in my

where essentially all the different facets of the electorate promoted a number of very fine

act have many, many numbers after them. It ideas. But the central theme was a simpler,

is called the 'snoring' system because of the fairer, more transparent, more easily under-

series of zeds which might follow as the final stood act. Essentially, the message is people

part of a particular part of this bill. It is being want to be empowered. People who want to

redefined and slowly but surely straightened make a contribution by building up their

out.

businesses and by being good citizens want to

The complexity of the system, as far as it is felt by average Australians, cannot be underestimated by anybody in this place. I think back to when I was a youngster and my father used to quite happily, 25 or 30 years ago, do his yearly income tax on the kitchen

know what it is they are paying tax for, understanding the systems involved. They do not want to see more added on and more taken off and this ad hoc approach to taxation management in this country. They would like to see the whole act rewritten.

table. The black blanket would come out; this Small business is certainly sick of FBT and

was the first sign. The bill spike would come capital gains tax regimes. In the state area

out from the bottom of the wardrobe and all they are sick of payroll tax and land tax and

of the receipts for the year would be laid out the way they cost the generation of real jobs.

on the table. Dad would happily sit down They want the whole tax act rewritten. Essen-

with the pencil at first, be happy with the tially, they want it along more simple and

results, then pen it in and send it off to the basic, common sense and more easily under-

tax man. He has not done so for 20 years, stood lines. I will not canvass any of the hard

mainly because of the complexity of the act. changes talked about at that 'shred the tax

In my working life of the last 20 years I have act' seminar other than to say I think the call

managed to do my taxation once myself from other bodies in recent months to keep

before giving it over to the professionals in an politicians out of the debate is the right call.

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7081

If the chambers of commerce and the welfare lobby in this country would like to have a meeting of minds and can from their different constituencies' points of view, then surely in this place, where good debate should be generated on these sorts of matters, we can as
well.
So politicians should stay out of the debate in the short term, fine, but I put this point: essentially we need to have a standard set of rules for everyone, which everyone can understand. Everyone should pay their fair share of tax. The current system, which Labor has had more than a little bit of a hand in over the last 20 years, seems to be more geared towards protecting some at the big end of town and negates this sector's responsibility to contribute on a more equal basis. Certainly, this is the folklore out there.
I submit the process of real reform to the taxation system should involve everybody and it should not just be members of this place, academics and bureaucrats. It should involve all Australians working together for a sensible outcome, which so many people want.
The taxation system in this country cannot be underestimated as to its impact on economic well-being. It also socially engineers certain outcomes. The taxation system can create envy or dispel it. It can create jobs or destroy them. It can promote growth or suppress it. It can create social justice or put it completely under strain. It can create opportunities for those who want to work hard and it can also discourage effort. The number of people who have said to me they do not want to work overtime or longer hours because they lose so much money in tax is a perfect example of this.
We no longer need a taxation system which seems to be more about maintaining the system and its bureaucracy ahead of the outcome: ensuring a fair and equitable contribution is made by all Australians to the running of this nation. A law which does not have universal support and which is not easily understood and therefore not easily adhered to and is not easily respected by those it is s~pposed to govern of course is a law destilled to be broken and to be bent. If we can make the tax laws in this country more

transparent, if we can make them simpler and more easily understood, then fewer Australians will bother to try to think of ways to get around them.
If we can create this situation, perhaps fewer bureaucrats will be needed to try to expose those who cheat or attempt to escape the system. There have been many celebrated examples over the years of the ATO going down a particular path in a particular year to try to generate some additional income, under direction of the Treasurer or finance minister of the day. They have put on thousands of extra part-time staff only to find the cost of putting them on has been greater than the amount of money brought in. Certain sections of our community are brought in for desk audits just out of some random desire to try to see whether the tax office can flush out a certain amount of money.
A lot of this would never be necessary if everybody felt quite happy they were paying their fair share of tax in this country. People want to contribute. People want to pay their fair share of tax to ensure they are helping run the country, helping to provide the basic services and infrastructure to help those who are less fortunate in the community. People understand this, but we in this place need to understand, by creating a more complex and threatening taxation system through every amendment we bring through this place, we will not help the sum total of those who want to pay their fair share of tax and contribute and understand they are contributing and be satisfied many others are also contributing.
This government needs to address these matters. Those opposite will also have to recognise the fundamental need to support some of the changes which are going to come out of the debate over the years ahead. It is certainly no good playing scare politics like the now opposition did back in 1993.
I certainly hope those opposite losing government, losing power, at the 2 March election has taught them a few lessons. One of them would be to listen to the peopleordinary workers, ordinary small business owners, mums and dads, the elderly of this country who have retired but are paying tax after having worked all their life-to find out

7082

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

they want a simpler, more easily understandable and, more particularly, fairer system. I hope the Labor Party in this place in particular has the maturity to work with the government parties to bring about some worthwhile changes which will promote jobs, hope and certainty for all Australians through its fairer taxation system. This certainly can be created if key laws like tax laws are simple and easy to understand.
Some years ago, in an earlier incarnation, I worked with the then Liberal Party leader in Queensland, Angus Innes, who had a policy in the 1989 state election in Queensland-it was one of those watershed years where no matter what we put forward we were never going to win-whereby for every additional page in the laws we as a government were going to promote two pages would be taken out. In other words, there would be a rewrite to make it simpler, shorter and more easily understood. I can think of no better place to start with in relation to the laws in this country than tax, although the changes which should come will perhaps take a bit of time.
So let us have the debate. Let us involve everyone in this country. Let us make decisions. As members in this place, we owe it to all of our constituents to get on with the basics and to get them right.
Mr STEPHEN SMITH (Perth) (4.42 p.m.)-I rise to support the amendment moved and circulated in the name of the member for Werriwa (Mr Latham) and also the amendments cjrculated in the name of the member for Hotham (Mr Crean). The substantial elements of those amendments that I wish to refer to this afternoon go to research and development and to cooperative companies. The relevant paragraphs of the amendment moved by the member for Werriwa are:
(3) the Bill will substantially reduce industry research and development in Australia, thereby eroding our competitive advantages, economic growth and employment creation;
(4) the Bill will damage co-operative companies and especially damage employment, investment and local ownership in regional Australia at a time when the Government has flattened growth and economic activity;
Those two paragraphs go to the heart of the contribution that I wish to make this after-

noon. Whilst Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No.3) is an omnibus bill and the important areas of research and development and the economic activity of cooperative companies are dealt with, most of my remarks will deal with research and development.
In the end what is research and development about? In the end research and development is about a country like Australia trying to maximise its economic growth, trying to maximise the number of job opportunities, doing that by researching and developing Australian ideas here, ensuring that our smart ideas which are developed here become not just part of our domestic consumption but part of our export effort, taking advantage of the trade liberalisation mechanisms that we have seen put in place over recent years. So in the end research and development is about economic growth and about jobs. The mechanism or lever research and development uses to get economic growth and jobs is that it provides an incentive for Australian companies to research, to make that private investment in research.
Historically, Australia has had a very good record for public sector research. All members of this House hold their head up high when they talk about the successful research efforts of the CSIRO. Historically, we have been weak in relation to private research, and historically we have been weak in developing that pure research into Australian products. A substantial effort was made by the previous government to provide Australian companies with incentives to make that investment into research, and that was effectively by way of the mechanism of the 150 per cent tax conceSSIOn.
The relevant parts of this bill reduce the 150 per cent concession to 125 per cent. At precisely the time when we need to take maximum advantage of Australia's place in our region, at precisely the time when the markets opening up in Asia are for elaborately transformed manufactures or for value added goods and at precisely the time when the government's own budget papers show, firstly, that the effect of their policy will reduce economic growth and, secondly, so far as exports are concerned, that a positive

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATNES

7083

contribution to economic growth by exports in the last financial year will tum to a minus three-quarters of a per cent net negative contribution to growth in GDP in the next financial year, the government reduces incentives to Australian companies to invest in research and development.
It is not as though this decision is out there in holy isolation. This is consistent with the course of conduct that we have seen from the government since it took office on 2 March. If it is not reducing the incentive to companies for research and development, if it is not knocking off bounties for shipbuilders, which is the subject of separate legislation, then it is knocking off the export market development grants scheme, lTES, lAMP or Asia Business Links-a whole array of trade and industry incentive programs put in place over a sustained period to provide incentives to Australian companies to invest, to develop Australian ideas here and to tum themselves into companies which have as their priority to a successful export strategy.
The whole thrust of the research and development provisions of this bill go against our national interest. Our national interest is to enhance our private research effort, economic growth, the number of job opportunities, trade and our export. The government with this bill-one example in a range-is doing precisely the opposite.
Industry reaction to this particular provision has been absolutely damning. In the September edition of Australian R&D Review there is a vast array of condemnatory comments. I will not burden the House by reading them all into the record, just a range of them:
Dr Robin Batterham, Vice President of CRA Research & Technology, saw two problems with the reduction of the R&D Tax Concession from the point of view of major companies.
"First it is a stupid decision, because it will tilt the balance for big companies undertaking major R&D projects and comparing a number of possible locations. In the past, Australia offered a comparable economic environment but won out through the availability of relative cheap research science and engineering personnel. However, with the reduced R&D tax concession rate, Australia will no longer compete with countries such as Chile, Malaysia and Singapore," he said.

Dr Batterham pointed out that the decision to locate HiSmelt-
in Western Australia-
(Australia's largest single R&D project) here was largely influenced by the 150% per cent tax concession.
He goes on to say:
The message that-
the decision to reduce from 150 per cent to 125 per cent-
sends to business is that this Government is prepared to go ahead and make major decisions which have significant implications for the investment climate in Australia without any discussions with the business community.
In addition to the very hostile and adverse reaction by industry to the reduction, there has also been a very adverse and hostile reaction to that decision having been done without consultation. Further in the Review, Dr Robert Hobbs, General Manager of Corporate Research at BHP, refers to the change being:
. . . a sudden reversal of promises made by the Government.
He is quoted as saying:
The big issue for industry was to ensure certainty about the R&D tax incentive. Now, BHP is reviewing its position, and I expect that we will maintain our total R&D effort but more of it will be done in other places.
There is a building up of a consistent reaction in industry that, whilst it may be the case that the same level of research and development will be done, less of it will be done in Australia. That is hardly in our national interest.
There are a range of other comments, but I will just give the House a couple. In the same article Michael Rowland from Amrad says:
A lot of industrial research is now likely to go to Malaysia or Singapore where there is a 200% tax concession. Amrad conducts all its research in Australia and is not planning to change that at this stage, but we may have to look at it in the future.
There is also a quote from Dr John Stocker, former chief executive officer of CSIRO, who is now with Pratt Industries. He makes the point:

7084

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

R&D is a long-term operation and the recent changes send the signal that (the investment environment) is susceptible to sudden changes.
So the reviews by relevant industry members have been absolutely damning.
A number of constituents who are employees of Orbital Engine in Western Australia have written to me and raised their very grave concerns about the adverse implications and effect that this bill will have on the research and development efforts of Orbital Engine, which is a project of some long standing significance in Western Australia. I have received a number of approaches from constituents who work at Orbital, which is outside my electorate, urging me as their local member to oppose the changes that the government is making to R&D. I am certainly happy to do that, and will vote accordingly.
The second area I want to briefly touch on is cooperative companies. The effect of the legislation before the House is that cooperative companies will no longer receive a deduction for the repayment of new government loans. The budget savings here are quite minimal-$12 million over three financial years. This is quite a small amount so far as the overall budget is concerned, but it has a very big adverse effect so far as a range of cooperatives are concerned.
These cooperatives operate in particular in regional areas and are invariably in the business of adding value to primary produce. They are also invariably reliant upon this sort of incentive to continue their efforts. Very many of these companies are now turning themselves from domestic operations to exporting operations. The Golden Circle Cannery in Brisbane is just one example, but it is a very good example. Whilst the amount of dollars that are affected so far as the budget bottom line is concerned is quite small, the potential adverse effect for regional cooperative companies, particularly in the primary producing area, is very grave.
Again, we are seeing a consistent course of conduct on the part of this government. They are not in favour of economic growth. Not in favour of jobs. Not in favour of providing incentives to companies so they add value to their efforts and turn themselves into export-

ing companies. Not in favour of providing incentives to Australian companies so they lift their private research and development effort and have the opportunity to develop Australian ideas here. That has the consequent effect of developing jobs and providing prosperity here.
This bill is part of the government's consistent course of conduct. Similar comments can be made in respect of a range of trade and industry legislation which we will see before the House in due course.
This legislation has all the hallmarks of a government which is cutting off its nose to spite its face. It is interested in the budget bottom line, but is not interested in the economic and employment consequences which follow.
Mr VAILE (Lyne) (4.54 p.m.)-I have a good opportunity this afternoon to discuss a couple of the more important elements of this omnibus bill, the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No.3). This bill delivers on a number of the coalition's commitments from the 2 March election, namely, and most importantly, our promise to provide a more equitable taxation threshold for self-funded retirees.
That measure was certainly one of the policy platforms that was very welcome in my electorate, as I have a lot of self-funded retirees in my electorate-albeit some of them are on lower incomes than those in a lot of other areas of Australia. These retirees believe that, for a number of years, they have been inequitably treated in the taxation system compared with, for instance, full pensioners. So this measure in this bill is certainly very welcome. It will provide some important relief to a great number of people in the community, particularly in my electorate of Lyne.
This bill also delivers on another measurethat is, in relation to equity investments in small and medium enterprises that are taxed under CGT provisions. Again, we are delivering upon another important commitment that we made at the election in March this year.
The provision that allows for an increased threshold for older Australians and retired Australians is very important. The bill means

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7085

that the federal government is delivering on its election commitment to increase the tax free threshold for self-funded retirees. This will be of great importance to people in my part of Australia, the mid-north coast of New South Wales.
Self-funded retirees have saved for their own retirement. Some of them have low incomes and pay tax at a much lower threshold than those on the pension. Under the coalition's proposal, they will receive the same tax rebate as pensioners on that income level. So the tax free threshold for an eligible, single, aged person will increase from $5,400 to $11,185. This measure will be introduced in two stages, commencing with a half rebate in 1996-97 and the full rebate in 1997-98.
I should note at this stage that those same retired Australians who take out private health insurance will also receive the $250 rebate for couples under our health reform package. Those people who are on a part pension and have a part private income will still receive the twice-yearly indexation of the age pension to maintain it at or above the 25 per cent of average weekly earnings.
So this is a very important measure, and I note with interest that it has not been commented too broadly on by members of the opposition in the debate on this bill. There has been a far greater focus on some of the other measures, but I thought it was worthwhile identifying that as being one of the very important elements in this bill we are debating today.
There has been a great deal of attention paid to the proposed changed arrangements as far as syndicated R&D is concerned. It certainly will not hurt for the government of the day to review the position that has been enjoyed in some of these areas. We are seeing a reduction in the availability of the deduction from 150 per cent to 125 per cent, so that is a reduction of one-sixth.
Honourable members should bear in mind that one of the reasons the government has had to review all these policy and taxation measures is the situation we found the Australian economy in on coming into government. Every section of the economy is being asked to shoulder a part of the responsibility

of fixing up the problem that we have. In that fiscal consolidation, we are asking this section of the economy to shoulder a small part of that burden. In that process, we have the opportunity to tidy up an area where there has been an alleged rorting and abuse of the system in syndicating those tax deductions for research and development.
I am sure that industry will work wi th the government in going through this process. The people who are genuinely trying to kick a few goals for Australia are not going to be detrimentally affected by this process. They will work with the government to ensure that they continue to do what they do best. The people who will drop off the pace, the people we will lose out of the system, will be the ones who have been abusing the system. The benefit will no longer be there for them to abuse the system. It is important to recognise that the people who are genuinely doing research and development for the benefit of this nation will continue to do that. Those who are doing research and development purely for the extra 25 per cent benefit are not doing it genuinely. Those people are doing it to minimise tax rather than to develop new products for their industries to manufacture.
The underlying reason for this measure is the woeful state of the economy that we inherited. The opposition-through some of the amendments that the member for Werriwa (Mr Latham) moved-is claiming that this is going to be detrimental to the private sector. The first point that the member for Werriwa makes in his amendment is that the government has substantially increased the tax burden on ordinary PAYE taxpayers.
We are eight months out from an election where there was a major change in attitude in Australia and a change in government wrought by the people of Australia not by any small measure but in spades. The people of Australia wanted a change in government after 13 years of a Labor government that burdened PAYE taxpayers with indirect taxes and a sleight of hand on taxation. Not only did they burden PAYE taxpayers through the indirect tax system, wholesale sales tax and tax on fuel, but the previous Prime Minister was the driving force for pushing interest

7086

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

rates to an unbearable level for business in this country.
That is why there are so many complaints in this country today from people throughout Australia about foreign ownership, foreign investment and the number of industries and businesses that have moved offshore. It is not so much to do with what we are doing now, but to do with the interest rate regime that was overseen by the former Prime Minister and the Labor Party. It has been shown that he was driving the interest rate regime in the late 1980s. He pushed interest rates to the unacceptably high levels that we saw then.
That is what did the damage to this economy. That is what did the damage to industry in this country. That is why so many industries left this country. That is why foreign investors have come in and bought a lot of our industry base. Foreign investors have come in and taken over the processing sectors of our agricultural industries-the value adding sectors-because Australian businesses could not afford to borrow money in Australia because of the monetary policies run by the Hawke and Keating governments.
I would like to refer to an article written by Max Walsh where he talks about Keating's attitude that he had the Reserve Bank in his back pocket. He says that between March 1988 and November 1989 the cash rate was lifted by nearly eight percentage points, with Paul Keating cracking the whip. He says that the cash rates were pushed too high for too long.
Don Russell, the former Prime Minister's chief adviser when he was Treasurer and again when he was Prime Minister, told a seminar that he heard the economy snap at the end of 1989. Why did it snap? It snapped because the then Treasurer, Paul Keating, drove the cash rate up by eight percentage points. People who were trying to do business and create jobs and wealth for this country had to pay over 20 per cent to borrow money. They were the most damaging years for industry in this country. That is why industry in this country is in the situation it is in today.
The people who are still conducting R&D are not doing it because there is a 150 per

cent deduction. They are doing it despite the fact that the Labor Party caned them with 20 per cent interest rates in the late 1980s. Many of our Australian industries have gone offshore not because they can get a 200 percentage deduction in, say, Malaysia but because they can borrow money more easily. They cannot borrow money in Australia.
Much of our value adding primary industry sector has fallen into foreign ownership because foreign investors could borrow money offshore in their countries of origin at four, five or six per cent interest when the people in Australia who wanted to invest in those industries had to pay over 20 per cent interest. Why? The then Treasurer drove the cash rates up by over eight percentage points. He was cracking the whip behind the Reserve Bank. That is why industry in this country is in the situation it is in today.
We inherited an economy with $180 billion of foreign debt of which nearly $100 biIlion belongs to the public sector. Our foreign debt increased by nearly $30 billion during the time of the former Prime Minister's rule. That is why the coalition has had to introduce a regime of fiscal consolidation. That is why we have had to take these responsible measures. Some of these measures have to be introduced because we cannot go on the way we were going on under the previous regime-under the Labor Party.
I close by reminding the House that the government is trying to address the absolutely deplorable economic situation that this country was in where the Labor Party drove the country with a policy of deficit and debt. We are trying to fix up the problem we inherited. We did not create the problem, but we are going to fix it. We are going to shoulder the responsibility of fixing it and we are asking different sectors of the economy to shoulder a small part of that responsibility.
They need to recognise that they have got to do that because of the Labor Party and what they did for 13 years in this country. Those industries know that it was the Labor Party and the monetary policy they ran in the late 1980s that absolutely crucified and almost annihilated them through that high interest rate regime.

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7087

The coalition government will remain committed to fixing the problem we inherited. The bill we are debating today is part of that, and it is also delivering on a number of the commitments, particularly-and I highlight again--commitments to self-funded retirees in Australia, who have been inequitably treated by the taxation system in recent years. We are going to provide a bit more equity for them.
Madam DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mrs Sullivan)-During the speech by the honourable member for Lyne a matter arose in the chamber. I was reluctant to interrupt the speech of the honourable member for Lyne to draw it to the chamber's attention. Before I call the honourable member for Chifley, I ask him, after he makes his speech, to refresh his memory on the matter of standing order 56.
Mr PRICE (Chifley) (5.08 p.m.)-Oh yes, thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker-it is a particular fetish.
I am very pleased to speak in this debate on the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No.3). I want to respond to some of the remarks of the honourable member for Lyne (Mr Vaile). I note that he consistently regurgitates what a lot of government members are suggesting; that is, that the economy was in a very dire state after the election on 2 March. It is most interesting that in Australia the Prime Minister (Mr Howard) has one thing to say about the Australian economy, but when he travels overseas he says something quite different; he is quite pleased to acknowledge that he inherited a very strong economy. I note that when opposition members talk about black holes, they are never prepared to concede the $3.5 billion worth of election promises made by the Prime Minister and funded in the budget.
Quite rightly, the member for Lyne raises the issue of assisting self-funded retirees. The difficulties of wanting to meet that particular group's needs in the community would come as no surprise to honourable members. I note that the government has wanted to do so. I am sure I can say that, on our side of politics, we too were very concerned to be seen to be wanting to assist them.
I think the cost of fulfilling the coalition's promise on this issue is $65 million in 1997-

98. It is approximately half the cost of the dental health program. I would be indebted to other coalition speakers if they would perhaps enlighten me about a proposal that they have considered and supported which is benefiting 50,000 people, and a proposal abolishing something that is this year benefiting some 600,000 people. There are other things in this bill that I wanted to talk about, but since the member for Lyne talked about the economy I thought I should say what I thought the most important issues in the economy were from my perspective.
I think interest rates are very important; it is pleasing to see them coming down. Unlike the honourable member for Lyne-because he did not mention it-I still think the banks enjoy a generous spread of some three per cent on their margins. They have some of the highest spreads of banks anywhere in the world. It seems to me that there is still plenty of capacity in the banking system, with no other changes in the economy, for interest rates to come down. I would have thought that the honourable member for Lyne would have been arguing passionately that interest rates should come down even further in an attempt to try to kick start what appears to be a very lagging economy-an economy that is starting to go into a slight decline. Certainly, lower interest rates-and significantly lower interest rates-would act as a stimulus, and I am the first to concede it. So interest rates are certainly important in my electorate and I support the lowering of interest rates.
I have the greatest stake in growth in the economy and employment growth. These two things benefit my electorate greatly-probably not as much as they benefit some other electorates, but they do have a profound impact on my electorate because they mean that there are more jobs. In the last three years of the Labor government-with reference to leaving the economy in such a dreadful state-we enjoyed growth in GDP averaging some 4.2 per cent. Employment growth was three per cent. We averaged 200,000 new jobs every year. That has already declined under the coalition; in fact, it has halved. They average not 200,000 jobs a year but 100,000 jobs a year. If we want to talk about

7088

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

the last election, is it not a pity that this falling employment rate was not shared with the voters and that they were not informed that there would be a 50 per cent reduction? Rather than there being prospects of it improving, it is indeed going to get worse.
In terms of economic growth, the budget projection was lower-I think it was 3.5 per cent-than our average of 4.2 per cent over the last three years. Already we can say that that target is unlikely to be met in this budget. That is a tragedy. But I make the observation that, as much as we might be satisfied or feel self-congratulatory about four per cent or 4.2 per cent, there is a real need to try to get the Australian economy to grow at an even faster rate and to do that without trying to suck in imports.
That brings me to a very important item in this bill, and that is the issue of cutting R&D from 150 per cent to 125 per cent. If you want to look at industry policy and try to develop and grow Australian industry, the real starting point of that exercise has to be research and development. I have gone through the explanatory memorandum of the bill. I have gone through in the explanatory memorandum the 'General outline and financial impact' of the bill. I must say that the savings here are quite considerable as far as R&D is concerned. I think that, at the end of the three-year period, some $840 million per year will be saved.
Has there been any explanation by members on the other side of the House about the implications of this bill? Are we supposed to agree in this chamber to the proposition that there wiII be absolutely no change in R&D in Australia as a result of this, that it will have not one bit of impact? Are the members of the government going to argue that there will be some change but that it will be minimal? Has the department looked at this issue? Can the department advise us, through the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Andrew Thomson), who is at the table, exactly what is the cost and benefit of this measure?
It goes without saying that already, particularly in manufacturing but also in services, the Australian economy is dominated by foreign

companies. The people who take perhaps the most exciting advantage of this research and development program are the smallest companies. Invariably, they are Australian companies. They spend a disproportionate percentage of their revenue on research and development. When I say 'disproportionate', I mean that small Australian companies spend more on research and development as a proportion of their revenue than do multinational and foreign companies-and we are dominated by them.
Perhaps the interest is only on this side of the House, but I have to confess to having a great and abiding interest in wanting to see Australian owned innovative companies develop and grow. As I have said before, industry policy is not all that difficult. The notion is that you want to grow small companies into medium companies and medium companies into very large companies. If you have these exciting small companies taking advantage of the program, you are really giving a big boost to getting a greater proportion of our economy in Australian hands.
The point I am trying to make is that, by cutting the research and development grant, you are really aiming at the heart of small, innovative Australian owned companies that are operating in growth sectors in the economy that wiII be able to provide permanent long-term and sustainable jobs for us and our children and grandchildren into the future.
I know that on the government side there is a great passion for rationalism and level playing fields. I am not particularly xenophobic about foreign investment. But when you have an economy dominated by multinationals you always pay a price. The price is this: often they will not permit research and development to be undertaken in Australia, reserving that for other parts where the company has a presence and more usually for the headquarters.
The other price you pay is that there are usually, generally, overwhelmingly, marketing arrangements which prevent a subsidiary of a multinational from competing in certain markets. It does not matter if it has a better product, it does not matter if it is more price competitive and it does not even matter if the

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7089

customers want the product, once headquarters-whether they be in Tokyo, Detroit, London or Paris-have taken that decision the Australian subsidiary cannot buck it.
I have been critical in the past of Labor's ability to jawbone multinationals, to claw back more of the action for Australia. I wanted more-there was some-but there is no evidence that the coalition are in any way prepared to get down to trying to jawbone multinationals.
The research and development change in this bill is an absolute disgrace. I do not for one moment say that there cannot be changes. For example, previous speakers on our side have pointed out that we have always had an outstanding record in public research-that is, research done by universities, the CSIRO and the Defence Science and Technology Organisation. That has always rated highly as a proportion of our GDP.
It was private industry that was lagging behind, and we still do not have a culture in Australia, notwithstanding this measure that was introduced under a Labor government, of Australian companies spending well or even spending up to OECD averages on research and development. I suppose that is another question I would ask the departmental officials and invite the parliamentary secretary to respond to. Are you arguing that we, as a result of the Labor government introducing this measure, now have a sustainable commitment to research and development by Australian companies? I do not believe you could sustain such an argument.
Maybe there will come a day when you will not need this proposal, but I was talking about changing it. The point I wanted to make is that Australia is very good at fundamental research. We are very good at innovation. We are not so good at getting to the product stage, not so good at commercialising the research and development. We are good at the R, not so good at the D.
Maybe there needs to be a redesign of our research and development grants. Maybe there needs to be some adjustment of focus. That is a legitimate debate to have. That is a debate I believe the opposition would welcome and would want to get involved in in a bipartisan

way. After all, we in the Labor Party stand for jobs and growth in the economy. We want to secure a future for our children in an ever changing world. Let us have that debate.
The government really does have to share with us and the people of Australia what motivates this change. What will be the cost of it? What will be the outcome? What will be the outcome next year? What will be the outcome in 10 years time? Will we be even more dominated in this economy by multinationals? Is this what the departmental advice has argued for? Was this the Treasury advice? Are they arguing that we should be more dominated, that in fact the growth of these innovative Australian owned companies developing a whole raft of products is unhealthy for the economy? Are they dissatisfied? Is there too much research and development going on in Australia? Is that the point of this measure? Is that what you are really trying to say to us and to the people of Australia?
When ordinary people, whether they live in my electorate or whether they live in the bush, understand that this is a bad measure, that this is a measure aimed at the heart of growth in the economy, of jobs, of developing innovative Australian owned companies and growing them from small to medium and medium to large, they are going to be sorely disappointed.
The member for Hotham (Mr Crean) has often said in this House that there really is an absence of an industry policy on the other side. At least, when we were in government, we may have been a bit schizophrenic about it but we had a decent record as far as industry policy was concerned. In measures like this, in the various plans that we put together, the great sin was that they all worked. I welcome the opportunity, as the shadow minister has said, that the opposition are going to go for a much more innovative and interventionist industry policy because we are concerned about Australia's future and we are concerned for more Australian companies succeeding on the world stage.
In the short time that is left to me-and there are a number of measures in this bill-I should talk about the medical expenses rebate. This is increasing the threshold from $1,000

7090

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

to $1,500 above which medical expenses can be claimed. I have to say that in my electorate there are not too many people who spend $1,000. That was a pretty tough threshold for them, but shifting it up makes it even harder. It really suggests that those in the community who will be able to benefit will be much better off than the average person, the average mums and dads, in my electorate.
Again, this is a measure which raises $26 million in 1997 and grows to $24 million in the 1999-2000 financial year. Of course, we are not told what the impact is. What is the reduced number of people who will now be precluded from claiming? That is the amount of revenue the government saves, but how many of our fellow Australians will be missing out? As I said, the $1,000 hurdle was already a pretty tough one-$1,500 is, indeed, much tougher. I would be most interested to hear the parliamentary secretary explain to the House how many Australians will be caught up in this provision. When we say that the proposal will save $24 million, how many people does that represent?
Madam Deputy Speaker, I conclude my speech and I will have an opportunity to see you about the offending standing order. I assure you I have a very legitimate excuse.
Madam DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mrs Sullivan)-Order! I just mention to the member for Chifley that the reason I raised it was nothing personal; it was a matter of the standing orders and respect for the House.
Mrs ELIZABETH GRACE (Lilley) (5.28 p.m.)-The Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No.3) 1996 amends the taxation laws in a number of respects, but today I would like to concentrate on the changes affecting co-ops. The income of cooperatives is subject to taxation, and special rules relating to deductions are contained in section 120. This section provides special tax concessions to cooperatives where they borrowed from governments to acquire assets.
Basically, section 120(1)(c) allows cooperatives to either carry on business or acquire assets which would be subject to a special concession with government loans. Such loans were originally used to acquire land or buildings for company premises or to fund the

initial start-up operations of the company. In addition to the special deductions, cooperatives were also eligible for normal business deductions under section 51 of the Income Tax Assessment Act and this allowed for deductions for expenses incurred in carrying on business to produce assessable income.
Cooperatives therefore have access to the deductions available to other companies, as well as this additional deduction. Section 120(1)(c) contains tax concessions which are not available to other taxpayers. This section was introduced in the late 1930s with the intention of facilitating the transfer of assets from government to the private sector, and this intention was confirmed by the parliamentary debates at the time. Section 120(1)(c) is no longer serving its purpose because few, if any, cooperatives these days are acquiring assets from government.
In the 1996-97 budget, the government announced it would repeal section 120(1)(c) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936. The repeal does not and will not affect in any way the ability of cooperatives to borrow from governments or anyone else. The repeal of this section only affects a tax deduction. It does not restrict the ability of cooperatives to borrow from government. Put simply, if cooperatives still want to borrow from government, there is nothing which prevents them from doing so.
For cooperatives undertaking large-scale investment, it is difficult to believe that it would not go ahead because of one tax deduction. The investment they are making should represent their belief in the future of the industry and the profitability of its investment, and not just tax deductions.
Since the government handed down its budget on 20 August, I have been approached by two of Australia's leading cooperatives: Golden Circle and Capilano Honey. Executives from both of these companies aired their concerns about the effect of the budget's changes to section 120(1)(c). Like most cooperatives, Golden Circle and Capilano Honey have capital expenditure budgets which extend over three or more years, and the availability of section 120(1)(c) formed a part of those investment plans. Both these

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7091

companies are large organisations, and I agreed with them when they argued that the government had to take into account the forward planning of businesses, including present contractual commitments.
Golden Circle is a grower owned unlisted public company which has operated the largest fruit and vegetable cannery in Australia within my electorate since 1947. Employment at their Northgate operation varies from 750 to 1,700, depending on seasonal requirements. Their shareholders are predominantly located in regional areas of south-east Queensland. As the only significant processor of pineapple in Australia, Golden Circle accounts for over 80 per cent of total pineapple output.
Golden Circle undertook a strategic review in 1993 and developed a five-year plan. Since that time some radical changes have been implemented. These include: imported product which represented 15 per cent of the retail market has been replaced by Australian product; a two-year research program into automation of pineapple processing is coming to fruition with the first processing line currently being installed; and the industry has commenced a $50 million program to provide processing facilities over a five-year period.
Ninety per cent of Capilano Honey's shareholders are beekeepers and beekeeping suppliers. It is a medium sized business with $50 million turnover, of which half is export business. It is in the top 500 of Australia's private companies. It has around 100 direct employees and supports the beekeeping industry which employs many more people.
Capilano Honey argued that they wanted to see a more realistic introduction to change. They had capital expansion plans in place which were part of a long-term expansion program. Capilano suggested a more responsible approach would be a phasing in period to allow cooperatives to complete their financial borrowings and also the projects to which the borrowings related.
I took the concerns of both Golden Circle and Capilano Honey to the Treasurer (Mr Costello) and advocated on their behalf for some effective transitional arrangements that would not adversely affect their planning for

the future. I thank the Treasurer for arranging suitable transitional arrangements. The government is satisfied that the transitional arrangements will allow genuine transactions entered into, or contemplated before the budget, to proceed; while at the same time preserving the integrity of the budget decision to repeal the provision.
The proposed transitional arrangements will allow Golden Circle to complete its plan by 1998 and will ensure that its grower base remains viable. Golden Circle's multimillion dollar redevelopment of the cannery, increased training of its staff and reduction in costs have made it more competitive both domestically and internationally. Modernising the plant was not so much about capacity but about making the cannery more competitive. There is no trade protection any more, and it has had to learn to compete in a very competitive environment.
Golden Circle is a prime example of what cooperatives can achieve coming into the 21st century. May I say that cooperatives like Golden Circle and Capilano Honey will still undertake large-scale investments without section 120(1)(c), because investment represents their belief in the future of their industry and the profitability of the investment, and not merely tax deductions.
Governments will always make tax changes. I am sure cooperatives will not halt investment as a result of tax changes, particularly when section 120(1)(c) represents only one of three tax deductions available to cooperatives. I support organisations like Golden Circle and Capilano Honey and look forward to maintaining a close working relationship with their executives and their employees. I commend this bill to the House.
Mr O'CONNOR (Corio) (5.35 p.m.)-The Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No.3) 1996 includes the latest broken promise of the Howard government made to Australian industry before the last election. This particular broken promise, which relates to the tax concession for research and development, is the latest in a litany of broken promises across a range of policy areas by one of the most deceitful Prime Ministers in living memory, aided and abetted by an arrogant

7092

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

Treasurer (Mr Costello) who arrogantly smirks while he drives Australia's unemployment rate up and drives Australia's industrial research and development overseas.
All that can be said for this budget measure, which reduces the taxation concession for industrial development from 150 to 125 per cent, is that it is plain dumb. It is dumb politics and it is even dumber economics. It merely reinforces the growing belief that, after only eight months in office, this is a government without leadership and without a coherent industry policy. Let Australian industry be under no illusions: this is a government that has an industry minister who is incompetent and who in eight months has articulated no vision for Australian industry; this is a government that has lied through its back teeth to win government and, after barely eight months in office, has reneged on the major promises that it made to Australian industry.
This is a government that over four years, if it wins the next election, will withdraw some $2.2 billion in research and development assistance to industry in Australia through the reduction of the R&D tax concession from 150 per cent to 125 per cent and abolishing research and development syndication. This comes on top of a reduction in support for the manufacturing sector in the budget of some $336 million over three years and a reduction in assistance to exporters of some half a billion dollars over three years.
As I mentioned, the Prime Minister (Mr Howard) and our arrogant Treasurer specifically promised at the March election to retain the 150 per cent research and development tax concession. And they have simply broken that promise. But, as I stated, it is not the only promise that this government has broken to firms in my electorate and to firms around the country.
Mr Martin Ferguson-It won't be the last.
Mr O'CONNOR-I certainly hope that this government keeps to its promises because, quite frankly, the Prime Minister could not lie straight in bed, as far as making these promises-

Mr Ronaldson-Madam Deputy Speaker, with the greatest respect, I think that is inappropriate and I ask the member to withdraw.
Mr O'CONNOR-I withdraw that. The fact is that, as far as making promises is concerned, the government are as crooked as a dog's hind leg. They make all these promises; then they go and break them within eight months of coming to office. If honourable members are so sensitive about this and they want me to document it, let me just run through a few.
The honourable member for Corangamite (Mr McArthur) sits in the House today. I remind him that these were the promises that his government made to firms in Geelong that his government has broken. They made a promise to maintain the export market development grants scheme. And what did the government do? Slash the program by $426 million over the next four years.
It made a commitment to maintain the international trade enhancement scheme. And what did the government do? It abolished the program at a cost of $120 million over four years. It gave a commitment to maintain the export market development grants scheme, and it slashed that scheme and funding to Austrade. It gave a commitment to retain AusIndustry as the primary agency for delivering enterprise development programs and then drove the boot into it.
If that is a record that honourable members opposite are proud of, barely eight months in office, then there is little wonder that, as you walk the length and breadth of Australia and talk to industry leaders, you find that they regard the Minister for Industry, Science and Tourism (Mr Moore) as incompetent and have absolutely no confidence in the industry policy of this government.
There is now considerable uncertainty in Australian business circles about the Howard government's commitment to industry in this country. It is this litany of broken promises that has contributed to business uncertainty. Overlay the general lack of confidence industry has for the minister with these broken promises and you have a very potent cocktail for winding back even further the expenditure

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7093

on industry research and development in this country.
If we are going to maintain levels of business investment, especially in R&D, then it is imperative that the government maintains a climate of certainty in its policy formulation and its overall direction. If this nation is to overcome the appalling deficiency in the level of private industrial research and development and to make research and development expenditure a natural and integral part of the business environment and culture, then this taxation concession must be maintained at 150 per cent.
It is not just the opposition that has this concern about the lack of substance and direction in the government's industry policy. I note that at a recent meeting of the New South Wales Australian Business Chamber these very sentiments were articulated by the business community in New South Wales. And of course we go back to that infamous industry dinner recently where most of the executives came away with the view that the industry minister was a nincompoop, was absolutely incompetent. Is there little wonder that there is a lack of confidence by industry in the performance of this government barely eight months into office?
Members on all sides of the House ought to understand that R&D is very important to Australia's economic future. Over the past 15 years, Australia has entered the global marketplace. It relies now on an innovative and progressive business culture to invest in research and development and to bring the fruits of that labour to the international marketplace for the benefit of this nation.
We all know the recent history of this country. In the early 1980s, Labor was left an industrial museum by the Liberal Party. It was left a devastated economic landscape that we had to meticulously rebuild to re-position Australia in this global marketplace. For example, to meet the challenges of the global economy beyond the year 2000, we had to restructure Australian industry quickly, to ~ssure some sort of future for future generatlOns of Australians.
I will give you examples of the dimensions of the problem that Labor faced in the early

1980s. We faced industrial structures that were archaic and in need of modernisation. We faced a financial system that was rigid and underdeveloped and had no real capacity to meet the needs of Australian industry in areas such as research and development. Labor faced an education and training system that was inappropriate to the development of the skills base of this nation. We faced a management culture that was rooted in the 1950s. It was reluctant to change and reluctant to innovate.
We took over from a national government that lacked any sort of vision and a bureaucracy that was regarded as professional but also inefficient, the national infrastructure had been allowed to run down in those seven dark Fraser years, and we were left with a macroeconomic framework which was not conducive to economic growth and research and development. But, most of all, we were left with an industrial structure that was poor in its investment in research and development. That was the awful legacy left to Labor by Malcolm Fraser, John Howard and the Liberal Party of Australia. Labor had to clean up-in current dollars-the $24 billion debt that had been left to us by John Howard. Labor had to reduce the inflation rate, which was in excess of 10 per cent, left to us by John Howard.
Labor had to clean up the mess of negative growth in the economy, negative job creation, left to us by John Howard. We had to clean up an awful mess in this country left to us by the current Prime Minister. We realised the enormity of the task before us and we set about fixing up this mess which was left to us by the Liberals.
Mr Martin Ferguson-It wasn't easy.
Mr O'CONNOR-It wasn't easy. We commenced the process of restructuring Australian industry and making Australian industry internationally competitive. We had to restructure the financial sector to try to overcome the market deficiencies that had led to low levels of industrial research and development. It was up to Labor to develop the export culture and to reposition Australian primary industry, its mining industry and its value added manufacturing products and services in the international marketplace.

7094

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

It was Labor that had to restructure the federal bureaucracy and the government business enterprises to make them more efficient. It was Labor that had to invest heavily in education and training to build the skills of the nation and the work force. It was Labor, yet again, that had to clean up the mess that was left to us by the Liberal Party and set about addressing the task of building Australia's research and development capacity after years of benign neglect.
Let us examine the historical position of Australia with regard to research and development. It is in this context that we must consider the bill before us today. We have traditionally been poor investors in research and development. That has been primarily due to the high levels of foreign ownership in Australian industry and the importation of research and development into our industry structure. It is fair to say that high protection levels also offered little incentive for firms in the Australian economy to innovate and change.
The sad truth is that Australia lacks a business culture to support research and development and innovative firms. We have relied too heavily in the past on international firms to support our national efforts and to innovate and commercialise the fruits of research and development in this country. Unfortunately, we have not developed an indigenous, innovative culture that enables us as a nation to take research through to the development phase to effective commercialisation. This is indeed the Achilles heel of Australia as an industrialised nation, even though Australia has a relatively strong public sector involvement in research and development. In a recent survey, we ranked fifth among 24 developed nations in our public expenditure as a percentage of GDP on research and development. But our private business expenditure ranking as a percentage of GDP on research and development has Australia positioned 19 out of 24. That is another very important reason why this taxation concession ought to be maintained at 150 per cent.
There is another important factor that must be understood in conjunction with the com-

parative figures that I have just stated. Our public sector expenditure on research and development has been concentrated more on the pure research area in the pursuit of new knowledge. Whereas our private business expenditure, much lower, relates more to applied research and the commercialisation of new products and ideas.
Certainly I do not wish to downplay the importance of public research and development in this country. The CSIRO is a fine institution and I am fortunate in the Geelong area to have many public sector research institutions. We have the Animal Health Laboratory, the CSIRO's wool division and marine science laboratories and extensive public research within the confines of Deakin University. These institutions make a massive contribution to the economic and intellectual life of not only the Geelong region but, of course, Australia. It is fair to say the Geelong region has more scientists per head of population than anywhere else in Australia.
As far as Labor's research and development record is concerned, we were very successful in the 1980s in stimulating expenditure on research and development in the Australian economy. For example, from 1981 to 1988, the average increase per annum was in the order of 17.7 per cent, while the average for the OECD was around 8.4 per cent. Taking the period from 1988 to 1994, the average increase per annum was in the region of eight per cent, while the OECD average was 2.7 per cent.
When the Industry Commission assessed the effectiveness of Australia's research and development effort in the Labor years it found that, in the first two years of the 150 per cent taxation concession in 1985 and 1986, there was a massive increase in research and development expenditure. In 1985-86, the first year, it increased by 26 per cent and in 198687, the second year, by 19.8 per cent. The Industry Commission concluded:
The 150 per cent tax concession has brought net benefits to the Australian economy-a removal of the tax concession would lead to a reduction in GDP.
This is the very expenditure that the government wants to reduce in this legislation before

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7095

the House. It doesn't come any dumber than this: it is absolutely beyond the pale for a government that says it is interested in industry development to put before the House a measure that is going to emasculate research and development in this country, and inhibit the growth of Australian manufacturing industry over the next decade.
In conclusion, to make our way in the global trading environment our economic system needs to be innovative; that is, it must be finely tuned to the development, application and diffusion of new ideas, skills and products. But there are some real barriers to achieving this. One is the financial system. Our financial system is more tuned to the property market than to supporting small and medium firms in the private sector which are involved in research and development which we might term as risky. These firms have great difficulty in accessing finance for development and commercialisation of their research. But they offer us great potential for economic and job growth.
The second inhibiting factor is, of course, the business culture itself which is very slow to adopt innovative practices. We attempted in government to stimulate that. We realised the essential deficiencies in the market as far as innovation is concerned. There was also a substantial barrier when we came to office in 1983 of an education system that was slow to develop its commercial links with industry and which had consistently undervalued engineering, science and technology based Courses.
There were also the institutional barriers of conservative governments which had failed to understand the importance of research and development to our economic future. Indeed, We have such a government in power today. It is a sad day for research and development in this country that a national government would remove a concession that even the most conservative economic body in this country, the Productivity Commission, regarded as beneficial to induce the sort of innovation that Australia is going to require if it is going to sustain itself and propel itself further into the international marketplace, secure

economic growth for this nation and secure jobs for our children.
Mr HOCKEY (North Sydney) (5.55 p.m.)-The Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No.3) implements a number of initiatives contained in the 1996-97 Commonwealth budget. These initiatives include the tax rebate for low income aged persons, the medical expenses rebate, changes to the treatment of infrastructure borrowings and changes to the concessional deduction rate for R&D from 150 per cent to 125 per cent, as well as some other related alterations to the concession. In the first place it should be recognised that these initiatives form part of a broader package that makes up the first budget of the Howard government.
I would like to take this opportunity to briefly comment on the 1996-97 budget which represents a significant turning point in the management of our nation's public sector finances. This budget implements what is known as a fiscal contraction. In short, we are eliminating over three years the budget deficit that we inherited from the Keating-Beazley Labor government. It was the bequest that no beneficiary of any estate would wish to have-a budget deficit of $9,141 million or 1.9 per cent of the nation's gross domestic product.
If there were no hard decisions in this budget-and I point out to members of the Labor Party that increasing government revenue through increased taxation is just as difficult public policy as cutting government expenditure-by 1998-99 our accumulated budget deficits would have been $33,644 million. Most importantly, we would still be stuck with an underlying budget deficit of around one per cent of GDP. The mens rea of this crime is the preparedness of the Labor Party to pass on to the next generation of Australians a heinous level of debt. It is my generation and the people who will follow me who are stuck with the repayment of that debt.
In 1996-97 alone, Commonwealth expenditure on the repayment of debt will be $9,142 million. This is the fifth biggest form of government expenditure, not just for the Commonwealth budget but for all government

7096

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

expenditure around Australia. For example, the Commonwealth spends more on repaying debt each year than the New South Wales government spends on running the 184 public hospitals around the state, serving 6.1 million residents. Putting it another way, it is nearly twice what the New South Wales government spends each year running over 2,000 schools for nearly one million students. Our annual bill for the repayment of Commonwealth debt is larger than the entire budget of Western Australia.
The worst part of this legacy is that the Beazley debt problem was actually getting worse. This bill contains a number of initiatives that help to address this problem. Firstly, this government remains committed to providing incentives for the development of much needed infrastructure across our vast continent. Infrastructure represents the arteries in our nation's body and one of the earliest decisions of this government was to overturn the decision of the previous government not to allow tax deductions for infrastructure bonds. How New South Wales Premier Bob Carr must rue the day Paul Keating lost the federal election in March because the Premier literally buried projects such as the eastern distributor in Sydney on the excuse of the Commonwealth's previous decision to abolish tax benefits for infrastructure bonds. This made the BOOT schemes-build, own, operate and transfer schemes-and other privately funded infrastructure projects financially unviable.
The people of Sydney knew that there were more devious political reasons for not proceeding with these projects. The eastern distributor in particular was absolutely necessary, not just for the half a million local residents affected but also because it was a vital part of the overall traffic management plan for Sydney. Not even a distracted New South Wales roads minister could deny this.
When the Howard government reintroduced tax benefits for infrastructure bonds, the New South Wales Premier had to swallow his pride and break yet another election promise not to have tolls. He sent his roads minister out to announce that the eastern distributor would be built. I am glad he did. The smooth flow of

traffic through the road gridlock in Sydney is of vital concern to my constituents. It has also made obvious a now vital missing link.
In four years time, a car traveller can expect a comfortable drive from Baulkham Hills to Melbourne. That is apart from a congestion gridlock in my electorate. This gridlock represents a new missing link in the Sydney road network that ties together the M2 at the Lane Cove River and the Gore Hill expressway leading onto the Sydney Harbour Bridge. This new missing link has already turned Epping Road into a traffic calamity. With the connection of the M2 in the next 12 months and the completion of the eastern distributor by 2000, Epping Road will become as difficult to negotiate for the average commuter as it would be for Michael Schumacher to negotiate the treacherous Khyber Pass in his high performance Ferrari.
Recent investigations by the New South Wales Roads and Traffic Authority have counted an average of 80,000 vehicles travelling along Epping Road per day. That is an alarming count for a suburban main road and it will increase substantially when the M2 is opened. Motorists' frustration, lost travelling time and the environmental compromise through the generation of even more hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides are unacceptable. Yet Bob Carr's Labor government is sitting on its hands.
This is a state government that feigns concern for the environment. This is a state government that impersonates empathy for the average motorist. This is a state government that fails the most basic tests of responsible urban road planning. I call on the New South Wales Premier to move forward on the missing Epping Road link. He should call for tenders now for the construction of a road tunnel under Epping Road, from the Lane Cove River to the Pacific Highway.
We have done our bit in Canberra by making infrastructure bonds tax effective for private investors. You do your bit: call for tenders and ensure that my local residents and nearly a million other motorists do not become the innocent victims of Sydney's next legendary traffic nightmare.

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7097

In the unlikely event that the project requires a financial contribution from the New South Wales government, I believe it must be made. The Carr government do not have any legitimate or credible claim to be a government of fiscal constraint. They managed to find $74 million recurrent for the tollway compensation scheme on the M4 just before the obviously unsuccessful Lindsay by-election last month. They have now found an additional $570 million for the M5 east road project despite a raft of private investors standing ready with their chequebooks in hand prepared to invest in a BOOT scheme.
In a legendary post-election splurge, Andrew Refshauge, the New South Wales Minister for Health, was able to find $120 million in 1995 to replace already committed private sector investment in a clinical services block at Prince of Wales Hospital. The New South Wales government is the only government in all of Australia that actively discourages and replaces private investment in community infrastructure with taxpayers' money.
I well remember the member for Werriwa (Mr Latham) in this House not long ago decrying with, I believe, great justification the shortage of adequate hospital services in western Sydney. I am sure the member for Dobell (Mr Lee) would be interested in this. His genuine grief should be directed at his Labor colleagues in New South Wales, who have used scarce public money to effectively nationalise tollways and private infrastructure around the Sydney basin.
This federal government believes that if the private sector can provide infrastructure in a timely, cost-effective and efficient manner then the private sector should do the job. There is no logical reason why public sector capital should replace private sector capital, especially in relation to community infrastructure.
This bill reaffirms our government's commitment to encourage infrastructure development through private investment around Australia. Amongst other initiatives, it closes down attempts by some high net worth individuals supported by some crafty financiers to abuse the tax benefits that we provide in

relation to research and development. This has contributed to the need to cap the annual cost to the government of the infrastructure investment bond scheme at $150 million in 1996-97 and $200 million for 1997-98.
This bill closes down attempts by some special interests to further undermine the integrity of the infrastructure borrowings program. These abuses come at a cost to the genuine attempts to make private sector investment in the development of publicly accessible infrastructure financially viable to investors. At times, I wonder if some Australian businesses actually realise the ramifications of their selfish attempts to abuse tax concessions provided by the Commonwealth.
By abusing a well-intentioned attempt by the Commonwealth to support a particular industry through tax concessions, Australian businesses can end up chewing off the fingers of the helping hand. One such example is in relation to the need for the reform of the research and development taxation concession scheme. In particular, this bill provides for a reduction from 150 per cent to 125 per cent in the research and development concessional deduction rate.
In addition to the reduction, new syndicates are prevented from claiming R&D deductions. These measures are part of our overall commitment to reduce the budget deficit. But they are also a reaction to the abuse by companies that registered jointly for the concession in the form of a syndicate. Joint registration and the resultant accrued tax benefits were clearly never intended to be part of this concession, yet registrants have taken unfair advantage of this provision. The net result of this is that the growing costs of the R&D tax concessions have left this government with little choice but to rearrange the scheme. This has resulted in savings to the government of $59 million in 1996-97, $718 million in 1997-98, $630 million in 1998-99 and $840 million in 19992000.
There are many honest Australian companies that have made genuine applications for benefits from the pre-existing R&D concession scheme. One such company, Cochlear Ltd, holds 80 per cent of world market share in the development of cochlear

7098

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

hearing implants. It also happens to have its head office in Lane Cove in my electorate. In any high technology, industry research and the ongoing development of products are a vital lifeline to world market share. High technology is an enormously important export industry for Australia, and Cochlear is one of the nation's finest examples of a company that has benefited from Australian ingenuity, Australian research and Australian product development.
Cochlear derives 95 per cent of its revenue through exports and it employs more than 200 people in Australia, with over 70 people engaged in research and development. For many years Cochlear has been a beneficiary of the incentives for research and development. In fact, we have all benefited from the success of companies such as Cochlear.
Commitments to research and development do, however, require long-term investment strategies. There is some degree of uncertainty in the market as to the future direction of support for R&D. However, I am aware that the Minister for Industry, Science and Tourism (Mr Moore) is endeavouring to prepare a longer term plan that will allay these fears. This will enable companies such as Cochlear to plan future R&D investments into the next century with some degree of certainty.
In addition, a problem common to many forms ofincentives provided by governments is the complexity of compliance. Applying for R&D concessions is no different, and I am sure that many companies would appreciate a simplification of the very complex rules for R&D concessions. This, of course, is hand-inglove with the government's commitment to making it easier to do business in Australia. Of course, as in so many cases, the complexity of the compliance requirements would not be an issue if companies sought to benefit from government initiatives in good faith. Unfortunately, that is not the case in our real world, or in anyone else's, and genuine companies like Cochlear suffer the consequences.
In conclusion, this bill deals with a number of other initiatives to keep our election commitments and at the same time helps to address a considerable budget deficit left to us

in Paul Keating's political will. We did not create the deficit, but we will accept responsibility for fixing it. At the same time, we will get on with the job of giving Australian businesses a fair go.
Mr LEE (Dobell) (6.09 p.m.)-First of all, I would like to take up a few comments made by the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Hockey). If I understood him correctly, he claims that the Carr government's decision to refund to the people of western Sydney the cost of using the tollways was in effect nationalising the privately owned tollways. That claim is perhaps easy to understand, given that it came from the member who represents the North Shore of Sydney. The member for North Sydney said that it is wrong for Bob Carr to refund the toll payments of the electors of Lindsay.
Mr Hockey-Absolutely.
Mr LEE-'Absolutely', he says across the chamber. Why didn't you tell us this before the Lindsay by-election?
Mr Hockey-I have always said it.
Mr LEE-You have always said it, have you? We might well ask whether the honourable member went doorknocking in Lindsay. If he did, I suspect he did not tell people on their front doorsteps that his view is that they should not have their toll payments refunded. I would certainly be interested to know whether the honourable member for Lindsay (Miss Jackie Kelly)-
Mr Hockey-Do you agree with nationalisation?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Quick)- Order! We will not have discussion across the chamber, thank you.
Mr LEE-I would certainly be interested to know whether the honourable member for Lindsay shares the view of the representative of the North Shore of Sydney that tollway payments should not be refunded.
Mr Ronaldson-You lost that one. Move on.
Mr LEE-The member for Ballarat interjects that we should move on. I can certainly tell the member for Ballarat that the electors of all of western Sydney, wherever they may

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7099

live, would be interested to know that the Liberal Party's representatives on the North Shore-they run this government-will be working hard to undermine the Carr government's decision to pay back those toll payments.
We will be very intrigued to know whether the state colleague of the honourable member for North Sydney, Peter Collins, the Leader of the Opposition in New South Wales, also shares the view of his federal member that the state government handing back those toll payments is in effect nationalising tollways and therefore, as the member for North Sydney argues, that should be opposed. Again, perhaps it is no surprise, given there was so much division inside the state Liberal Party and in the state coalition about what they should do about Bob Carr's decision to refund those toll payments.
I can tell the honourable member for North Sydney and his North Shore colleagues that the Labor Party will continue to try to ensure that the residents of western Sydney do receive those rebates in accordance with the promises that we made. The member for North Sydney has made it clear that, if ever Peter Collins were elected as Premier of New South Wales-which is very unlikely because he would be lucky to remain the Leader of the Liberal Party in New South Wales for much longer-and the Liberals were elected in New South Wales, one of the first items on their agenda would be to restore the tolls and make sure people will no longer get rebates for their toll payments if they live in western Sydney and use those tollways, which we are turning into freeways.
The honourable member for North Sydney also made a big song and dance about Cochlear Ltd and the great job that they have done in generating employment in his own electorate. He mentioned that their head office is at Lane Cove. I regret to say that the honourable member is leaving the chamber at the very time. I am trying to explain something. In fact, I will save it in case he returns to the chamber.
I would like to begin by pointing out that the ideological obsession of people such as the member for North Sydney results in not

only our having privately owned tollways that require ordinary battlers, as the Prime Minister (Mr Howard) likes to call them, to pay for the use of their roads but also people wishing to use public hospital beds being required to make extra payments.
The member for North Sydney was singing the virtues of private infrastructure in the hospital system. During the period that the member for North Sydney worked for the Greiner and Fahey Liberal governments in New South Wales, he no doubt advised his employers to make decisions such as to privatise the Port Macquarie hospital on the north coast of New South Wales.
We certainly know that it is the view of the Liberal Party and the member for North Sydney that Port Macquarie hospital should have been privately owned. It was certainly the view of the Liberal Party that more hospitals, such as 100ndalup in Perth and many others in states such as Victoria, should be privately owned. I understand that even in Tasmania there is a debate about whether or not public hospital beds should be privately owned.
I can tell you that one person who had reservations about the decision to allow the public beds at Port Macquarie hospital to be privately owned was the Auditor-General of New South Wales. The Auditor-General of New South Wales studied the secret agreement which had been developed by the employers of the member for North Sydney, the Greiner and Fahey governments-the deal they did with that particular private sector company. I don't blame the company for the fact that they did a terrific deal with the Liberal government of New South Wales. I don't think it is their fault that they were able to negotiate a deal that meant they were able to extract from the taxpayer very large sums of money. The people I blame are the conservatives with their ideological obsession with having infrastructure privately owned.
When the Auditor-General examined the deal which had been done, the contract which had been done, with this private sector company he made the point that the level of payments were so high that the state government of New South Wales and the taxpayers

7100

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

of New South Wales were basically paying for the hospital twice. There were a whole series of payments that meant, in effect, that the owners of the hospital were having the capital costs of the hospital paid for twice over. At the end of a 25to 30-year period, the ownership of the hospital would be fully in the hands of the private sector company. As the Auditor-General of New South Wales called it, the taxpayers of New South Wales would pay for the hospital twice and then give it away. That is the sort of deal that conservative governments, obsessed with having public hospital beds privately owned, will enter into. That is the high cost taxpayers will have to meet if they have their way.
Having responded to the provocations of the member for Noith Sydney, I would like to spend most of my time taking up a few issues in detail that are contained in the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No.3). Two issues that we in the Labor Party believe are bad policy and will result in decisions that are not in the long-term interests of Australia are, first of all, the government's decision to
increase the threshold at which the medical expenses rebate starts to cut in and, secondly, the government's crude attack on the tax incentives for research and development for Australian industry.
Before looking at these two measures in detail, you have to ask questions about what is missing in this legislation. In particular, the second reading amendment that has been moved by my colleague the member for Werriwa (Mr Latham) makes the point that the Australian taxation system needs to be fairer than it currently is. We believe that the government has been wrong to back off in its efforts to try to close the loopholes, to try to take action against those people who are using family trusts to avoid their taxation responsibilities.
The former government received advice from the taxation commissioner just before the election that up to $800 million could be obtained by closing the loopholes. Since the election of the Liberal and National parties, we have seen the Prime Minister, the Treasurer (Mr Costello) and the Minister for Finance (Mr Fahey) make it clear that this government is adopting a 'go slow' campaign on address-

ing those tax problems, on addressing the issues that are virtually allowing people on very high incomes to make a decision about whether they will pay tax.
Mr Martin Ferguson-We all know why.
Mr LEE-As my colleague interjects, we know why. They have one or two friends, perhaps even one or two members of this parliament on that side of the chamber, who might have family trusts. I can certainly tell you that, whoever they are, whatever their position, the Treasurer, the Prime Minister and the Minister for Finance should have taken tough action, as the former Labor government proposed, to close these loopholes for family trusts. If the government were serious about trying to make sure that we have a fairer tax system then they would have been taking the strongest possible action on these family trust matters.
Frankly, the Labor Party will be continuing to raise this issue in this parliament because we believe that there is a deep responsibility on this government to make sure that the advice we received from the taxation commissioner in early 1996 is acted upon. It is wrong that some people can decide whether they want to pay income tax and whether they want to pay any tax towards the maintenance of basic services in this country. That is the great hole that is missing in all the tax legislation the government has brought into this House to date. It is the great hole that is missing in the actions which have been taken by the government to date.
I would like to turn now to the issue of medical expenses and the deductions and rebates that have been allowed in the past. This bill seeks to increase the threshold for the medical expenses rebate from $1,000 to $1,500. Under the previous Labor government, people who were unfortunate enough to have unrefunded medical expenses of more than $1,000 a year were entitled to a tax rebate of 20c in the dollar for every dollar over that threshold. This was part of the community's health safety net, and it is necessary because sometimes people find that their medical expenses aren't covered by the medical safety net or the pharmaceuticals safety net.

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7101

People who find themselves in this situation are those who may require expensive pharmaceuticals which are not subsidised by the pharmaceuticals benefits scheme or a family facing large private medical bills after an operation in a private hospital. If a person suffers from chronic conditions, such as incontinence, their family may be required to purchase medical aids or that individual person might have to pay for them themself. It is in these particular circumstances that people can clock up medical bills that exceed the $1,000 threshold that used to apply under the former government.
The decision to raise the threshold from $1,000 to $1,500 is really quite amazing. The only thing that singles out this particular group of people from the rest of the population for special treatment is that they are already $1,000 out of pocket in meeting these expenses. They are unfortunate enough to be ill; they are unfortunate enough to have the Howard government target them for one of the budget cutbacks. The government is placing an extra $25 million a year tax on these Australians simply because they are sick.
The government's position is also extremely hypocritical, given that the Minister for Health and Family Services, Dr Wooldridge, has often spoken about the plight of people who suffer from incontinence. The minister has mentioned the fact that these people are often several thousands of dollars a year out of pocket because the aids they need are not subsidised by either the federal government or the state government. He has often used that example in arguing that there needs to be a change in the allocation of responsibilities in this area from the federal to the state government.
In fact, Dr Wooldridge held out the hope that the COAG negotiations would result in the state governments being fully responsible for providing hospital services and community nursing services, often through local area health services. He also hoped that, under the Wooldridge grand plan, the federal government, which is now responsible for aged care, might hand back to the states the responsibility for nursing homes and hostels.

We all know that there was meant to be a meeting of Premiers and the Prime Minister last Friday, but that was put off, allegedly because of the election in Western Australia. It is common knowledge that the negotiations on the transfer of health and aged care responsibilities from the Commonwealth to the states are going absolutely nowhere. The states have woken up to the fact that they will be asked to take on an area which has the fastest rate of growth in expenditure. With the ageing of the population, the states-
Mr Ronaldson-Court couldn't attend it. He was in caretaker mode.
Mr LEE-The honourable member for Ballarat knows full well that it is common knowledge that his own Premier, Jeff Kennett, is not going to take on the responsibility for health care, aged care and all of those areas without the financial revenue to pay for these rapidly growing areas. The member for Ballarat might not be aware of what is happening in aged care, but I can certainly tell him that, if he picks up the phone and rings the state minister for health or the Premiergiven that it is common knowledge he is one of their strongest supporters-they will tell him that they are not prepared to take on these responsibilities. It means that those people who suffer from incontinence are waiting for Dr Wooldridge's grand planwhere the states are responsible for all of these areas-so that they can have those incontinence products provided. Those discussions are going absolutely nowhere.
In the meantime, while Dr Wooldridge is holding out the hope that in some way these COAG negotiations will address this problem, these people get hit on the head by this sneaky measure in the budget to increase that threshold for the medical expenses rebate from $1,000 to $1,500. That is something which we think will hit people who had been expecting that the government would take some action to address their concerns.
The second area we are concerned about is the changes in the research and development taxation provisions. As the opposition spokesman on health, I have a number of concerns about the impact that this decision will have on the funding of research by pharmaceutical

7102

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

manufacturers and by other people involved in health.
I have to say that I think the former Labor government's decision to provide a 150 per cent tax rebate for research and development was one of the best industry policy measures taken in the last 50 years in Australia. Certainly, those companies that I talk to which carry out research, fund research and develop products in Australia tell me that 150 per cent tax deduction allowed them to get extra funding committed for research and development. If they were Australian subsidiaries of overseas companies, often that 150 per cent tax deductibility meant that the research and development took place in Australia rather than in Asia or Europe. That 150 per cent tax deductibility was very important for encouraging greater expenditure in this area in Australia.
One of the reasons why the former Labor government made that decision was that the public sector had funded a lot of good research and development in the past. The public sector in Australia, by international comparisons, is at the level you would expect from other equivalent developed economies.
But it is in the private sector that, in some ways, Australia has lagged behind, and it was that 150 per cent tax deductibility that gave the private sector that extra push along in encouraging them to increase their expenditure in this area. If you compare Australia with the United States or European countries, you see that it is not so much the public money getting spent on science and R&D. In Australia, it is that private sector commitment that seems to be lagging behind that which is able to be devoted in other countries.
The decision by this government to cut back that important tax concession from 150 per cent to 125 per cent will mean that we will lose many of those benefits. Some of those overseas companies will no longer allow their Australian subsidiaries to commission that R&D. Some of those companies in my own electorate will no longer have the money to commit to research and development.
The member for North Sydney spoke a lot about the great successes that Cochlear has

clocked up in recent days. This company was born out of a Melbourne University research project that concluded in 1978. Through the Nucleus Group, which has been wholly owned by the Pacific Dunlop group since 1988, Cochlear has managed to capture more than 80 per cent of the world market for its sophisticated implant systems for people with profound hearing disabilities. Cochlear employs more than 300 people, and last year it had a sales income of $68 million.
The member for North Sydney was singing the praises of Cochlear, but what he did not do was point out that this company has registered serious concerns about the impact of the government's decision. The Australian on 11 October said:
Ms Livingstone said the Government's cuts to research and development tax concessions would affect Cochlear's bottom line by $1 million this financial year, hamper its research program and undermine Australia's economic position.
CSL is another Australian company which has put in a lot of effort in research and development in the pharmaceutical area. In the Age, CSL's chief executive, Mr Brian McNamee, is reported as saying:
. .. the Budget was a "real blow" to the innovative sector of the economy.
He went on to say:
"Why hit us, the innovators," ... The reduction in the R&D tax allowance ... was a direct hit on small innovative companies, and left "the big end of town" comparatively unscathed.
He continued:
"Australia has to move forward from excavation and rural industries, and try to create knowledgebased industries," . . . "This was a direct hit on knowledge-based industries."
So, for all of these reasons, we think the government has made the wrong decision in cutting back the incentives for Australian companies to invest in R&D. We think the government has made the wrong decision in increasing the threshold for the rebate for medical expenses. We think the government has made the wrong decision in failing to take action against people for avoiding tax through family trusts.
Debate (on motion by Mr Williams) adjourned.

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7103

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE: ADDITIONAL RESPONSES
Gun Control Advertising Campaign
Mr WILLIAMS-I wish to clarify an answer I gave earlier today to a question from the honourable member for Wills. Part of the honourable member's question related to a meeting that took place on 28 June 1996. In my answer I said that I was advised that the meeting was not directly related to the public education campaign for the Australian firearms buyback scheme. I said that I was advised that the meeting was simply to explain the methods used by the Office of Government Information and Advertising in managing government education campaigns.
After question time, given that I did not attend the meeting, I had my answer checked. As of June, my office was unfamiliar with the role of OGIA. As I said earlier today, the operations of OGIA are a matter for the Minister for Administrative Services as the agency comes within his portfolio. I am advised that the meeting did deal with the matters I referred to earlier and as it well should it covered such matters as the early steps that had been taken in relation to the gun buyback campaign. I am advised that it was called in the context of the firearms buyback education campaign and that the role of OGIA in managing government education campaigns was explained in that context.
Sitting suspended from 6.31 p.m. to 8 p.m.
TAXATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL (No.3) 1996
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mrs DE-ANNE KELLY (Dawson) (8.00 p.m.)-I rise tonight to speak on the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No.3) 1996 and to pay particular regard to part 6 relating to cooperative companies. There are 2Yz thousand to 3Yz thousand cooperatives in Australia. The largest cooperative in Queenslandthe Mackay Sugar Cooperative Association Ltd-is in the seat of Dawson. I would like to take this opportunity to give the House

some background on the sugar industry in Queensland.
The Queensland sugar industry is one of the most consistent producers of export income for Australia. Some $1.6 billion was derived from four million tonnes of raw sugar in 1994-95. Queensland produces 95 per cent of Australia's sugar and virtually all of Australia's sugar exports. This represents a great benefit to Australia. On the domestic front, the Queensland sugar industry provides a good living for 20,000 people directly and over 25,000 people indirectly. Over 6,000 families derive their direct livelihoods from the sugar industry. This industry has led to prosperous communities right up the Queensland coast from Maryborough to Mossman. Consumers in Australia enjoy the lowest priced sugar in the OECD-sugar which is of consistently high quality.
In Dawson there are two significant rural marketing cooperatives-the Mackay Sugar Cooperative Association Ltd and the Proserpine Cooperative Sugar Milling Association Ltd. A cooperative comprises a group of people cooperating to advance their common interests in a jointly owned and democratically controlled enterprise. Cooperatives have a different aim to private companies. In a private company one is looking for pecuniary gain. In a cooperative one is looking for mutual benefit.
Cooperatives allow farmers to control the processing and marketing of their produce. Much of this is done in a corrupt world market. In the Australian sugar industry, for instance, there is a 13 per cent tariff. Our major competitors have extraordinarily high tariffs. Thailand has an equivalent tariff of 104 per cent. The United States has an equivalent tariff of 100 per cent. I hope that these differing tariffs are raised with the President of the United States. In Australia, our farmers enjoy very few safeguards. Farmers in the United States have a great number of subsidies through the EEP scheme. The equivalent tariff for those in the European Union is 170 per cent. Australian farmers have to market and sell their produce on corrupt world markets. A cooperative is one mechanism which allows them to do that efficiently.

7104

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

The benefit of cooperatives is easily seen participating members' retained earnings.

when you look at the beleaguered cattle When earnings are retained, there is a disad-

industry. We have essentially allowed our vantage to existing shareholders in the short

processing sector to be not only taken over by term because they do not receive the income

those outside the industry but also controlled or the benefit of any increase in the value of

by foreign multinationals. The steering comtheir shares.

mittee and task force report on the Australian meat and livestock industry and reforms for
the future has even suggested that there is
transfer pricing in our major processing sector
in Australia. Not only are our producers and employees in our meat works losing but the
government is losing revenue as well. This is an industry where there are no regulation and

The other difficulty they face is funding. Cooperatives essentially rely on withdrawable
share capital. In other words, they do not have the opportunity companies have of issuing
further shares and raising equity capital. They are largely dependent on funds from their
participating members or debt capital.

no cooperative arrangements.

The banks in our area have been very

Cooperatives differ from private and public reluctant to fund cooperatives without a risk

companies. I am indebted to the Chief Execmargin. The aim of the budget papers to

utive Officer of Mackay Sugar Cooperative introduce competitive advantage-competitive

Association Ltd, Dr Ron Swindells, for details neutrality I think is a phrase that is used-

on the way in which cooperatives differ from may be all very well for the lenders, but I do

private companies. Under the current taxation not believe it gives competitive neutrality to

system, when a cooperative retains earnings the borrowers. A cooperative has considerable

to expand its production capacity and ultidisadvantages compared to a company. They

mately gain or produce accessible income, it are not in a level playing field situation.

is taxed on those earnings. In non-cooperative type companies, generally the retention of
earnings in the company will be reflected by an increase in value of the shareholders' investment in the company.

In the 1930s in division 9 of part III of the Income Tax Assessment Act provisions dealing with tax on cooperatives were brought into play. It seems that this was the last time a Commonwealth government sought policy

In a cooperative, the shareholders have no advice on the taxation arrangements for

profit to realise by an increase in value or cooperatives. That was in 1935 with the

equity as their shares have a fixed valueFerguson Royal Commission. Nothing has

generally the face value for the shares. I am changed since division 9 was introduced in

a member of a cooperative-the Mackay 1935. Cooperatives still operate in a similar

Sugar Cooperative. I have a shareholding in manner and with the same objectives.

that cooperative. I would like the House to be aware of that during my contribution to the debate.
Cooperative shares cannot be traded in normal financial markets, nor in any other public manner whatsoever. Shareholders cannot realise any equity value in these shares. All equity is passed on to successive generations of shareholders-that is, growers-through their ability to use the assets of the cooperative to process their commodities.

Under the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No.3) there is a repeal of 120(l)(c). That
section has enabled cooperatives to enjoy the benefits available to companies whereby interest repayments are a tax deduction, depreciation is a tax deduction, but also the
principle repayment is a tax deduction. Many have said that this is a double advantage, if you like. I do not believe so. I have simply outlined to the House now the considerable
disadvantages that cooperatives face, the great

Cooperatives are 100 per cent Australian benefit that they are to providing 100 per cent

owned. Mr Deputy Speaker Quick, they are Australian ownership and to competing and

as Australian as you and I. There is essentialallowing farmers to process and market their

ly no foreign ownership in cooperatives. A produce in what essentially is a very corrupt

cooperative's equity capital comes from its world marketplace.

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7105

The way in which this amendment was introduced in the budget was unduly harsh. Originally in the budget papers, arrangements had to be legally enforceable-the loan and the contract-and they had to be in place prior to 20 August 1996. This would have denied bona fide cooperatives with legitimate five-year expansion plans to have adjusted to the changed circumstances.
In the sugar industry we have an arrangement whereby cooperatives commit to their growers within a fiveto 10-year period of time to increase their crushing capacity. In other words, they say to farmers, 'If you go out there and develop another two and a half thousand hectares of cane, we will commit in five years time to crush the cane that you produce.' Plans are long-term in the sugar industry. It is not a matter of a board sitting down and deciding that they might spend on more infrastructure. It is a long-term plan. It is a commitment between the board of a cooperative and their growers.
Originally, as the budget papers read, my cooperatives, Mackay Sugar Cooperative Association Ltd and Proserpine Cooperative Sugar Milling Association Ltd, would have been severely disadvantaged. I have presented a case for the retention of 120(1)(c) to the Treasurer; however, he is concerned about the integrity of the budget, and we have managed to negotiate transitional arrangements. Might I also say that the new coalition government have been very lenient towards Mackay Sugar. We have been able to retain a $5.1 million shipping capital grant with the considerable assistance of the National Party Minister for Transport and Regional Development, Mr John Sharp.
Turning now to our transitional arrangements, I would like to thank the following people from the sugar industry for their able assistance in negotiating transitional arrangements: Mr Chris Connors, the Secretaryffreasurer of the Cooperative Federation of Queensland; Graham Davies, the Chairman of Mackay Sugar; Dr Ron Swindells, the Chief Executive Officer of Mackay Sugar; Mr John Pollock; Mr Alf Musemeci, the Manager of Proserpine Cooperative Sugar Milling Association Ltd; Harry Bonanno, the chairman of

Canegrowers; Jim Pedersen, the chairman of Canegrowers in Mackay; Mr Ron Mullins, the manager of Canegrowers, Mackay; Mr Kelso Greenwood, the chairman of Canegrowers in Proserpine, who has been extremely active on this matter; and Mr Bruno Camer, the chairman of Canegrowers in the Burdekin, and his deputy, Mr Frank Scuderi.
The transitional arrangements are such that any loan entered into up to 31 December 1996 and any business plan whereby directors had given approval and anticipated the acquisition of the asset and that approval was recorded in the company's minutes prior to the 20 August 1996 will allow that company to access 120(1)(c), provided the asset is installed and ready for use by 30 June 1998. These transitional arrangements permit cooperatives such as mine, with a bona fide expansion plan, to have some of the capital borrowings come under the auspices of 120(1)(c). However, this does not take account of the overall state of the sugar industry and other cooperatives.
In the sugar industry in the next five years we have over half a billion dollars worth of expansion. It is only the cooperative mills in Queensland that are expanding. We see Proserpine Cooperative, Mackay Sugar and others with considerable plans for expansion. They are looking to the future, to the great opportunities that our industry offers. Unfortunately, the proprietary companies have become, shall I say, very short-term in their thinking. Many of the farmers in areas where there is a proprietary mill, a company mill, are looking at setting up cooperatives and taking over that mill simply because the expansion will not occur.
These cooperatives are 100 per cent Australian owned. That is something to be very proud of in Australia today. When you look at the processing sector in other industries, something that is 100 percent Australian owned is something that all Australians should be proud of.
In a cooperative arrangement, Treasury eventually gets their money. They either tax the cooperative at 36c in the dollar or they tax the bonus or the dividends in the hands of farmers at 48.7c in the dollar. So, ultimately,

7106

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

the Australian people and the Treasury obtain their, shall we say, just desserts from the sugar industry. I am not in favour of the changes that we have before us.
I would like to take this opportunity to speak very briefly about the sugar industry review that is taking place in Queensland. This is a review of the arrangements under Queensland law relating to the sugar industry regulatory arrangements. I would like to speak about what is called the Productivity Commission; it must have a sense of humour to use such a term when one looks at their industry commission submission to the sugar industry review working party. They say that the land assignment system for sugar growing is the reason that milling capacity in the cane growing expanded areas is under threat. It is in fact the proprietary company miIls' reluctance to invest in expansion capacity that is the difficulty.
I am not going to overview the sugar industry review any further except to say that the sugar industry in Australia is a mighty industry. It employs one in four people in my seat of Dawson, it contributes over $1.6 billion to this fine country and it is largely 100 per cent Australian owned. I would like to see it remain so.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (CalweIl) (8.17 p.m.)-We have heard a very serious and important speech from the member for Dawson (Mrs De-Anne Kelly). The speech shows that, as far at least as these provisions in this bill are concerned, this is a proposal which the Treasurer (Mr Costello) has pushed through, notwithstanding not only opposition from the Labor Party but what is clearly opposition from the National Party as well.
The member for Dawson made some very important points about why we should not proceed with these changes. I will come back to her points in a minute. It seems to me that her points and her speech here today raise a matter which has been in the news very recently and which concerns the question of whether or not the National Party has any possibility whatever in this government of actually defending the interests of the people they are supposed to represent.
Mr McClelland-It clearly has none.

Dr THEOPHANOUS-It clearly doesn't have any influence. I put it to the member for Dawson and all the other National Party members-
Mr Vaile-The left wing of the Labor Party hasn't any influence either.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-Stop interrupting and listen because this is a serious matter about your constituents, sir. Your leadership in the National Party has not even been able to reverse this decision. What is the total saving in relation to this measure? A lousy $2 million in the first year, $4 million in the second year and going up to $6 millionpeanuts in terms of the total federal budget. Yet you have not been able to achieve a result like that. What is going to happen when there are hundreds of millions of dollars at stake to your constituents, the people in the country?
You talk about the sugar industry and you say it is a very important industry. It certainly is a very important industry to this country and I support that industry and always have. But the situation is, as the member for Dawson correctly pointed out, that much of the industry is being run under arrangements under cooperatives. What has happened in relation to that?
Mr Anthony-How's your mate Brian?
Dr THEOPHANOUS-Stop interrupting and talking nonsense and focus on the real issue. You are a member of parliament now and you are supposed to represent the interests of your constituents. The fundamental point is that the National Party should never have allowed this measure to go through and it is an absolute disgrace that you could not get the Treasurer even to reverse this simple measure, which is only $2 million, but which is very important in its whole impact on these areas and these cooperatives.
We in the Labor Party make it perfectly clear that we oppose this measure. We think this measure is mistaken and for many of the same reasons given by the member for Dawson. She pointed out that cooperatives are different from proprietary limited companies. She pointed out that cooperatives operate on different principles. She pointed out that the

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7107

possibilities for loans and investment in cooperatives are different. How come the Treasurer, the man who puts himself up as an economic genius in this country and who is ruining this country's economy-
Mr Prosser-Ha, hal
Dr THEOPHANOUS-Here we have the laughing Minister for Small Business and Consumer Affairs. This is the minister who has been disowned by small business. He has only been in power for six months and he has been disowned.
Let me just say something about what is happening with the Australian economy in relation to the measures in this bill. Another very important measure here concerns what is going to happen with research and development. The honourable minister laughed before when I mentioned the Australian economy. Obviously, he has not had a look at the fact that the economy is moving into flattened growth activity.
Mr Prosser-It's moving into a growth phase right now.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-It is moving into a growth phase ! Would you like to put your money on it, Minister? That is why the budget predicted lower growth this year than last year, I suppose. Is that right? Going down constitutes going up according to you.
The economy is in a lot of trouble. If you were talking to small business, like a lot of us are talking to both small and big business, you would know.
Mr Anthony-But there aren't too many left. You've bankrupted most of them.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-What would you know about our discussions with business? The fundamental reality is that business is very concerned about this measure of reducing the research and development grants. The members from the government benches may laugh but, if they actually go out and talk to business people about this measure, they will discover they are not laughing.
They are very upset about this measure. This measure sends a signal to business, and the signal is that those who are interested in research and development, those who are

interested in supporting Australian enterprise, especially productive enterprise, manufacturing industry and productive primary industry, those who are determined to put into place new research and development to assist our industries, are going to get a kick in the pants because there is going to be this very substantial reduction in research and development. It would not be so bad if this were not coming on top of the fact that this government has no industry policy whatsoever. None. Zero.
Mr McClelland-A vacuum.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-There has never been such a vacuum in Australian industrial development as there is at the moment. The Minister for Industry, Science and Tourism (Mr Moore) is asleep. Every time you ask him a question about industry policy, he comes to the rostrum and says, 'The economy is going to grow. Industrial relations will fix everything. We don't need an industry policy. We don't need any focus on industry. We don't need any specific measures. We don't need any specific support.' The reality is that there is now massive competition for investment in manufacturing industry around the world.
Many countries are now offering concessions, incentives for investment. One of the most important figures that has not come out, except in the Financial Review, is that overseas investment in Australian production, especially in manufacturing, has dramatically fallen. What does this mean? It means that many overseas companies, especially big companies, are saying, 'We're going to take our business elsewhere.' That is what they are saying. They are saying, 'We're going to take our business elsewhere because we don't feel that the Australian government has put into place sufficient incentives for us to invest here.'
I was the deputy leader of a parliamentary delegation that recently went to the European parliament and also to Ireland-Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. In the Republic of Ireland, we were amazed to find that within 20 years the country had converted an agricultural economy into a hightech manufacturing economy. It was a biparti-

7108

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

san delegation. We asked questions about how they did this.
It turns out that the Irish government had put into place a series of incentives directed towards the manufacturing industry, incentives such as giving them a company tax rate of 10 per cent to the year 2010. For regional development, for those companies that were prepared to go to the regions in Ireland, they were giving them an additional grant. I am not saying we need to do the same, but we certainly need to look at our incentives to industry.
What does the Treasurer do when we mention incentives to industry? We know that the National Party used to have a backbone and a tradition of supporting industry. They seem to have forgotten about that now-not all of them; I notice that some of them are still prepared to stand up-but the reality is Australian industry, especially manufacturing, will progress only if it is strongly supported.
Even the member for Dawson mentioned that, in relation to overseas competitors in the industry she was concerned with, the Australian position is that we have only a 13 per cent protection whereas some countries have more than 100 per cent. They were the words of the member for Dawson. What you say about that industry also is the case in a whole range of industries.
If you think that we are not in trouble in industry development, if you think that companies are not now at this very moment thinking about getting out of Australia instead of coming in, you do not know what is going on in the economy. If we are going to fix this problem, at least we have to have in place reasonably moderate incentives.
So what do we do? In the very first budget, we go and reduce one of the most important incentives-the research and development incentive-the incentive that allows companies to actually do more research to develop more products, to develop a competitive edge vis-a-vis our other international competitors. We gave that incentive to them and said, 'If you go with this, over time you will be able to get this 150 per cent allowance.' And what do we do? In the middle of the process we say, 'No, we're going to cut that to 125

per cent'-just like that. That reduction has been very severely criticised by industry.
First of all, the Treasurer gets up and goes on with this hypocritical nonsense about, 'You want to support the big boys. You want to support big industry. You don't want to support the ordinary man.' He goes on with this kind of nonsense. Why does he not wake up to himself? What do you think is happening around the world in relation to industry development? All countries are supporting their industries. If you do not support industry, you will end up without industry. That is the fact of the matter.
For the Treasurer to get up here and try to make some cheap point about companies getting the returns from this research and development is a lot of nonsense. If he wants to tax wealthy people who gain from income tax, that is a different matter from taxing companies that make investment in employment, in production and especially in manufacturing. The Treasurer comes in here and makes this nonsensical point as if that is the solution to the matter and we do not have to study the issue any further.
I am telling you that without an industry policy this country is going to get into a lot of trouble. I do not know how it is going to develop because we have a minister who is not interested in the development of an industry policy. The Treasurer and several others on the front bench believe that it is all a level playing field.
As the member for Dawson said herself in her comments, in the case of the cooperatives, they claim that these advantages are not justifiable and are inconsistent with competitive neutrality principles. But competitive neutrality principles have to be based on the fact that you begin from an initial equal position and, as she correctly said about cooperatives, that is not the case.
More broadly speaking, we are not dealing with a level playing field in industry development. All sorts of different incentives are offered by different countries around the world. Because of the capacity of capital to move so quickly within hours, even minutes, from one country to another, we have to have genuine incentives for production, for employ-

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7109

ment and for productivity. We oppose what the government parties are doing with these cutbacks in research and development grants.
But we want something further: we want the government to put in place some kind of policy to support industry so that we can actually build up our manufacturing base. I am not speaking here merely from a partisan point of view. You should have a look at what the big industry organisations have said even in the last few weeks. What is the Metal Trades Industry Association saying to the government? Is it saying that it is very happy with this reduction in R&D? On the contrary, they are furious with this reduction.
What are they saying to the government? They are saying, 'Not only are we furious with this reduction but we do not understand where you are going with industry policy. We do not understand where you are going in helping to develop industry. We do not understand how you intend to ensure that the key manufacturing industries of this country'-for example, the metal trades industries-' will continue.'
We have heard about the steel plan. When the Labor government was first elected in 1983, we put into place a steel plan which was intended to salvage the steel industry, and it did.
Mr McClelland-The car plan.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-That was followed later on by the car plan. What have we found in the last few weeks? The chiefs of the car companies in Australia are saying, 'Look, unless something is done, we cannot guarantee our future investment in the motor car industry in Australia.' The motor car industry-of which one part, the Ford Motor Co, is in my electorate-employs more than 70,000 people directly and many thousands of others indirectly in this country.
What are we saying to them? We are saying, 'Look, we know that you can live with a total reduction of tariffs to zero. Don't worry about it. We know you can live with it. We know you will find a way. You're bluffing when you say that you're going to get out of Australia. We know that is all a lot of nonsense. We know that you've made invest-

ments here and you can't pack up and go.' But don't believe it: companies can get up and leave. It has been proven in other countries in the industrialised world where, with hardly any notice, companies have suddenly got up and left and gone to other countries, including many Third World countries, to do their production there. If we think that without incentives and without the moderate levels of protection that we have we will be able to continue with our key manufacturing companies, we are mistaken.
Let me return to this matter of why research and development is such a key . We know that we are heading into the information age. We know that computers, development of software programs and development of new technologies in the communications age are all absolutely critical to our survival in a competitive world. To help to develop those things, you need research and development; you need to encourage your scientists; you need to encourage those people who can transfer the pure science into an applied science and the applied science into technology and the technology into production and so forth. All of those measures are absolutely essential if we are going to meet this challenge in the future.
Instead of saying, 'Given all of that, we had better keep in place this research and development,' what do we do ? We decide to cut back in this arbitrary fashion the very thing that will be the motor of all this-the research and development, that special incentive which has the biggest justification of all industry incentives-without any kind of data and without any support. The government just simply says: 'We need to make a saving in the budget and that will do.'
Do you think that saving in the budget is going to be felt today, tomorrow or in the next year? What will be felt is the employment consequence on people when all those companies decide that they have had enough, when they decide that they are not going to stay under this current regime, when they start saying that they will have to put people off and when some of them even decide to go to another country because of this.

7110

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

We reject key parts of this legislation. We think it is mistaken. We support the second reading amendment that we moved, and we call upon the House to support it.
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond) (S.37 p.m.)- Today I rise to speak on the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No.3), a very complex piece of legislation covering nine different areas. It is a pity they were not separated for there are some areas which I certainly feel less enthusiastic about than others. I am glad to see the member for Barton (Mr McClelland)-and hopefully the member for Calwell (Dr Theophanous)-remain in the House to learn something.
Tonight I would like to highlight three specific areas in this bill, notably, the tax rebate for low income aged persons, equity investments in small and medium enterprises, and the issue of cooperatives, which is extremely important for Australia's rural constituency.
With the exception of the tax rebate for low income aged persons-better known as benefits to low income self-funded retirees-alI the other measures are focused on reducing tax breaks in an effort to regain Commonwealth revenue. On the surface, this may not be palatable, but it is done in the context of the fiscal and financial mismanagement that we inherited from the Labor government. It is also good to see the member for Dobell (Mr Lee) in the chamber.
This inheritance saw the big spending chardonnay socialists triple Commonwealth debt from $30 billion to $100 billion in less than five years. During their stewardship of 13 years, we saw record bankruptcies, record interest rates, record unemployment and record suffering by the vast majority of Australians.
To quote Menzies' words, it is these forgotten people, called mainstream Australians, that this government will look after with sensible economic management rather than pandering to ALP sympathisers masquerading as tax driven R&D syndicates. It has taken great courage to aim for a balanced budget, for if we didn't then the legacy of debt and despair would grow even faster, producing

further indebtedness for this country and for our future generations.
The insincere crocodile tears being displayed here by the opposition and notably by the member for Hotham (Mr Crean)-and by the member for Calwell, who has suddenly vanished-is breathtaking, particularly in light of his ISO-degree V-tum on advocating interventionist government. The ALP of the 19S0s and 1990s will go down in history as the great deregulators, advocating a flat earth policy without prudential controls at the expense of their traditional constituency: bluecollar workers and regional areas.
With this bilI, the real winner is self-funded retirees, a group which was disenfranchised by the previous government.
Mr Lee-And the co-ops?
Mr ANTHONY-We will get to that. On the one hand, the ALP legislated for compulsory superannuation, for the right reasons, in an attempt to stop the tide of ever ballooning social security commitments as Australia's population grows older. The member for DobeIl should know. He has a lot of elderly people in his electorate. It is only a pity that another 500 did not vote the other way. But, on the other hand, Labor's policies were actually discouraging people from planning their own retirement.
Self-funded retirees and part-pensioners need to be recognised and rewarded for the personal sacrifice they have endured in planning for their own retirement and should not be unfairly taxed. This piece of legislation will effectively raise the tax free threshold for self-funded retirees of pension age from $5,400 to $11,000 with a cut-off point above $20,441 for single people or $15,S55 for married couples. This is very good news for self-funded retirees in the electorate of Richmond in towns such as Ballina, Ocean Shores, Tweed Heads, other areas of Coffs Harbour and of course up in the Whitsundays.
It is with great pleasure that this pre-election commitment is being honoured in full. At a time when interest rates are falling due to our policies, it is pleasing to note that the government will also be reviewing deeming legislation to allow greater purchasing

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7111

power for this very worthy group of Australwork that cooperatives have done right across

ians.

Australia, and particularly in rural New South

The second area I would like to highlight, Wales and Queensland.

equity in small and medium enterprises, is The great benefit of cooperatives is that

aimed at providing a circuit-breaker for these they are always run and owned by Australian

organisations in their attempts to raise capital. businesses which play a significant role in

This will have enormous significance for value adding primary production, particularly

small businesses which have assets under $50 for our exports. The beneficiaries are usually

million and which currently employ over 50 small local communities which have come

per cent of the Australian work force.

together collectively to share capital equip-

When the new investment facility, SMEs, comes into effect it will change the tax treatment of certain equity investments where the investment is held by a leading institution. Any profits or losses from an eligible equity
investment will now be subject to capital gains tax provisions rather than being on a
revenue account. What this means is that institutions will be able to claim indexation.

ment and knowledge in an attempt to process and market rural commodities to the world.
Cooperatives are unique because, unlike public companies, they do not distribute capital back to stakeholders but rather reinvest it back into plant and equipment. One of the reasons for not redistributing profits is that generally cooperatives are at a tax disadvantage compared with companies because by

By allowing institutions to use SME investdefinition they do not benefit from imputation ments to be treated as capital gains tax, it or from franked dividends.

allows a greater flow of capital.

Indeed, if profits are redistributed-this was

The pooled development fund scheme set
up by the previous government was an absolute failure. I speak with some authority here
because in the early 1990s I personally visited over 30 venture capital organisations in an
attempt to raise equity for a private project that I was promoting.

raised by the member for Dawson (Mrs De-
Anne Kelly)-stakeholders, traditionally farmers, are taxed at the marginal income tax
rate, up to 48.7 per cent. The other characteristic of cooperatives is that, by being Austral-
Ian owned, profits are retained and spent in this country-not by multinationals, which
minimise tax profits through fancy tax breaks,

This new scheme must be given total transfer pricing or elaborate R&D schemes.

support bec::ause it is still extremely difficult for small businesses to borrow from tradition-
al financial institutions. I implore the banks, which have made record profits in excess of
$1 billion-$2 billion in the case of the National Australia Bank-to embrace this.
legislation to help promote Australian small business.

Indeed, there has been an incredible ration-
alisation process in the food industry in Australia, particularly the meat industry, which has seen many cooperatives go to the
wall or be taken over by major international conglomerates who were approved under the
FIRB guidelines of the reign of previous
Treasurers Keating, Kerin, Dawkins and

The member for Curtin (Mr Rocher), who Willis. That is not to say that all these take-

spoke yesterday on this legislation, raised overs were without merit but we must stand

some very good points in his speech on this firm and protect those cooperatives that are

topic. The point he made that financial institudoing well in the sugar, dairy, cotton, nut,

tions should be encouraged to lend against fruit and beef industries to name a few.

cash flow and not just equity or property assets had been endorsed by the Institute of
Chartered Accountants.

Of critical importance for some cooperatives is the facility of 120(1)(c), which allowed cooperatives to borrow from a govern-

The third area I would like to highlight, ment instrumentality to invest in specific plant

which is part of the heart and soul of the or equipment which would enhance the long-

National Party, is in relation to cooperatives. term expansion of their cooperatives. Many of

I would like to acknowledge the fantastic these cooperatives have found it difficult to

7112

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

obtain finance on the deregulated playing field, as institutions would either not lend or would charge extreme interest rate premiums to these enterprises. So 120(1)(c) is aimed at giving these cooperatives a specific tax break to aid both interest and capital repayments.
In the northern rivers area of New South Wales, Norco, a major dairy producer, as well as the nut industry have been major users of this facility. While it may not have been desirable to have maintained this facility indefinitely, the coalition recognises that we must all share the pain of fiscal responsibility required by the situation we inherited from our predecessors. The key issue now is having an adequate transition period which seeks to be flexible and appropriate to allow existing cooperatives to expand with certainty where co-op boards have made in principle decisions prior to the budget.
Dairy Farmers, controlled by Australian Cooperative Foods Ltd, is one such cooperative which now has dairy food sales of over $1 billion, which has utilised this facility. The transition arrangements struck through tireless negotiations with my Queensland National Party colleagues and others have resulted in an improved transition period.
I would like to put on record though that there needs to be adequate flexibility to allow existing cooperatives which do not have a three-year track record with government lending institutions to be allowed to access 120(l)(c) where the spirit of the intent was made prior to budget night, particularly the Australian Macadamia Processing Cooperative near Alstonville in New South Wales.
What is interesting about the ALP argument on cooperatives is that only a relatively small number of co-ops have been able to utilise 120(1)(c). To be eligible you had to borrow through a government agency or bank. To date there are only a few institutions, most notably the old QIDC. The reason why there are few institutions is that under Labor's stewardship, government banks were either gobbled up by private enterprise or were forced to restructure because of the negligent commercial policies guided by state ALP governments.

The hypocrisy of the ALP and the member for Hotham (Mr Crean) is breathtaking-on the one hand, as the previous minister in the Hawke-Keating government, he advocated a level playing field policy in many industry sectors except his most precious constituency base, the ever-diminishing ACTU. Yet at the same time he was happy to tum a blind eye to protecting some of the most archaic work practices in the maritime industry. He now advocates an interventionist policy in a desperate attempt to remain relevant to the battlers of Australia and the blue-collar workers. Yet it was the ALP interventionist policies of trying to pick winners such as WA Inc., the State Bank of South Australia and the State Bank of Victoria, which bankrupted these economies.
Mr Lee-Metway.
Mr ANTHONY-It is not bankrupt at all, it is very strong-unlike the ones that you bailed out. What this country requires is common sense, pragmatic agricultural, manufacturing and financial institution policies to strike the right balance in order to advance Australia. I read with interest the sudden renaissance that some of our party icons, notably John McEwen, are having with the member for Hotham. It is just a pity that the ALP did not practice what they preached.
Finally, I find the opposition's amendments incredible-I would hold my head in shame if I were them-implying that women have been disadvantaged by this government. Given Labor's commitment to women of one-third of safe ALP seats, it is ironic that there are only four seats on the Labor side of the House as opposed to 17 on this side. The old boy network of the union movement is still alive and strong. Likewise, the family tax initiative due to be implemented on 1 January will be a major plus to families following the interest rate cuts which have meant savings of over $145 per month on mortgages since 2 March. My wife, who is in the gallery today, would certainly advocate that initiative.
In summary, this bill aims at assisting aged Australians on low incomes and tightening the eligibility for tax breaks for business which have been abused by some R&D syndicates, and some infrastructure bonds. Tonight I have

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7113

tried to demonstrate the importance of equity going to small businesses and the need to have an adequate transition period for cooperatives. I know that the member for Barton (Mr McClelland), who is the best of the bunch over there, will probably agree with everything I have said.
Mr McCLELLAND (Barton) (8.50 p.m.)- Initially, I listened with great pleasure to the speech by the honourable member for Dawson (Mrs De-Anne Kelly). I got a warm inner glow when I heard her stand up for her constituency. Unfortunately, at the crucial time she walked away from them and dropped them cold. The best that the member for Dawson came up with was her claim that she had participated in the negotiation of transitional arrangements for her constituents. What a great member. If she wanted a result, with respect, she would have spoken to us. If they had crossed the floor, as initially suggested, she would have got the result for her constituents.
Constituents want results, not words. Tonight all we heard were words from National Party members. Their constituents are tough people and they want action. They will get from us far more than patronising references to their names in Hansard. As I say, they are tough fellows. I come from a Scottish background and they say one reason Scotsmen did not have pockets in their kilts was to prevent someone from filling them up with an unpleasant liquid. And that is all we have heard from the National Party members about their constituents.
The member for Dawson spoke of the sugar industry employing one in four members in her electorate. Sadly, they have been let down. We trust we are going to see some more fortitude from the member for Kennedy (Mr Katter) and we trust we are going to see some more fortitude from the National Party senators.

develops research techniques which add to the nation's store of intellectual property.
Quite obviously, research and development are very relevant to a number of industries. For instance, our car industry is based on continually improving and marketing new models. The computer technology that is developing would mean that any manufacturer is simply out of the picture within five years-probably three years-unless they continue research and development. Mobile phones, for instance, are outdated after six months and that technology has a crucial need for research and development.
Companies involved in those industries and many others, I hear tonight from the member for Richmond (Mr Anthony)-and they would be interested to know that they have now become ALP sympathisers; they are tax driven R&D rorters and they have always been aligned to the Labor Party, according to the member for Richmond-will be interested to know that and to know that their very serious concerns and those of the country are dismissed so offhandedly and irresponsibly by those entrusted with representing the people of this nation.
I referred in my speech on the appropriation bill to a rugby union analogy. At 150 per cent we had the equivalent of 15 players on the field. The government has decided to take the two breakaways off the field and has told the lock forward to play half again. Our competitors, Malaysia and Singapore, have a 200 per cent R&D deduction. They have an extra back line on the field and we are expected to play against them. In that international context you either keep up with technology or you may as well walk off the field. The sad point is that the government is taking us off the field. It is taking us past the reserve benches. We are not going to get back on the field if we lose this technology. The government is placing us right in the spectator stands. As I say, that is a very grave tragedy.

Nonetheless, it is the research and development aspect of the bill that I particularly want to focus on. Research and development has a threefold effect: it develops new products and processes that can be sold commercially; it improves quality and productivity; and it

The fact is that the government cannot admit that under Labor we had growth averaging 4.2 per cent. We had employment growth averaging three per cent and that, in part, resulted from Labor's industrial policy. They cannot admit that in this world of

7114

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

unprecedented technological growth-indeed, job displacing technological growth-that it was and is necessary to invest in our country's asset base, to both upgrade our skills reservoir and to bring our technological know-how into the 1990s.
For the government to recognise that fact and those objective statistics would mean destroying their own propaganda. Their mindless contraction of the Australian economy is very much the result of their own rhetoric. They are classic propagandists. If you repeat the terms 'waste' and 'rort' often enough, as we heard tonight, you will get some people to accept that brand as reality. It is, however, grossly incorrect to say that the constructive partnership which was developed between government and industry-and universities-under Labor was based on a rort or wastage of resources.
Ever since the days of John Button it has been realised that Australia has to become a clever country or go under as a developed nation. It was universally recognised that if we wanted to maintain our standard of living we had to become sophisticated. Specifically, we had to add value to our own natural, rich resource base. We could not simply continue to dig minerals out of the ground and shear wool from sheep, and ship that produce to England for England to market that produce for us on the European market.
Fundamentally it was realised that we had to develop our own manufacturing industry based on state of the art best practice and technology. It was known that it was going to be a task which required significant effort. But even more so it was realistically known that it was going to take significant investment in calculated risk. The Labor government was prepared to put its money where its mouth was and prove it by actions in developing the research and development allowance structure.
I heard a media report today of the Prime Minister (Mr Howard) harking back to the days of Robert Menzies. Those days have gone. The world is a different place. We no longer have privileged trading status with Great Britain and we very much have to make our own way in the world. There will be no

divine force intervening to assure Australia of its privileged and very wealthy status in this modern world.
Mr Adams-He won't come back.
Mr McCLELLAND-That is right; Bob Menzies will not come back and nor will the world of that era. We are playing for keeps. The trouble is that this government has not realised that. It is quite clear in the world of today with multinational production that the productivity equation is assessed by those corporations either on the basis of cheapness or quality. We have literally two options: if we are going to compete with our neighbours and the low skilled, low cost labour force that they apply without technology we would have no choice other than to have our workers' wages slashed dramatically. Not even this conservative government proposes that dramatic a cut in real wages for our workers.
Our only option if we do not want that to occur is to invest in research and development. Australians do not want to be a cheap supplier of labour, to be manipulated by multinationals. We want to be not only desired but also required in the productivity equation because of our skill and our technology. We most certainly have the culture to achieve that and, at least until recently, we have had the educational institutions to achieve that.
We also had the industry policy to achieve success. One of the primary planks of that policy, as I say, was our research and development allowance. At the rate of 150 per cent, it effectively gave a deduction of 18c for every dollar spent. With the reduction from 150 to 125 per cent, that benefit has been halved to 9c for every dollar spent.
The government has halved the benefit to our industry in the context of an admission by the Prime Minister that the world economy is not an even playing field. Until the actions of his government, we were well down the path of becoming the clever country. But in an article published in the Financial Review, entitled 'Goodbye clever country-the price we pay for scuttling business R&D', the author concluded with the ominous warning that just how much is being given up by our abandonment of industry may very well take

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7115

years to establish. The article stated that, until budget night, industry did not know what the government had in store for them. There are indeed some very significant examples. If the member for Richmond is listening, he might describe to me how these companies can be regarded as ALP fellow travellers and rorters of the system.
Firstly, there is CRA's Hi-Smelt project, which is perhaps the biggest research and development project in this country's history. CRA have tonight apparently become ALP sympathisers. The company is on the record as saying that that project would not have gone ahead without the research and development allowance. Goodman Fielder say that the future of research and development in higher risk projects is now prejudiced. ICI says that it will be difficult to convince its British parent that research and development should be undertaken in Australia. They are big companies. What about small companies?
The Financial Review's small business section said that the concession cuts will set research and development back by 12 years. Mr Rudolph Werner, an expert in research and development tax, has articulated how the effect will be most severe on small and medium sized businesses, those which really have the potential to grow and employ Australians. One can only agree with Mr Werner that the reduction in the concession shows a lack of long-term direction for industry at the expense of short-term book balancing. Indeed, that view is echoed by businesses generally.
Yesterday's Daily Telegraph reported the New South Wales based Australian Business Chamber as attacking the government for its lack of vision. According to Mr Holt from the Australian Business Chamber, the government is following the easy options of reducing and cutting rather than putting together a comprehensive integrated national industry policy. He said that this would leave Australia increasingly dependent on external influences and saddled with a rising and totally unacceptable level of unemployment.
The Daily Telegraph also reported that Mr Holt's remarks reflected similar criticism from an industry dinner last month, at which business leaders warned that there was 'a

vacuum of embarrassed silence' by the government on key issues in the areas of industry and industry development. Similarly, the paper reported a round table conference of international corporate executives complaining to the government that it lacked a coherent and consistent industry policy. These reports are occurring at the time the media industry is undergoing an inquiry. When that inquiry is over, they will really let this government know what they think about it.
Perhaps even more telling is an analysis by industry experts. There have been two major surveys conducted, one by Price Waterhouse and another by Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu. Both surveys essentially came up with the same conclusions. Again, neither company could be regarded as fellow travellers of the ALP, but I suppose, if the member for Richmond says that they are representing these 'rorters', he might want to conveniently and ignorantly lump them in that category.
In any event, their condemnation of the government is one of the strongest I have ever seen of an Australian government. I will refer to the Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu summary in full-after they have given their statistics. They state:
There is no question that reducing the concessional rate of the R&D tax concession to 125% will have an immeasurably detrimental impact upon the amount of R&D being carried out by Australian companies. The effect of this is difficult to measure. However it is certain that the reduction in the amount of R&D being conducted within Australia could lead to both an increase in unemployment and a decrease in taxation revenue gathered by the Government. Further, the reduction will effect both the amount of the Government's taxation revenue and the Australian economy on many other levels.
The most obvious and detrimental of these trends will be the steady movement of corporate R&D operations offshore, particularly in high technology growth industries. This movement will greatly reduce the amount of taxation revenue gathered by the Government for an indefinite period of time.
It will inhibit growth in Australian businesses and render the "clever country" significantly less progressive and technologically second rate. Further, the reduction in the concessional rate will encourage companies to purchase technology from foreign countries, sending more and more potentially taxable Australian dollars and capital offshore. The effects of this sort of flow will have serious

7116

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

and potentially irreversible consequences for the Australian economy.
The reduction in the concessional rate of R&D tax concession is actively dissuading Australian companies from undertaking R&D activities. In doing so the Government is sending a clear message to companies that, despite its rhetoric, the Government is not willing to properly support R&D activities conducted in this country. The proposed 125% R&D tax concession can not compete with other OECD countries despite the Budget papers' comments to the contrary. This simple fact will ensure irreversible damage to Australia's future while assisting our neighbour countries in their economic and technological growth.
That is what this government is about. It is about perhaps a new form of diplomacy: giving our competitors, our neighbours, economic ascendancy over us.
As the Deloitte survey showed, the most concerning implication of the reduction in research and development will undoubtedly be the movement of Australia's research and development options offshore. Indeed, it predicted that as much as 51 per cent of companies involved in research and development would take that very action.
A number of other commentators who, again, could hardly be described as ALP sympathisers have said that, if we lose research and development, the odds are that we lose the manufacturing flowing from that. So we are going to lose overseas profits, the government is going to lose overseas company tax, we are going to lose Australian jobs and the government is going to lose taxation revenue from those would be workers and have to pay, on the other side of the equation, social security benefits. It is absolutely outrageous, given the developments that have taken place over at least the past decade in developing Australia as the clever country.
The Prime Minister's version of patriotism is to look back with nostalgic affection at the 1950s, when we were very much an outpost of the then rapidly declining British Empire. That is not patriotism at all; it is simply ignorance. True patriotism is developing and promoting Australian industry and Australian jobs. As the international community has already observed through the executives of international companies, this government has an embarrassing silence when it comes to the

sort of realistic patriotism that this country needs to get on.
This is an obsessive, ideologically driven government in its endeavour to hastily achieve smaller government. It is camouflaging its slash and bum strategy by using propaganda. When it comes to taking action to develop Australia, to invest in Australian industry, to invest in Australian technology and to invest in Australia's intellectual and knowledge base, it is found severely wanting. It is sitting there in a complete vacuum, and it is a very significant risk to the Australian public. I note that a number of companies have commenced legal actions against the government, and it may well be that those actions will cause further loss to the Australian people. (Time expired)
Mr NEVILLE (Hinkler) (9.10 p.m.)-I would like to contribute tonight to the debate on the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No. 3), and in particular I would like to focus on 120(1)(c). In doing so I want to further concentrate on the cooperative movement-a movement for which I have a great deal of respect-and to talk about its place in the Australian rural economy.
The cooperative movement as we know it has been around for 100 years or more, and it has played an important part in the expansion of many rural industries-dairy, beef, sugar, cotton, rice, oilseeds, peanuts-and a host of other industries. It is based on the mutuality system of Great Britain even back before the settlement of Australia.
Mr Adams-It is socialistic.
Mr NEVILLE-I do not mind whether or not it is socialistic. It is mutuality. It is people clubbing together to make something work. You could call it socialism if you like. You have moved a long way away from that. It is the ability of farmers to purchase or build facilities to process primary produce. That is on the basis that those primary producers own 90 per cent of the assets. The members or shareholders control the company and therefore its destiny.
But there is one great weakness in this: 200 or 300 farmers cannot be expected to undertake the capital borrowings that would be

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7117

expected in the commercial world. This was recognised by governments as far back as 60 year years ago, when they allowed farmers to borrow capital to purchase or build mills or factories. Certain conditions were placed on that: the money had to be borrowed from the government or a government instrumentality and it had to be for capital infrastructure items. That was quite a sound method, because it meant that the funds were focused on the development of the facilities.
As I said, 200 or 300 farmers could not possibly raise the amount of capital required then or today in the normal market. That is something that governments of both political persuasions have not addressed over the last couple of decades, and it is perhaps a challenge for the future. But in the meantime we must look at how things are at present, and I will deal in particular with sugar mills and food factories.
Many of those have, in recognising the calls of current government to adopt world's best practice, entered into five-year programs. Some of them are one year in and others are two or three years into those programs. In fact, just about every factory around Australia is currently in the middle of some form of five-year program.
Let me then move to a couple of examples of those, just to put this into perspective. The Golden Circle cannery in Brisbane employs up to 1,700 people largely for processing pineapple. That flows back through south-east Queensland, through a whole range of farming communities, and plays a very important part in that economy. South Burnett Meatworks, which is at Murgon and processes cattle from my area, has 574 employees.
Then we come to sugar mills. These are of great interest to me because I have in my electorate a sugar mill, a cooperative sugar mill, that plays a very important part in the economy of my electorate. These sugar mills, hand in hand with the factories, entered into five-year programs. That is a fairly complicated process when it comes to a sugar mill because it means asking farmers to commit to the purchase of land on which cane will be grown. In the case of the mill in question, the Isis Central Mill in my electorate, that in-

volved them committing to take cane from 2,000 hectares. That required a 15 per cent increase in the crushing capacity of the mill. That in tum required an upgrade in the purchase of a vast number of capital items.
Having said all these things, and before I move into the argument, I want to make one thing very clear: I believe in a parallel system. I am not here tonight to bag proprietary mills. There are some very fine companies operating in this country-CSR, Manns, Tate and Lyle-all of which have made contributions, but they have their capital resources, they have their shareholders, they have their borrowings instruments which the cooperative mills do not have. I think, in the spirit of equity, we have to keep a mechanism in there provided by government to ensure that this important sector remains.
There are 10 cooperatives in Queensland owning 13 mills and producing 42 per cent of Australia's raw sugar. Some 85 per cent of that raw sugar is exported. In fact, the whole of the Australian sugar industry returns $2 billion a year to this country. It is the sixth most important primary industry. You could say that these mills provide $900 million worth of income for this country. They employ between them 3,100 employees, and their shareholders or members are 3,300 farmers.
In each mill district there are anywhere between 400 and 600 employees involved in associated or allied fields. It is estimated that, across Australia, 19,000 people are fully employed in the sugar industry and another 26,000 people in related industries-45,000 people in total. About 20,000-a very important figure-of those would be associated with the cooperative sugar mills. The shareholders or members of these mills often go back three and four generations. Their blood is in the soil; they are very much a part of their communities.
The Isis Central Mill at Cordalba is the one I speak about tonight. It had its centenary as recently as September. Under the chairmanship of Dudley Mittleheuser, the deputy chairmanship of Alf Bonanno and with a very focused general manager, Mark Hochen, it is a typical Australian sugar mill. The Chairman

7118

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

of the Queensland Canegrowers Council, Harry Bonanno, also resides in that mill district, and he is well known in rural industry and is a former deputy chairman of the NFF. It has 185 growers and 400 to 500 people are employed directly from the mill and in the associated and allied fields, and it is certainly the lifeblood of that shire and the township of Childers.
They are no slackers either. They have not just held on to the concession provided purely to indulge themselves or to keep a flagging mill going. Quite the contrary, they have been at the cutting edge of world best practice in things like effluent disposal and emission control from their chimney stack. They have a superior rail system including, in part of the mill area, a double tracking system, which is unique. They have modified former diesel hydraulic locos from the Queensland railways to carry loads of up to 700 tones. You are not talking about people who are just hanging on by the skin of their teeth, but people who are quite progressive in looking forward.
Their expansion, even in its initial stage, involved the need for $15 million worth of capital, and that was in jeopardy. Contrary to a number of speakers from the Labor benches tonight, I make no apology for going to the Treasurer (Mr Costello) and doing a deal for people in the cooperatives. I do not see that as a failure. I do not see that as opposing the government's initiatives at all. I see it is as working through the system in a way that you guys were never able to do during 1993-96. You cowered there, like Graeme Campbell, who slunk up the back there for nearly the whole three years and who when the rug was pulled without him jumped over here. That is the way you are controlled. Not one of you ever spoke out of tum. We can speak, we can negotiate deals, and we have done.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Andrew)- Order! The member for Hinkler knows he has an obligation to address his remarks through the chair.
Mr NEVILLE-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, I am well rebuked. Having said that, I think it was important to find a deal that was fair not only to the integrity of the government's measures but also to these

mills. The deal that was struck was this: if a mill had, say, a five-year business plan in place and if it had been approved by the board and had been approved before the budget on 20 August and if that mill had the confidence of the state government lending instrumentalities to be able to borrow that amount of money and if it could guarantee to have that equipment boIted down by 30 June 1998-which is a fair period-then, quite clearly, that mill would be able to achieve a very fine transitional arrangement. Personally, I would like to have seen a longer transitional arrangement. Nevertheless, it is a good deal, and I am proud to have been part of brokering that deal. I think it will make a vast difference to the people in my area.
The cooperative movement plays a very important part across Queensland. As I mentioned, South Burnett Meatworks, Golden Circle Canneries, 13 sugar mills and similar bodies in New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania rely on this. I trust this arrangement will help them to focus on other forms of finance. As I said before, there is a challenge for our government and for subsequent governments to find ways of providing capital for the cooperative movement which is a necessary corollary of the withdrawal of any taxation benefits.
Finally, I think the cooperative movement plays a very important part in the structure of communities up and down the Queensland coast and right down through New South Wales and Victoria to Tasmania. I support the bill. As I said before, I make no apologies for brokering an amendment to this bill. I feel sure that this bill will put the sugar industry in those other areas in a transitional situation where they can enter new eras of trading from a position of strength rather than weakness.
Mr ADAMS (Lyons) (9.23 p.m.)-The honourable member for Hinkler (Mr Neville) said that he supported a cooperative system around Australia that assists many areas of regional Australia. But then he said that he helped broker a bit of a deal that is going to help sort out what is going on. Well, it is just the crumbs off the floor. There has been a deal done, and they have been pushed aside.

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7119

The honourable member for Dawson (Mrs De-Anne Kelly) came in here and told us all the reasons why she was opposed to the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No.3) 1996. She laid all those reasons out. She said why this bill should not pass, and then she said that she had helped broker a bit of a deal. Then she went off. She has also sold out the cooperatives of Australia.
The member for Richmond, Mr Anthony, came in and talked a lot of rhetoric. He hollered and talked rhetoric without getting to any substance at all. There were people years ago who used to sit on that side of the House who stuck up for regional Australia. They did not worry about balancing budgets; they went in to bat for regional Australia.
The current National Party members are shadows of the people who used to sit over there. The people who used to sit over there used to stick up for regional Australia. You have failed the test tonight, my friend. The member for Richmond has failed the test greatly, and the people of Richmond will know all about how you failed it. You failed the test.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Andrew)- The member for Lyons is also failing to address his remarks through the chair.
Mr ADAMS-I will address my remarks through the chair, Mr Deputy Speaker. I understand that National Party senators in the other place were running around blowing their chests out and saying they were going to abstain from voting unless they achieved something. They were blowing their chests out and saying, 'We'll do this. We'll do that. We'll abstain from voting in the Senate.' Well, they caved in as well. Let all of Australia know-and let regional Australia know, because this affects regional Australia more than anyone else-that this bill will pass because of the failure of the National Party to stand up for regional Australia.
The National Party have sold them out. They have gone down the drain. They have got a little concession of about $6 million or $12 million. You cannot even win a $6 million or $12 million concession. Not to be able to win that small amount back from the Treasurer (Mr Costello) means you are a real

failure. It shows you up. It shows you up that you have not got any influence whatsoever on this government. The executive of this government does not take any notice of the National Party whatsoever. You have failed to make any sort of impact within the government.
There are many concerns about the taxation laws which are before us tonight. I was under the impression that this government really wanted to help regional and rural Australia and that they wanted to see some activity in research and development. Of course, in this bill, it has failed. It seems as though the government want to throw any new development back into the arms of our competitors, so that Europe, Asia and even the US will benefit by the brains and the innovations that we have produced here in this country.
The Business Review Weekly has had a field day. 'Goodbye Clever Country' was the headline in the Business Review Weekly. What a good indictment! People ought to be very proud of the policies that bring that sort of headline in that sort of magazine! They looked at the price that we will be paying for scuttling business research and development, and might they do so.
One of the most successful initiatives put into place by the last government was the 150 per cent tax concession on R&D expenditure. In fact the Business Review Weekly said:
... few industry-supported initiatives of the past 15 years have been so widely supported ...
This concession has now been slashed to 125 per cent which, according to the BRW, is:
... effectively a halving of the concession because its value is in the percentage over the 100% that would be available if the expenditure was written off as a normal expense.
I believe we set in place a vision to continue the development of many of our new industries. In some cases, I reckon we did not go far enough from our party's point of view in giving support to industry. A cautious but thoughtful approach would eventually have us leading the field in many categories of innovation and expansion. We would be encouraging them to go down that road.
Now the Minister for Industry, Science and Tourism, Mr Moore, has been let out with his

7120

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

scythe and his matches. This method might be good for growing sugar, but I am sure it is not good for our economy.
Industry has been shocked by the moves to reduce the subsidy. The BRW gave the results of a survey recently. It said:
57% of those that claim the concession said the reduction would have a negative effect on R&D decisions.
They go on to say:
Nearly a quarter of the respondents and 34% of those that have claimed the concession in the past five years, say they are considering moving their R&D overseas.
This is a great way to drive industry out of this country. I have never heard a government decision spoken about in those terms and to that extent before. Some 34 per cent of those who have claimed the concession in the past five years say that they are considering moving their R&D overseas, and well might they do so. Overseas countries are giving them more of an incentive than we are.
To me this is very sad news. This bill is a very bad bill. Australian ideas have made headlines over the years and despite losing some-everybody talks about things that should have been developed and processed in Australia-there have been some spectacular successes and a lot of quiet and very successful achievements.
I will go back to why those companies are going overseas. The advantages and assistance being offered overseas are tremendous and seen to be a lot more than Australia is offering. Knowing that this decision has been made in Australia, Singapore and Malaysia are offering 200 per cent R&D tax concessions. That is making many of our industries ask why they should stay in Australia when they can get that sort of concession overseas.
This government has tightened the criteria by subtle changes to the definition of what is eligible for the tax concession. It is said to be that the research must have 'an appreciative degree of novelty or a high level of technical risk'. I do not know exactly what that means. I think a lot of other people might have some difficulty in working that out, especially people in industries in this country.

Tasmanians trot out Incat as being our innovative and successful enterprise. That is not because Incat is the only company that we have that is successful, but because it is flamboyantly successful. It makes big, shiny boats which stand out. It is telling the rest of the world that we are in the forefront of this particular side of the industry. Today in the Mercury there was an article headed 'Europe honours Incat's success'. It went on to say that the Tasmanian shipbuilder Incat Australia has won the inaugural Europe Business Review Award for the best Australian business achievement in Europe. That is a great honour for an industry from Tasmania and a great honour for an industry from Australia. That industry is suffering as a result of the loss of the ship bounty and the R&D reduction.
The article says that Incat had built 45 per cent of the 41 high speed passenger ferries operating around the world. This year they have delivered three 81-metre catamarans to Europe, each capable of carrying 700 passengers and 180 cars while operating at a speed of up to 44 knots. That is quite a speed for a ship that size.
Next month another ship is off to Europe. It is slightly bigger and slightly faster. They are all the time experimenting, improving and testing the product they manufacture. Now they are going to be hit by the loss of this tax concession. Keeping the business in Australia-and in Tasmania in particular-where we need it is going to be more difficult. Our unemployment rate is 10.7 per cent. If we were to lose this industry we would lose 900 jobs in one fell swoop.
This government really must have rocks in their head to do what they are doing. We do not know what will be saved in budgetary terms by scrapping this concession. I would like the government to prove to the House what they are saving by scrapping this concession. I would like them to prove that what they are going to save as a result of this decision is more than it is going to lost in terms of the loss of business, the loss of tax revenue and the cost of unemployment.
Market forces cannot be expected to provide a totally balanced economy. They are

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7121

very skewed in how they affect different regional areas and they are widely different, depending on what forces are at work. The market reacts to the beat of a different drum than the needs of disadvantaged regions. Old technology and old products must be replaced by new ones if we want to continue to develop our economy-we must renew.
How then is this government proposing that the research and development that is needed be done? The most costly part of any development enterprise is during this phase. All the funds are going out and very little is coming in. How are we going to encourage firms to take a long-term view to invest in the effort that new technology requires, to solve problems, to renew? Incat is not the only industry in Tasmania that is benefiting by the R&D they have done in the past, but they are certainly the most successful.
Another angle of these tax amendments that really gets up my nose-we have heard the Nationals talk about it in the House-is the tax treatment of cooperatives. It is dealt with in items 17 and 18 in schedule 1 of the bill. This removes the tax deduction that cooperatives have been able to claim for government loans used to purchase assets.
At the moment the capital debt incurred by cooperatives is not taxed if it is borrowed from a government entity. So what does this government do? It removes the tax free status, so that every future repayment of debt incurred by cooperatives to purchase assets for the expansion of their business is taxed. They might save $6 million over three years, but what will the cost be to the community, to regional communities that are really under attack, that are really pressurised, that we are battling to get capital to invest in? You know that, Mr Deputy Speaker. It takes a lot of effort and we are actually failing the test because we are not getting the capital into regional Australia.
There are many sorts of co-ops, but many do not pay tax on profits made with dealings with their own members. But it is the ones that have dealings outside-primary producers selling surplus to the market or using government loans to expand, or to develop dividends-that are the ones likely to be burnt by

this. There are many farmers, people out in the rural and regional areas, some of whom are only just recovering from drought. Those people will now have to pay new taxes on debt, and that will threaten their future viability. This is from a Liberal-National Party government.
Farmers go broke. There is no investment in the local towns. Services close down. People start leaving because there are no jobs. The only people left are the old and the very young, and who is left to support them? Who is there to come and revitalise and regenerate? Nobody. Such may be the fate of United Milk in Tasmania, the largest cooperative that we have. It had over $170 million in sales last year, employing almost 400 people.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Andrew)- Order! The level of conversation in front of me, while not intended to be disruptive, is probably higher than the members realise.
Mr ADAMS-I thought the Parliamentary Secretary at the table, the member for Braddon eMr Miles), who has most of the United Milk cooperative in his electorate, would be showing some concern for the dairy farmers that make up that cooperative. What about the farmers that I have just mentioned that supply them? Early this year investment was made in part of my electorate for a I,SOO-head dairy in the Fingal Valley. I guess this decision could place that in some jeopardy.
I understand that some transitional arrangements which have been negotiated and lifted up to great heights will shield some of the cooperatives from the removal of the tax deduction, but there are plenty that will not qualify. Those that are looking at expansion and that have made some plans on the basis of this deduction continuing will be in some difficulty. So what are those people supposed to do while the government bumps and grinds around policy areas trying to cut bits here and trim a bit there without having any reasoning put in place for the amendment we are dealing with today? We are showing that we might balance a budget, but then what? We will have no innovation, no expansion of industry, unemployment skyrockets, exports fall, imports grow. Just look at the US figures today. Our trade deficit to the US is up $1.S7

7122

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

billion. All this is about balancing a budget. (Time expired)
Mr MILES (Braddon-Parliamentary Secretary (Cabinet) to the Prime Minister) (9.43 p.m.)-Time is moving on for this debate because of one or two extra speakers, so in summing up this debate I will keep my remarks reasonably brief. It has been pretty extensive with a large number of people from both sides of the House contributing to what has been a reasonably robust debate. I would like to comment on three of the key areas on which there have been comments from particular members of the opposition. The first area relates to the research and development concessional rate being reduced to 125 per cent. Secondly, the syndicates are ineligible for the research and development tax concession. Thirdly, I will make some comments about the co-ops.
The member for Hotham (Mr Crean) said, 'Where is the justification? Where are the rorts? Where is the proof?' It is very interesting that those points are raised. The justification for removing the syndicates lies in their misuse by finance arrangers to leverage up tax benefits to investors well beyond the level of the real research and development spending. Most syndicates are arranged so that the investors are not at risk, whether the research and development project is successful or not.
A quite common result is that tax benefits exceed actual spending on research and development in a ratio of two to one. When the Australian Taxation Office examined syndication it found that in excess of 90 per cent of all syndication was structured along those lines. So the sorts of arrangements made were pretty extensive.
Mr Adams-Are you saying they're all rorting?
Mr MILES-I am saying that the tax benefits exceeding actual expenditure on research and development are in a ratio of two to one and, of the syndications examined by the Australian Taxation Office, 90 per cent of them were structured along those lines. That is the situation there.
In regard to research and development concessions, some people have said they

make no sense because the surveys show research and development will go offshore to attract more generous foreign tax concessions. I think even the last speaker indicated that. The research and development tax concession is not withdrawn but reduced in scope. It would be nice to be able to keep the 150 per cent, but with the huge deficit left by the previous government we had to make a balanced judgment about this. We had to make sure that we had a plan to resolve Australia's problems left by the previous Keating government. It is as simple as that. The concession remains. It is generous at 125 per cent because business is able to write off 125 per cent of expenditure in anyone year.
The headline rate of 200 per cent is available in Singapore and Malaysia, for example. It seems more generous than Australia's. The comparison is simplistic, however, because their concessions are more restrictive in the range of eligible expenditures and are subject to ministerial discretion rather than legislative entitlement. That makes quite a substantial difference. There are other factors as well. Sensible business decisions would be based not only on headline rates of deduction but on all factors relevant to the research environment: for example, the availability and cost of skilled labour, interest rates, the economic environment, lifestyle factors, existing business connections and so on.
Other people made some comments about the changes to the research and development tax concession as evidence of lack of commitment by the government to encouraging industry research and a fixation on cost containment. Honourable members making those comments seemed to be overlooking the retention of the tax concession at 125 per cent, plus the budget undertaking to provide-
Mr Crean-Companies aren't overlooking it.
. Mr MILES-As I said before you came
m-
Mr Crean-I know. I listened to you.
Mr MILES-Reality is you left us with this huge deficit and this government is doing something about it.

,

r

Tuesday, 19 November 1996

REPRESENTATIVES

7123

Mr Crean-Give us an example of the rorts.
Mr MILES-I have been through that. If you had been in the House you would have heard it. There is also the budget undertaking to provide a $340 million package of assistance under the strategic assistance for research and development program.
The measures in the bill ought to be seen as a balanced response to that situation rather than the government's abdication of its responsibility to foster genuine research and development in Australian industry. The member for Bonython (Mr Martyn Evans), one of the opposition speakers, even made the point himself in arguing that, in government assistance for research and development, modest direct grants have been a factor in some of the world's most important research and development outcomes.
Lastly, in regard to the decision to end research and development, syndication is retrospective. The member for Hotham indicated that it was retrospective. Of course, the new measures do not affect any syndicate that at the date of announcement had been registered or at least had had the necessary advance approvals for registration from the Industry Research and Development Board. It was the usual practice by syndicates to ensure that any contract entered into before that time could be voided if the necessary advance approvals were not received.
Mr Adams-Is UMT affected by this?
Mr MILES-It certainly isn't. In regard to co-ops, I would like to make a few comments. People are saying it is only a small amount that is being saved. The estimate of revenue saving is $2 million in 1997-98, but in 199899 it is $4 million and in 1999-2000 it is $6 million.
While the revenue savings are important, the repeal of paragraph 120(1)(c) is consistent with competitive neutrality principles and the government policy of removing anomalies in the tax system. Paragraph 120(1)(c) gives preference to cooperatives over other companies and also prefers borrowers because the effective double deduction it confers is only available for loan funds. There is also the

evidence that the provision is being exploited by some government owned financial institutions to gain a commercial advantage over other lenders.

The government does not accept, of course, the amendment moved by the member for Werriwa (Mr Latham) and the amendments foreshadowed by the member for Hotham. This has been a fairly comprehensive debate with a substantial number of people speaking from both sides of the House. I thank members for their contributions and suggest that we proceed to considering the bill in detail.

Question put:

That the words proposed to be omitted (Mr

Latham's amendment) stand part of the question.

The House divided.

[9.56 p.m.]

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr J.N. Andrew) Ayes ............... 81

Noes ............... 41

Majority ......... 40

Abbott, A. J. Anthony, L. J. Baldwin, R. C. Bartlett, K. 1. Bishop, B. K. Broadbent, R. E.
Cadman, A. G. Cameron, R. A. Charles, R. E. Costello, P. H.
Downer, A. 1. G. Elson, K. S. Evans, R. D. C.
Forrest, 1. A. Gambaro, T. Georgiou, P.
Hardgrave, G. D.
Hicks, N. 1. *
Jeanes, S. B. Jull, D. F. Lieberman, L. S. Lloyd, 1. E.
McArthur, F. S. *
McLachlan, I. M. Moore, 1. C. Mutch, S. B. Nehl, G. B. Neville, P. C. Prosser, G. D. Reith, P. K. Ruddock, P. M.

AYES Andrews, K. 1. Bailey, F. E. Barresi, P. A. Billson, B. F. Bradford, 1. W. Brough, M. T. Cameron, E. H. Causley, I. R. Cobb, M. R. Dondas, N. M. Draper, P. Entsch, W. G. Fahey, J. J. Gallus, C. A. Gash,1. Grace, E. J. Hawker, D. P. M. Hockey, 1. B. Johnston, R. Kelly, J. M. Lindsay, P. J. Marek, P. McDougall, G. R. Miles, C. G. Moylan, J. E. Nairn, G. R. Nelson, B. 1. Nugent, P. E. Randall, D. J. Ronaldson, M. J. C. Sinclair, I. McC.

7124

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

AYES

Slipper, P. N.

Smith, A. C.

Smith, W. L.

Somlyay, A. M.

Southcott, A. J.

Stone, S. N.

Sullivan, K. J.

Taylor, W. L.

Thomson, A. P.

Truss, W. E.

Tuckey, C. W.

Vaile, M. A. 1.

Vale, D. S.

Wakelin, B. H.

West, A. G.

Williams, D. R.

Wooldridge, M. R. L. Worth, P. M.

Zammit, P. 1.

NOES

Adams, D. G. H.

Albanese, A.

Baldwin, P. J.

Bevis, A. R.

Brereton, L. J.

Brown, R. 1.

Crean, S. F.

Ellis, A. L.

Evans, G. J.

Ferguson, L. D. T.

Ferguson, M. 1.

Fitzgibbon, 1. A.

Grace, E. L. *

Griffin, A. P.

Hatton, M.

Holding, A. C.

Hollis, C.

Jenkins, H. A.

Jones, B. O.

Kerr, D. J. C.

Langmore, 1. V.

Latham, M. W.

Lawrence, C. M.

Lee, M. J.

Macklin, J. L.

Martin, S. P.

McClelland, R. B.

McLeay, L. B.

McMullan, R. F.

Morris, A. A.

Morris, P. F.

Mossfield, F. W.

O'Connor, G. M. Quick, H. V.

Price, L. R.
Sawford, R. W. *

Sercombe, R. C. G.

Tanner, L. 1.

Theophanous, A. C.

Thomson, K. 1.

Wilton, G. S.

PAIRS

Anderson, J. D.

Crosio, 1. A.

Fischer, T. A.

Smith, S. F.

Howard, J. W.

Beazley, K. C.

Kemp, D. A.

O'Keefe, N. P.

McGauran, P. 1.

Evans, M. J.

Reid, N. B.

Willis, R.

Scott, B. C.

*

Melham, denotes teller

D.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Consideration in Detail
Bill-by leave-taken as a whole.
Mr MILES (Braddon-Parliamentary Secretary (Cabinet) to the Prime Minister) (10.03 p.m.)-I move:
(1) Schedule 1, page )3 (lines 26 to 30), omit subparagraph 18(2)(c)(i), substitute:
(i) the directors of the company had given approval to a business plan that antici-

pated the acquisition of the asset and that approval is recorded in the company's minutes; or
I want to make a few brief comments. This is a minor amendment being made to subparagraph 18(2)(c)(i) of schedule 1 of the bill to relax one of the conditions which must be satisfied for a cooperative to take advantage of the transitional arrangements which accompany the repeal of paragraph 120( 1)(c) of the act.
One of the conditions in the existing transitional arrangement is that, before the budget announcement of the repeal of paragraph 120(1)(c), the directors of the company must have authorised the entry into a contract by the company to acquire the asset and have recorded that authorisation in the company's minutes. The amendment will ensure that the deduction under paragraph 120(1)(c) will still be available where before the budget the directors had approved a business plan which anticipated the acquisition of the asset, and that approval has been recorded in the minutes of the company. I commend the amendment to the House and I present the supplementary explanatory memorandum.
Mr LATHAM (Werriwa) (10.05 p.m.)- The Labor Party will not be opposing this particular amendment because we recognise that it strengthens the transitional arrangements the government is seeking to put in place on the taxation treatment of cooperatives. That is not to suggest, of course, that the Labor Party is entirely happy with the amendment. We believe quite strongly that there should be no transitional arrangements whatsoever, because the taxation concession itself should not be in question.
I think it is a very sad moment for the parliament to realise that we are effectively seeing the end of the cooperative movement in Australia. As we see the killing off of the cooperative movement, we see the killing off of any credentials whatsoever that the National Party might have in this parliament in representing rural and regional Australia. It was very interesting earlier on to hear so many National Party members voice their concern about these transitional arrangements.

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7125

The member for Hinkler (Mr Neville), who is now resuming his place ready to jump into the debate, a few moments ago said that he would like to see an even longer transitional period. If he has the courage of his convictions, he should stand up and move an amendment to strengthen the provisions that the Parliamentary Secretary (Cabinet) to the Prime Minister (Mr Miles) has now put before the House. If the member for Hinkler really believes that the cooperative movement in Australia deserves a decent, extended future, then he should move an amendment accordingly.
It is also important to recognise that the member for Hinkler, speaking on behalf of the National Party in this measure, said that 20,000 people in Queensland alone are affected by the government's alteration to the taxation concession and that this included 13 sugar mills in the state of Queensland. He said that some of these cooperatives had been in the hands of families for generation after generation and that their blood is in the soil. The best he can do under those circumstances is come up with a backroom deal negotiated with the Treasurer, Mr Costello.
If their blood is in the soil, if the cooperatives have been in the family for generation after generation, doesn't it deserve more than a backroom deal, doesn't it deserve more than some compromise reached with the Treasury bureaucrats? Instead of moving a backroom deal, couldn't you actually stand up and say that cooperatives in Australia deserve these taxation concessions and they deserve a healthy future?
What the National Party are signing off for tonight is the slow death of the cooperative movement. Their backroom deal has achieved nothing more than transferring the fast death of the cooperative movement into a slow death. Hearing all this pious rhetoric from the National Party about blood being in the soil, one would have thought it deserved a lot more than a backroom deal.
Mr Kerr-Blood on their hands, I reckon.
Mr LATHAM-As the member for Denison has correctly pointed out, what we have got tonight is blood on the hands of the National Party, as they sign away the funeral

rites of the cooperative movement in Australia.
The member for Hinkler, in expressing those views, was joined by Lame Duck Larry, the member for Richmond (Mr Anthony), who said that he too would like to see longer and stronger transitional arrangements put in place. But he won't vote for that. He wants to see these things but he won't stand by his point of view with actual amendments and voting strength in the House of Representatives. No wonder he will be known henceforth as Lame Duck Larry-another snarly hooknose from the seat of Richmond. In the tradition of those lame ducks coming down from the seat of Richmond, he is all talk and very little action when it comes to defending the cooperative movement.
Mr Neville-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. I take exception to the description of someone as a snarly hooknose. I think that is dreadful and, if it is a slur on the member of Richmond and his father, the former Deputy Prime Minister, I think it should be withdrawn.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Nehl}--The member for Werriwa, will you withdraw?
Mr LATHAM-My grandparents always called him that. They are not here but I am, and I withdraw.
Mr Crean-What about the 'Lame Duck'?
Mr LATHAM-That's right. They are not challenging the description of Lame Duck Larry because they know in their heart of hearts that he is a lame duck, the lame duck from Richmond-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Nonetheless, it is out of order, whether they are challenging it or not.
Mr LATHAM-Well, he has had to be rescued. The member for Richmond has had to be rescued by the Deputy Speaker and I recognise the authority of the chair.
Opposition members-Here he comes.
Mr LATHAM-Here he comes, quacking his way into the chamber. (Time expired)
Mr NEVILLE (Hinkler) (10.10 p.m.)-I find the hypocrisy from the Labor Party tonight breathtaking. I have had a long history

7126

REPRESENTATNES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

of association with the sugar industry, and your treatment of it was absolutely appalling. I can remember the former Minister for Primary Industries and Energy, now sitting on the front bench, on two successive days on the ABC rural program-with Robin McConchie, I recall. The chairman of the sugar task force, my predecessor, Mr Courtice, said that the decision of the committee was unanimous and the minister had to get up the next day and say that it was not.
Mr Crean-You copied our plan.
Mr NEVILLE-Oh, no. What's more, member for Hotham-through you, Mr Deputy Speaker-you were very slow in delivering that sugar package. The Walla weir, through three years of your term, got nowhere near completion. What's more, in the last 6Y2 years of federal and state Labor government in Queensland, not one dam was initiated, commenced and finished in Queensland. And you are concerned for the sugar industry!
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The member for Hinkler will address his remarks through the chair.
Mr NEVILLE-Furthermore, they were very slow on delivering the famous sugar package. It was grossly underspent at the time we came to power. You felt no moral imperative to .complete that and you did nothing about it.
Mr Crean-Rubbish! Go and ask the sugar growers.
Mr NEVILLE-What's more, I can take the honourable member back to the mid1970s when the then Gough Whitlam in an election speech-
Ms Macklin-He's still alive.
Mr NEVILLE-The then Prime Minister, Gough Whitlam, went up the Queensland coast and, in every town, the local dam that was going to be built was the first priority. The one in Bundaberg was the first priority, but when he got to Rockhampton it was the Rockhampton one. And when he got to Mackay, it was the Mackay one. You treated rural industry abysmally. You should be ashamed of ourselves.

Mr Crean-What are you doing now?
Mr NEVILLE-We brokered a deal that got the cooperatives a very good deal. It will mean up to $44 million for one set of sugar mills. It will mean $15 million for another sugar mill with which I am associated. And, not only that, in getting that deal through we worked through the system. We have that freedom of movement in the coalitionsomething that you guys didn't have.
For three years, from 1993 to early 1996, you sat over there like the cowed mob that you were, with not one of you game to speak up on anything, and in the dying days of your dreadful government, that Keating government, the poor old member for Kalgoorlie (Mr Campbell), who had nowhere else to go, finally took a stand 15 years into it-the one stand in three years-and then slunk over here.
The rest of you did not even have that much courage. So don't lecture me about rural industry. I have got clean hands. There has been no blood on my hands over the last 15 or 20 years. But I have seen the duplicity of state and federal Labor members in denuding the bush of any real thing. I have seen the former Prime Minister have to be dragged kicking and screaming into western Queensland, into drought ravaged areas. Don't lecture me. You have no credibility.
Mr ROCHER (Curtin) (10.14 p.m.)-I support the government's amendment to schedule 1. The provision being repealed is very narrow indeed and it is very rarely or selectively applied as a result of that. The justification, in my opinion, for removing the existing arrangement is quite strong in the narrow range of cases where it applied. I know that where there is a concentration of cooperatives people might not regard it as narrow but in an Australia-wide context, where it has applied a bias or a preference has been given to members of those cooperatives, it would not be available to a single taxpayer.
Briefly, the existing section 120(1)(c) allowed a cooperative company, the primary objective of which was the purchase of commodities or animals from its shareholders for disposal or distribution, a tax deduction for repayments made on loans from the

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7127

Commonwealth or a state government used for the purpose of acquiring assets required to carryon the business, or payments to a government for assets taken over from the government that were required for that particular cooperative's business.
The genesis of the policy behind the existing provisions is shrouded in time. But I presume, and I think I am right in doing so, it was earlier seen as a measure to assist the establishment of primary industries through cooperatives in circumstances where government had previously provided or would otherwise provide the infrastructure required. That is how it all started.
It is in these times a generous concession where it does apply. The removal of the concession is supportable, at least on equity grounds because, as I might have intimated earlier in these brief remarks, a single taxpayer would not be allowed a tax deduction, whereas a group operating under the same or identical circumstances through a cooperative would. That hardly makes for equity in the tax system. The concession is probably also not consistent with current policies of both the previous and present governments as far as privatisation goes and the general consideration of market efficiencies.
I repeat, I endorse the government's amendment, both the one introduced by the parliamentary secretary a few moments ago and in the original bill before the House. In that, I think I am at one with the Western Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and I am reassured in my position by theirs.
Mr CREAN (Hotham) (10.18 p.m.)-The opposition is prepared to support this amendment because it does make some improvement but it does not go far enough. That is the reason why, following the decision on this, we will be moving a further amendment.
We have here another typical example of the Liberal Party rolling over the National Party. We have the Treasurer (Mr Costello), who introduced this and forced it upon them, not even in the parliament to defend his actions. He sends in the member for Braddon, the Parliamentary Secretary (Cabinet) to the Prime Minister (Mr Miles), with a summing up brief that must have lasted four minutes.

And this from a parliamentary secretary representing the seat of Braddon that has one of the biggest cooperatives in the state of Tasmania. You represent UMT in Tasmania and you are selling them down the drain.
Mr Miles-Not true.
Mr CREAN-It is true.
Mr Miles-It is not true.
Mr CREAN-You know it is true because you are limiting their capacity to expand.
Mr Miles interjecting-
Mr CREAN-Why didn't you get up and defend them?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Nehl~The parliamentary secretary!
Mr CREAN-He keeps baiting me, Mr Deputy Speaker.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I will protect you.
Mr CREAN-Thank you. I am pleased to know that. But I will tell you who will not protect UMT in Tasmania-the member for Braddon, the member who sits in that seat; the member who has been told what to do by the Treasurer.
You have heard the rantings from the National Party over there. You heard the member for Hinkler (Mr Neville) say he comes with clean hands on this issue. He comes with clean hands because he is not prepared to touch it. The fact of the matter is he is not prepared to stand up in the party room and defend cooperatives.
At least the member for Kennedy (Mr Katter) has the courage to say that he will cross the floor. The member for Dawson (Mrs De-Anne Kelly), having declared an interest in a cooperative, has abstained from the vote tonight, having spoken not so many minutes ago in the debate. Here is another example of the National Party simply being taken for granted. It is the pathetic leadership of Tim Fischer. It is the reason he is under pressure. It is the reason there is backbench revolt. This is another example of it.
Let me indicate what we are really looking at here. We have an attack on the ability of cooperatives to grow, to expand. There are

7128

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

valid reasons why this tax provision has existed for cooperatives: they operate in regions, they are not likely to attract the same level of investment and capital as would come from the urban centres, and they need this sort of assistance when they borrow from state government lending authorities or government lending authorities to get the deduction on the capital.
The very fact that we have this amendment before the House recognises that the government has got this issue wrong. But we know that the Treasurer does not like to back down. You have to have all of the state premiers railing against him before he will back down. You have to have stupid statements made out of the side of the mouth stating what conversation he has had with Alan Greenspan to have him back down. But he will not back down to the National Party. Why? Because he does not have to. He takes you for granted. This is an example of why you have been taken for granted.
We have seen members get up in this House and talk about the importance of rural Australia, regional development and lessening rural debt-and we have a measure before this House that increases taxes on cooperatives. That is what this does. If that is not adding to their debt, tell me what is. We have a recognition in this amendment where they are now prepared to amend the original provision of directors approving a business plan which anticipated the acquisition of an asset purchased using government borrowings which would have qualified for the deduction.
The previous bill ignored the fact that approval might have been given by the board. Obviously, they have had a couple of co-ops come and say to them, 'The board has already made a decision but we have not formally acted on it. Oh, we had better plug that hole because it will not cost us that much money.' But what about the position of cooperatives that had not formally adopted a business plan but nevertheless had plans to expand? What about those that were looking at the opportunities to grow, to value add and to be part of the expansion of food processing, to be part of your strategy for the warehouse to Asia?

What about those contemplating expansion who now will not do it because of this decision? What we will see as a result of this measure is many investments put on hold. That is why, whilst this amendment makes some progress, it goes nowhere near far enough. If the National Party are not prepared to stand up in this parliament for their own constituency, Labor will-and we will keep hammering that support. (Time expired)
Mr PRICE (Chifley) (10.23 p.m.)-I need to apologise to the House because I spoke earlier on the taxation laws bill but did not disclose a pecuniary interest. I do hold a share, to the value of one dollar, in the Holy Family Food Cooperative in my electorate. I was a founding shareholder of that cooperative. I must say it does an excellent job in providing low priced food to people. The coop is used to make up food parcels from the Holy Family to those in need. I am also a member of the University Co-operative Bookshop. I apologise that I am not aware of the value of that shareholding but I believe that neither of these things will preclude my making a sensible decision.
An honourable member interjecting-
Mr PRICE-I am indebted to the honourable member. I was going to say that in the contribution of the honourable member for Curtin (Mr Rocher) about cooperatives he is missing the point that often these cooperatives were established because of a market need not being fulfilled by current players in the market. That has usually been the history of co-ops. It is perhaps in the mind of the member for Curtin that maybe there is no further role in developing new cooperatives. I want to say that I sincerely hope that in my own electorate in the next couple of years we can get a work cooperative going so we may be able to get meaningful employment for some of the long-term unemployed in my electorate. I know that that is an ambition shared by other members.
Let us look at rural Australia-and that is where most of the cooperatives are. I pose a question again to the honourable member and perhaps to the National Party members in this chamber: are they satisfied that the optimum level of development has been reached for

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7129

cooperatives? For example, just on the research and development side I am aware that in Spain there are very many vibrant research and development cooperatives that source their research from a variety of companies. I am sure the National Party will understand that the future of rural and regional Australia depends on research-for example, genetic engineering-and value adding. Are they satisfied, for example, that cooperatives have no role to play in further growth in rural and regional Australia?
Like other speakers on this side of the House I am appalled that co-ops are being singled out and we have this level playing field argument being advanced. It is going to affect regional Australia. I find that disappointing when so much damage has already been done there since 2 March. In particular, rural and regional Australia is being deprived of so many job opportunities. Do they see that it will be only the entrepreneurs who will move in and take advantage of the excellent work that is done by our farming community in terms of their efficiency and effectiveness?
If they see co-ops as being only marketing co-ops, with little value adding, I suspect there is not much future for rural and regional Australia. I do not believe that that is a view shared on this side. Even if for no other reason, I think they need to move in and try to protect co-ops. Merely to put in a transitional arrangement is doing a great disservice, particularly in my electorate-if I may return to that; it really deprives us of some opportunities to take advantage of cooperatives and to provide services in electorates that are much needed and which are currently not being taken up by other organisations, be they government or private enterprise.
I am passionately a believer in cooperatives. I believe they do have a real future and that we ought not to be satisfied with the current level of their operation but seek new and innovative ways of using this form of organisation and this form of enthusiasm to secure ~ustralia's future. I sincerely hope the Nat~onal Party will not walk away from cooperabves and the proud history they have in Australia-
Mr Crean-They have.

Mr PRICE-I sincerely hope, given they will have an opportunity later to vote on the issue, that in their voting pattern they will not
walk away from the proud history of co-ops
in this nation, particularly in rural and regional Australia. Members on this side will not be
opposing this amendment but we realise what
a tremendous sell-out this so-called compromise is of the cooperative movement. There
is no doubt that members on this side of the
House, whilst not opposing this transitional arrangement, will certainly be standing up in
the subsequent amendments to be moved by the member for Hotham (Mr Crean). We will
be voting to preserve cooperatives, voting in our belief that they represent an organisation
that was utilised in the past and has a role today and, in fact, can be given an even greater role in the future. We on this side of
the House will always stand up-

Mr Crean-We will; they won't.

Mr PRICE-I would like to think that they will. I would sincerely like to think-

Government members interjecting-

Mr PRICE-Maybe that is the case, but I know a number of the National Party mem-
bers. I have a regard for them. I know that they often stand up and express concern-

Consideration interrupted; adjournment proposed and negatived.

Motion (by Mr Miles) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

[10.34 p.m.]

(Mr Speaker-Hon. R. G. Halverson)

Ayes

81

Noes

45

Majority

36

Abbott, A. 1. Andrews, K. 1. Bailey, F. E. Barresi, P. A. Billson, B. F. Bradford, J. W. Brough, M. T. Cameron, E. H. Causley, I. R. Cobb, M. R. Dondas, N. M.
Draper, P.

AYES Andrew, J. N. Anthony, L. 1. Baldwin, R. C.
Bartlett, K. J. Bishop, B. K. Broadbent, R. E. Cadman, A. G.
Cameron, R. A. Charles, R. E. Costello, P. H. Downer, A. J. G. Elson, K. S.

7130

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

AYES

Entsch, W. G.

Evans, R. D. C.

Fahey, J. J.

Forrest, 1. A.

Gallus, C. A.

Gambaro, T.

Gash,1.

Georgiou, P.

Grace, E. J. Hawker, D. P. M.

Hardgrave, G. D.
Hicks, N. J. *

Hockey, J. B.

Jeanes, S. B.

Johnston, R.

Jull, D. F.

Kelly, J. M.

Lieberman, L. S.

Lindsay, P. J. Marek, P.

Lloyd, 1. E.
McArthur, F. S. *

McDougall, G. R.

McLachlan, I. M.

Miles, C. G.

Moore,1. C.

Moylan, J. E.

Mutch, S. B.

Nairn, G. R.

Nehl, G. B.

Nelson, B. J.

Neville, P. C.

Nugent, P. E.

Prosser, G. D.

Randall, D. J.

Ronaldson, M. J. C.

Ruddock, P. M.

Sinclair, I. McC.

Slipper, P. N.

Smith, A. C.

Smith, W. L.

Somlyay, A. M.

Southcott, A. J.

Stone, S. N.

Sullivan, K. J.

Taylor, W. L.

Thomson, A. P.

Truss, W. E.

Tuckey, C. W.

Vaile, M. A. 1.

Vale, D. S.

Wakelin, B. H.

West, A. G.

Williams, D. R.

Wooldridge, M. R. L. Worth, P. M.

Zammit, P. 1.

NOES

Adams, D. G. H.

Albanese, A.

Baldwin, P. 1.

Bevis, A. R.

Brereton, L. J.

Brown, R. J.

Crean, S. F.

Ellis, A. L.

Evans, G. J.

Evans, M. J.

Ferguson., L. D. T.

Ferguson, M. 1.

Filing, P. A.
Grace, E. L. *

Fitzgibbon, J. A. Griffin, A. P.

Hatton, M.

Holding, A. C.

Hollis, C.

Jenkins, H. A.

Jones, B. O.

Kerr, D. J. C.

Langmore, J. V.

Latham, M. W.

Lawrence, C. M.

Lee, M. J.

Macklin, 1. L.

McClelland, R. B.

McLeay, L. B.

McMullan, R. F.

Melham, D.

Morris, A. A.

Morris, P. F.

Mossfield, F. W.

O'Connor, G. M.

O'Keefe, N. P.

Price, L. R. Rocher, A. C.

Quick, H. V.
Sawford, R. W. *

Sercombe, R. C. G.

Tanner, L. J.

Theophanous, A. C.

Thomson, K. J.

Wilton, G. S.

Anderson, J. D. McGauran, P. 1. Scott, B. C. Fischer, T. A.

PAIRS Beddall, D. P. Crosio, 1. A.
Martin, S. P. Smith, S. F.

Howard, J. W. Reid, N. B.

PAIRS

Beazley, K. C.

*

Willis, denotes teller

R.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Amendment agreed to.

Mr SPEAKER-The question now is that the bill, as amended, be agreed to.

Motion (by Mr Miles) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

[10.43 p.m.]

(Mr Speaker-Hon. R. G. Halverson) Ayes ............... 81

Noes ............... 45

Majority ......... 36

Abbott, A. J. Andrews, K. J.
Bailey, F. E. Barresi, P. A. Billson, B. F.
Bradford, 1. W.
Brough, M. T.
Cameron, E. H.
Causley, I. R. Cobb, M. R.
Dondas, N. M. Draper, P.
Entsch, W. G. Fahey, J. 1.
Gallus, C. A. Gash, J.
Grace, E. J. Hawker, D. P. M.
Hockey, 1. B. Johnston, R.
Kelly, 1. M.
Lindsay, P. 1. Marek, P.
McDougall, G. R. Miles, C. G.
Moylan, J. E.
Nairn, G. R. Nelson, B. 1. Nugent, P. E. Randall, D. 1. Ruddock, P. M. Slipper, P. N.
Smith, W. L. Southcott, A. 1. Sullivan, K. J. Thomson, A. P. Tuckey, C. W. Vale, D. S.

AYES
Andrew, J. N. Anthony, L. J. Baldwin, R. C.
Bartlett, K. 1. Bishop, B. K.
Broadbent, R. E. Cadman, A. G.
Cameron, R. A.
Charles, R. E.
Costello, P. H.
Downer, A. 1. G. Elson, K. S. Evans, R. D. C.
Forrest, J. A. Gambaro, T. Georgiou, P.
Hardgrave, G. D.
Hicks, N. J. *
Jeanes, S. B.
Jull, D. F.
Lieberman, L. S. Lloyd, J. E.
McArthur, F. S. *
McLachlan, I. M. Moore, J. C. Mutch, S. B. Nehl, G. B. Neville, P. C. Prosser, G. D. Ronaldson, M. J. C. Sinclair, I. McC. Smith, A. C.
Sornlyay, A. M. Stone, S. N. Taylor, W. L. Truss, W. E.
Vaile, M. A. J.
Wakelin, B. H.

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7131

AYES

West, A. G. Wooldridge, M. R. L. Zammit, P. J.

Williams, D. R. Worth, P. M.

NOES

Adams, D. G. H.

Albanese, A.

Baldwin, P. J.

Bevis, A. R.

Brereton, L. 1.

Brown, R. 1.

Crean, S. F.

Ellis, A. L.

Evans, G. 1.

Evans, M. 1.

Ferguson, L. D. T.

Ferguson, M. 1.

Filing, P. A.
Grace, E. L. *

Fitzgibbon, J. A. Griffin, A. P.

Hatton, M.

Holding, A. C.

Hollis, C.

Jenkins, H. A.

Jones, B. O.

Kerr, D. J. C.

Langmore, 1. V.

Latham, M. W.

Lawrence, C. M.

Lee, M. J.

Macklin, 1. L.

McClelland, R. B.

McLeay, L. B.

McMullan, R. F.

Melham, D.

Morris, A. A.

Morris, P. F.

Mossfield, F. W.

O'Connor, G. M.

O'Keefe, N. P.

Price, L. R. Rocher, A. C.

Quick, H. V.
Sawford, R. W. *

Sercombe, R. C. G.

Tanner, L. J.

Theophanous, A. C.

Thomson, K. 1.

Wilton, G. S.

PAIRS

Reid, N. B.

Willis, R.

Howard, J. W.

Beazley, K. C.

Anderson, 1. D.

Beddall, D. P.

McGauran, P. J.

Crosio, 1. A.

Scott, B. C.

Martin, S. P.

Fischer, T. A.

Smith, S. F.

* denotes teller

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr SPEAKER-The question now is that the bill, as amended, be agreed to.

Mr Miles-I ask leave of the House to move the third reading forthwith-I move that the question be now put.
Mr Crean-Leave is not granted.
Mr SPEAKER-Leave is not granted.
Mr Crean-I move that so much of the standing orders be suspended-
Mr SPEAKER-The question is that the motion be now put. All those in favour say aye, to the contrary no. I think the ayes have it.

Mr Leo McLeay-Mr Speaker, the parliamentary secretary asked for leave, and leave was not granted.

Mr SPEAKER-And the parliamentary secretary then moved that the motion as agreed be put.

Mr Leo McLeay-There is no such thing.

Mr SPEAKER-The House has resolved that the question be now put, and I have put the question.

Mr Crean-There is no question.

Mr SPEAKER-I have said all of that opinion say aye, to the contrary no. I think the ayes have it.

A division having been called and bells being rung-

Mr Charles-Mr Speaker, I draw your attention to your previous ruling that the member for Watson was not in order in speaking from the dispatch box. He was highly unruly and out of order in trying to speak from out of his place.

Mr SPEAKER-I thank you for your point of order.

Question put:

That the bill, as amended, be agreed to.

The House divided.

[10.54 p.m.]

(Mr Speaker-Hon. R. G. Halverson) Ayes ............... 81

Noes ............... 42

Majority ........ . 39

Abbott, A. J. Andrews, K. 1. Bailey, F. E. Barresi, P. A. Billson, B. F. Bradford, 1. W.
Brough, M. T. Cameron, E. H. Causley, 1. R.
Cobb, M. R. Dondas, N. M. Draper, P. Entsch, W. G. Fahey, J. J. Gallus, C. A. Gash, J. Grace, E. J.

AYES Andrew, J. N.
Anthony, L. J. Baldwin, R. C. Bartlett, K. J. Bishop, B. K. Broadbent, R. E.
Cadman, A. G. Cameron, R. A.
Charles, R. E. Costello, P. H. Downer, A. J. G. Elson, K. S. Evans, R. D. C. Forrest, 1. A. Gambaro, T. Georgiou, P. Hardgrave, G. D.

7132

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

AYES

Hawker, D. P. M.

Hicks, N. 1. *

Hockey, J. B.

Jeanes, S. B.

Johnston, R.

Jull, D. F.

Kelly, 1. M.

Lieberman, L. S.

Lindsay, P. J. Marek, P.

Lloyd, 1. E.
McArthur, F. S. *

McDougall, G. R.

McLachlan, I. M.

Miles, C. G.

Moore, J. C.

Moylan, J. E.

Mutch, S. B.

Nairn, G. R.

Nehl, G. B.

Nelson, B. J.

Neville, P. C.

Nugent, P. E.

Prosser, G. D.

Randall, D. J.

Ronaldson, M. J. C.

Ruddock, P. M.

Sinclair, I. McC.

Slipper, P. N.

Smith, A. C.

Smith, W. L.

Somlyay, A. M.

Southcott, A. J.

Stone, S. N.

Sullivan, K. J.

Taylor, W. L.

Thomson, A. P.

Truss, W. E.

Tuckey, C. W.

Vaile, M. A. 1.

Vale, D. S.

Wakelin, B. H.

West, A. G.

Williams, D. R.

Wooldridge, M. R. L. Worth, P. M.

Zammit, P. J.

Adams, D. G. H.
Baldwin, P. 1.
Brereton, L. J. Crean, S. F.
Evans, M. J. Ferguson, M. J.
Grace, E. L. *
Hatton, M. Hollis, C.
Jones, B. O. Langmore, J. V. Lawrence, C. M. Macklin, 1. L.
McLeay, L. B. Melham, D.
Morris, P. F. O'Connor, G. M. Price, L. R.
Sawford, R. W. *
Tanner, L. J. Thomson, K. J.

NOES Albanese, A.
Bevis, A. R.
Brown, R. 1. Ellis, A. L. Ferguson, L. D. T.
Fitzgibbon, J. A. Griffin, A. P.
Holding, A. C. Jenkins, H. A. Kerr, D. J. C. Latham, M. W.
Lee, M. 1. McClelland, R. B.
McMullan, R. F. Morris, A. A.
Mossfield, F. W. O'Keefe, N. P. Quick, H. V.
Sercombe, R. C. G. Theophanous, A. C. Wilton, G. S.

PAIRS

Anderson, J. D.

Beddall, D. P.

Fischer, T. A.

Smith, S. F.

Howard, J. W.

Beazley, K. C.

McGauran, P. J.

Crosio, 1. A.

Reid, N. B.

Willis, R.

Scott, B. C.

*

Evans, denotes teller

G.

J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr SPEAKER-It is understood that the opposition wishes to-
Mr Crean-Mr Speaker, I move that so much of-
Mr SPEAKER-I am talking. It is understood that the opposition wishes to incorporate in Hansard its amendments which have been circulated but which were not moved.
Mr Crean-That is not true.
Mr SPEAKER-There being no objection, the chair will allow that course to be followed.
Mr Crean-Mr Speaker, with the greatest respect, if I could address you on this matter.
Mr MiIes-I ask leave of the House to move the third reading forthwith.
Mr CREAN (Hotham) (11.01 p.m.)-Mr Speaker-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Hotham has the call.
Mr CREAN-Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move:
That so much of standing and sessional orders be suspended as would prevent the member for Hotham moving forthwith opposition amendment No. 1 circulated in his name.
This is another disgrace in terms of the operation of this House. We had agreement to treat this bill as a whole-
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) put:
That the member be not further heard.
A division having been called and the bells being rung-
Mr Holding-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. Is it in order for any member who has moved place when a division has been called to move back in order to move the motion that has been put?
Mr SPEAKER-The member for Hotham had the call. I refused to see the right honourable member for New England until he resumed his seat.
Mr Holding-Was it in order once the division had been called and members had taken their places for the honourable member for New England to move back to his seat in order to take a point of order? I understood that you cannot move during a division.

Tuesday, 19 November 1996

REPRESENTATIVES

7133

Mr SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order because at that point I had not called
the division. I have now called the division. Lock the doors.

In division-

Mr Peter Morris-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. On a number of occasions during the evening the member for Hotham
has been on his feet addressing you and he has not been heard and his microphone has not been turned on. What is the procedure in the sound control box for the switching on of microphones? Is the member for Hotham
being denied the microphone?

Mr SPEAKER-Order! There has been a lot of toing and froing tonight. It is a daunting task for the ABC to pick up these movements
and activate the microphones quickly. I am sure they are doing their very best to ensure
that honourable members when they are on their feet are heard. But tonight it has been particularly difficult, as you would know.

The House divided.

[11.03 p.m.]

(Mr Speaker-Hon. R. G. Halverson) Ayes ............... 81

Noes ............... 42

Majority ......... 39

Abbott, A. J. Andrews, K. J. Bailey, F. E. Barresi, P. A.
Billson, B. F. Bradford, J. W. Brough, M. T. Cameron, E. H. Causley, I. R. Cobb, M. R. Dondas, N. M. Draper, P. Entsch, W. G. Fahey, J. J. Gallus, C. A. Gash, J.
Grace, E. J. Hawker, D. P. M. Hockey, J. B. Johnston, R. Kelly, J. M. Lindsay, P. J. Marek, P. MCDougall, G. R.

AYES Andrew, J. N. Anthony, L. J. Baldwin, R. C. Bartlett, K. J.
Bishop, B. K. Broadbent, R. E. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, R. A. Charles, R. E. Costello, P. H. Downer, A. J. G.
Elson, K. S. Evans, R. D. C. Forrest, J. A.
Gambaro, T. Georgiou, P. Hardgrave, G. D.
Hicks, N. J. *
Jeanes, S. B. JUll, D. F. Lieberman, L. S. Lloyd, J. E.
McArthur, F. S. *
McLachlan, I. M.

AYES

Miles, C. G.

Moore, J. C.

Moylan, J. E.

Mutch, S. B.

Nairn, G. R.

Nehl, G. B.

Nelson, B. J.

Neville, P. C.

Nugent, P. E.

Prosser, G. D.

Randall, D. J.

Ronaldson, M. J. C.

Ruddock, P. M.

Sinclair, I. McC.

Slipper, P. N.

Smith, A. C.

Smith, W. L.

Somlyay, A. M.

Southcott, A. J.

Stone, S. N.

Sullivan, K. J.

Taylor, W. L.

Thomson, A. P.

Truss, W. E.

Tuckey, C. W.

Vaile, M. A. J.

Vale, D. S.

Wakelin, B. H.

West, A. G.

Williams, D. R.

Wooldridge, M. R. L. Worth, P. M.

Zammit, P. J.

Adams, D. G. H. Baldwin, P. J. Brereton, L. J. Crean, S. F.
Evans, M. J. Ferguson, M. J.
Grace, E. L. *
Hatton, M.
Hollis, C. Jones, B. O. Langmore, J. V. Lawrence, C. M. Macklin, J. L. McLeay, L. B. Melham, D. Morris, P. F. O'Connor, G. M.
Price, L. R.
Sawford, R. W. *
Tanner, L. J. Thomson, K. J.

NOES Albanese, A. Bevis, A. R. Brown, R. J.
Ellis, A. L.
Ferguson, L. D. T. Fitzgibbon, J. A.
Griffin, A. P. Holding, A. C. Jenkins, H. A.
Kerr, D. J. C. Latham, M. W. Lee, M. J. McClelland, R. B.
McMullan, R. F. Morris, A. A.
Mossfield, F. W. O'Keefe, N. P. Quick, H. V.
Sercombe, R. C. G. Theophanous, A. C. Wilton, G. S.

PAIRS

Anderson, J. D.

Beddall, D. P.

Fischer, T. A.

Smith, S. F.

Howard, J. W.

Beazley, K. C.

McGauran, P. J.

Crosio, J. A.

Reid, N. B.

Willis, R.

Scott, B. C.

*

Evans, denotes teller

G.

J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr SPEAKER-Is there a seconder to the motion?

Mr LEO McLEAY (Watson) (11.09 p.m.)-This is a most disgraceful proposition
proposed by the government. The government
does not allow anyone to have their say here-

7134

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

Motion (by Mr Miles) put:

That the member be not further heard.

A division having been called and the bells being rung-

Mr Charles-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. The member for Watson should be dispensed from the service of the House. He was highly unruly. He is disregarding your
orders.

Mr SPEAKER-This is a procedural motion and the member for Watson is totally in accord with the instructions and rulings that I made some months ago.

The House divided.

[11.10 p.m.]

(Mr Speaker-Hon. R. G. Halverson) Ayes ............... 80

Noes ............... 42

Majority . . . . . . . . . 38

Abbott, A. J. Andrews, K. J. Bailey, F. E. Barresi, P. A. Billson, B. F. Bradford, 1. W. Brough, M. T. Cameron, E. H. Causley, I. R. Cobb, M. R. Dondas, N. M. Draper, P. Entsch, W. G. Fahey, J. J. Gallus, C. A. Gash, J. Grace, E. J. Hawker, D. P. M. Hockey, J. B. Johnston, R. Kelly,J. M. Lindsay, P. J. Marek, P. McDougall, G. R. Miles, C. G. Moylan, J. E. Nairn, G. R. Nelson, B. J. Nugent, P. E. Randall, D. 1. Ruddock, P. M. Slipper, P. N. Somlyay, A. M. Stone, S. N.

AYES Andrew, 1. N.
Anthony, L. J. Baldwin, R. C. Bartlett, K. J. Bishop, B. K. Broadbent, R. E. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, R. A. Charles, R. E. Costello, P. H. Downer, A. J. G. Elson, K. S. Evans, R. D. C. Forrest, 1. A. Gambaro, T.
Georgiou, P. Hardgrave, G. D.
Hicks, N. J. *
Jeanes, S. B. Jull, D. F. Lieberman, L. S. Lloyd, J. E.
McArthur, F. S. *
McLachlan, I. M. Moore,1. C. Mutch, S. B. Nehl, G. B. Neville, P. C. Prosser, G. D. Ronaldson, M. J. C. Sinclair, I. McC. Smith, A. C. Southcott, A. J. Sullivan, K. J.

Taylor, W. L. Truss, W. E. Vaile, M. A. 1. Wakelin, B. H. Williams, D. R. Worth, P. M.

AYES Thomson, A. P. Tuckey, C. W. Vale, D. S. West, A. G. Wooldridge, M. R. L. Zammit, P. J.

Adams, D. G. H.

Baldwin, P. J.

Brereton, L. 1.

Crean, S. F.

Evans, M. 1.

Ferguson, M. J.
Grace, E. L. *

Hatton, M.

Hollis, C.

Jones, B. O.

Langmore, J. V.

Lawrence, C. M.

Macklin, 1. L.

McLeay, L. B.

Melham, D.

Morris, P. F.

O'Connor, G. M.

Price, L. R. Sawford, R.

W.

*

Tanner, L. J.

Thomson, K. J.

NOES Albanese, A. Bevis, A. R. Brown, R. J. Ellis, A. L. Ferguson, L. D. T. Fitzgibbon, J. A. Griffin, A. P. Holding, A. C. Jenkins, H. A. Kerr, D. J. C. Latham, M. W. Lee, M. J. McClelland, R. B. McMullan, R. F. Morris, A. A. Mossfield, F. W. O'Keefe, N. P. Quick, H. V. Sercombe, R. C. G. Theophanous, A. C. Wilton, G. S.

PAIRS

Reid, N. B.

Willis, R.

Howard, 1. W.

Beazley, K. C.

Anderson, J. D.

Beddall, D. P.

McGauran, P. J.

Crosio, J. A.

Scott, B. C.

Evans, G. 1.

Fischer, T. A.

*

Smith, denotes teller

S.

F.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr McMulian-Mr Speaker, I move that the debate be adjourned.

Mr SPEAKER-We have a motion. I haven't stated the question, nor is it resolved. The question is that the motion to suspend standing orders be agreed to--

Mr McMulian-I move that the debate be adjourned.

Mr SPEAKER-all those in favour say aye, to the contrary no. I think the noes have it.

Motion (by Mr Miles) proposed:

That the question be now put.

Mr McMulian-Mr Speaker-

Mr SPEAKER-I have put the motion, but
the point that the honourable member for

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7135

Canberra is probably overlooking is that the opposition moved the motion to suspend standing orders. There have been two consecutive calls to the opposition and, in the way
we alternate the calls in this chamber, it would be the call of the government next. I
have also put the motion.

Mr McMullan-Why was my motion not in order, Mr Speaker?

Mr SPEAKER-Because I hadn't put the motion that was on the record.

Mr McMullan-You didn't have to put the motion. I moved that the debate be adjourned.

Mr SPEAKER-I had to put the motionit was incomplete.

Mr McMullan-Incomprehensible.

Mr SPEAKER-The ayes have it.

Mr Crean-The noes have it.

Mr SPEAKER-A division is required. Ring the bells for one minute.

Question put.

The House divided.

[11.15 p.m.]

In division-

Mr Crean-Mr Speaker, it was clearly seen that, after the doors were closed, the
Deputy Speaker was sitting on this side of the
House and he moved to the other side. That is against the procedures of this House and you should move him back.

Mr SPEAKER-I call on the honourable member for Cowper to restore himself to the position he was in when the division was called, if necessary.

Mr Nehl-Mr Speaker, when you said the
ayes will pass to the right of the chair and the noes to the left, I was here. I left my position
to check something and returned to where I was when you said that the ayes will pass to the right of the chair.

Mr SPEAKER-I thank the honourable member for Cowper.

Mr Crean-That is an explanation from a person who is the Deputy Speaker. You ruled, Mr Speaker, he should be sitting in his seat.

Mr SPEAKER-I invited him to. I didn't see it. I literally did not see it.

(Mr Speaker-Hon. R. G. Halverson) Ayes ............... 79
Noes ............... 42

Majority ......... 37

AYES

Abbott, A. 1.

Andrew, 1. N.

Andrews, K. 1.

Anthony, L. 1.

Bailey, F. E.

Baldwin, R. C.

Barresi, P. A.

Bartlett, K. 1.

Billson, B. F.

Bishop, B. K.

Bradford, J. W.

Broadbent, R. E.

Brough, M. T.

Cadman, A. G.

Cameron, E. H.

Cameron, R. A.

Causley, I. R.

Charles, R. E.

Cobb, M. R.

Costello, P. H.

Dondas, N. M.

Draper, P.

Elson, K. S.

Entsch, W. G.

Evans, R. D. C.

Fahey, J. J.

Forrest, 1. A.

Gallus, C. A.

Gambaro, T.

Gash,1.

Georgiou, P.

Grace, E. 1.

Hardgrave, G. D.
Hicks, N. 1. *

Hawker, D. P. M. Hockey, J. B.

Jeanes, S. B.

Johnston, R.

Jull, D. F.

Kelly, 1. M.

Lieberman, L. S.

Lindsay, P. J.

Lloyd, J. E.
McArthur, F. S. *

Marek, P. McDougall, G. R.

McLachlan, I. M.

Miles, C. G.

Moore,1. C.

Moylan, J. E.

Mutch, S. B.

Nairn, G. R.

NeW, G. B.

Nelson, B. 1.

Neville, P. C.

Nugent, P. E.

Prosser, G. D.

Randall, D. 1.

Ronaldson, M. 1. C.

Ruddock, P. M.

Sinclair, I. McC.

Slipper, P. N.

Smith, A. C.

Somlyay, A. M.

Southcott, A. J.

Stone, S. N.

Sullivan, K. J.

Taylor, W. L.

Thomson, A. P.

Truss, W. E.

Tuckey, C. W.

Vaile, M. A. 1.

Vale, D. S.

Wakelin, B. H.

West, A. G.

Williams, D. R.

Wooldridge, M. R. L. Worth, P. M.

Zammit, P. 1.

Adams, D. G. H. Baldwin, P. J. Brereton, L. 1. Crean, S. F. Evans, M. 1. Ferguson, M. 1.
Grace, E. L. *
Hatton, M. Hollis, C. Jones, B. O. Langmore, 1. V.

NOES Albanese, A. Bevis, A. R. Brown, R. 1.
Ellis, A. L. Ferguson, L. D. T. Fitzgibbon, J. A. Griffin, A. P. Holding, A. C. Jenkins, H. A. Kerr, D. J. C. Latham, M. W.

7136

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

Lawrence, C. M.
Macklin, J. L. McLeay, L. B. Melham, D.
Morris, P. F. O'Connor, G. M. Price, L. R.
Sawford, R. W. *
Tanner, L. J. Thomson, K. 1.

NOES Lee, M. J. McClelland, R. B. McMullan, R. F.
Morris, A. A. Mossfield, F. W. O'Keefe, N. P. Quick, H. V.
Sercombe, R. C. G. Theophanous, A. C.
Wilton, G. S.

PAIRS

Reid, N. B.

Willis, R.

Howard, J. W.

Beazley, K. C.

Anderson, 1. D.

Beddall, D. P.

McGauran, P. 1.

Crosio, 1. A.

Scott, B. C.

Evans, G. 1.

* Fischer, T. A.

Smith, S. F.

denotes teller

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr Price-Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. In relation to the point of order earlier raised, are you now suspending standing order 202, which the honourable member for Cowper in his point of order to you admitted that he had breached?

Mr SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.

Original question put:

That the motion (Mr Crean's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

[11.26 p.m.]

(Mr Speaker-Hon. R. G. Halverson) Ayes ............... 42

Noes ............... 80

Majority ......... 38

Adams, D. G. H. Baldwin, P. J.
Brereton, L. J. Crean, S. F. Evans, M. J. Ferguson, M. J.
Grace, E. L. *
Hatton, M.
Hollis, C. Jones, B. O. Langmore, J. V. Lawrence, C. M. Macklin, 1. L. McLeay, L. B. Melham, D. Morris, P. F. O'Connor, G. M.

AYES Albanese, A. Bevis, A. R. Brown, R. 1. Ellis, A. L. Ferguson, L. D. T. Fitzgibbon, J. A.
Griffin, A. P. Holding, A. C. Jenkins, H. A. Kerr, D. J. C. Latham, M. W. Lee, M. 1.
McClelland, R. B. McMullan, R. F. Morris, A. A. Mossfield, F. W. O'Keefe, N. P.

Price, L. R.
Sawford, R. W. *
Tanner, L. J. Thomson, K. J.

AYES Quick, H. V. Sercombe, R. C. G. Theophanous, A. C. Wilton, G. S.

Abbott, A. J. Andrews, K. 1. Bailey, F. E. Barresi, P. A. Billson, B. F. Bradford, 1. W. Brough, M. T. Cameron, E. H. Causley, I. R. Cobb, M. R. Dondas, N. M. Draper, P. Entsch, W. G. Fahey, 1. J. Gallus, C. A. Gash,1. Grace, E. J. Hawker, D. P. M. Hockey, J. B. Johnston, R. Kelly, 1. M. Lindsay, P. J. Marek, P. McDougall, G. R. Miles, C. G. Moylan, J. E. Nairn, G. R. Nelson, B. 1. Nugent, P. E. Randall, D. J. Ruddock, P. M. Slipper, P. N. Somlyay, A. M. Stone, S. N. Taylor, W. L. Truss, W. E. Vaile, M. A. J. Wakelin, B. H. Williams, D. R. Worth, P. M.

NOES

Andrew, J. N.

Anthony, L. J.

Baldwin, R. C.

Bartlett, K. 1.

Bishop, B. K.

Broadbent, R. E.

Cadman, A. G.

Cameron, R. A.

Charles, R. E.

Costello, P. H.

Downer, A. J. G.

Elson, K. S.

Evans, R. D. C.

Forrest, 1. A.

Gambaro, T.

Georgiou, P.

Hardgrave, G. D.
Hicks, N. J. *

Jeanes, S. B.

Jull, D. F.

Lieberman, L. S.

Lloyd, 1. E. McArthur, F.

S.

*

McLachlan, I. M.

Moore, 1. C.

Mutch, S. B.

NeW, G. B.

Neville, P. C.

Prosser, G. D.

Ronaldson, M. 1. C.

Sinclair, I. McC.

Smith, A. C.

Southcott, A. J.

Sullivan, K. 1.

Thomson, A. P.

Tuckey, C. W.

Vale, D. S.

West, A. G.

Wooldridge, M. R. L.

Zammit, P. 1.

Willis, R. Beazley, K. C.
Beddall, D. P. Crosio, 1. A. Evans, G. 1. Smith, S. F.

PAIRS

Reid, N. B.

Howard, J. W.

Anderson, 1. D.

McGauran, P. 1.

Scott, B. C.

*

Fischer, denotes teller

T.

A.

Question so resolved in the negative.

Third Reading Motion (by Mr Miles) put:

That so much of the standing and sessional orders be suspended as would prevent the motion for the third reading being moved without delay.

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7137

The House divided.

[11.35 p.m.]

(Mr Speaker-Hon. R. G. Halverson) Ayes ............... 79

Noes ............... 42

Majority ......... 37

AYES

Abbott, A. 1.

Andrew, J. N.

Andrews, K. J.

Anthony, L. 1.

Bailey, F. E.

Baldwin, R. C.

Barresi, P. A.

Bartlett, K. 1.

Billson, B. F.

Bishop, B. K.

Bradford, 1. W.

Broadbent, R. E.

Brough, M. T.

Cadman, A. G.

Cameron, E. H.

Cameron, R. A.

Causley, I. R.

Charles, R. E.

Cobb, M. R.

Costello, P. H.

Dondas, N. M.

Downer, A. 1. G.

Draper, P.

Elson, K. S.

Entsch, W. G.

Evans, R. D. C.

Fahey, 1. J.

Forrest, J. A.

Gallus, C. A.

Gambaro, T.

Gash,1.

Georgiou, P.

Grace, E. 1. Hawker, D. P. M.

Hardgrave, G. D.
Hicks, N. 1. *

Hockey, 1. B.

Jeanes, S. B.

Johnston, R.

JUll, D. F.

Kelly, J. M.

Lieberman, L. S.

Lindsay, P. J. Marek, P.

Lloyd, 1. E.
McArthur, F. S. *

McDougall, G. R.

McLachlan, 1. M.

Miles, C. G.

Moylan, J. E.

Mutch, S. B.

Nairn, G. R.

Nehl, G. B.

Nelson, B. 1.

Neville, P. C.

Nugent, P. E.

Prosser, G. D.

Randall, D. 1.

Ronaldson, M. 1. C.

Ruddock, P. M.

Sinclair, 1. McC.

Slipper, P. N.

Smith, A. C.

Somlyay, A. M.

Southcott, A. J.

Stone, S. N.

Sullivan, K. J.

Taylor, W. L.

Thomson, A. P.

Truss, W. E.

Tuckey, C. W.

Vaile, M. A. 1.

Vale, D. S.

Wakelin, B. H.

West, A. G.

Williams, D. R.

Wooldridge, M. R. L. Worth, P. M.

Zammit, P. 1.

Adams, D. G. H. Baldwin, P. 1. Brereton, L. J. Crean, S. F. Evans, M. 1. Ferguson, M. 1.
Grace, E. L. *
Hatton, M. Hollis, C. Jones, B. O.

NOES Albanese, A. Bevis, A. R. Brown, R. J. Ellis, A. L. Ferguson, L. D. T. Fitzgibbon, 1. A. Griffin, A. P. Holding, A. C. Jenkins, H. A. Kerr, D. J. C.

Langmore, J. V.
Lawrence, C. M. Macklin, 1. L. McLeay, L. B. Melham, D. Morris, P. F. O'Connor, G. M.
Price, L. R.
Sawford, R. W. *
Tanner, L. 1. Thomson, K. 1.

NOES
Latham, M. W. Lee, M. J. McClelland, R. B. McMullan, R. F. Morris, A. A. Mossfield, F. W. O'Keefe, N. P. Quick, H. V. Sercombe, R. C. G.
Theophanous, A. C. Wilton, G. S.

PAIRS

Reid, N. B.

Willis, R.

Howard, J. W.

Beazley, K. C.

Anderson, 1. D.

Beddall, D. P.

McGauran, P. 1.

Crosio, 1. A.

Scott, B. C.

Evans, G. J.

* Fischer, T. A.

Smith, S. F. denotes teller

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Question (by Mr Miles) put:

That the bill be now read a third time.

The House divided.

[11.43 p.m.]

(Mr Speaker-Hon. R. G. Halverson) Ayes ............... 80

Noes ............... 42

Majority ......... 38

Abbott, A. 1. Andrews, K. 1. Bailey, F. E. Barresi, P. A. Billson, B. F. Bradford, J. W. Brough, M. T. Cameron, E. H. Causley, I. R. Cobb, M. R. Dondas, N. M. Draper, P. Entsch, W. G. Fahey, J. J. Gallus, C. A. Gash,1. Grace, E. J. Hawker, D. P. M. Hockey, J. B. Johnston, R. Kelly, J. M. Lieberman, L. S. Lloyd, 1. E.
McArthur, F. S. *
McLachlan, 1. M. Moylan, J. E.

AYES Andrew, J. N. Anthony, L. J. Baldwin, R. C. Bartlett, K. J. Bishop, B. K. Broadbent, R. E. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, R. A. Charles, R. E.
Costello, P. H. Downer, A. 1. G. Elson, K. S.
Evans, R. D. C. Forrest, 1. A. Gambaro, T. Georgiou, P. Hardgrave, G. D.
Hicks, N. 1. *
Jeanes, S. B. Jull, D. F. Kemp, D. A. Lindsay, P. J. Marek, P. McDougall, G. R. Miles, C. G. Mutch, S. B.

7138

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

Nairn, G. R. Nelson, B. 1. Nugent, P. E. Randall, D. 1. Ruddock, P. M. Slipper, P. N. Somiyay, A. M. Stone, S. N. Taylor, W. L. Truss, W. E. Vaile, M. A. 1. Wakelin, B. H. Williams, D. R. Worth, P. M.

AYES Nehl, G. B. Neville, P. C. Prosser, G. D. Ronaldson, M. J. C. Sinclair, I. McC. Smith, A. C. Southcott, A. J. Sullivan, K. J. Thomson, A. P. Tuckey, C. W. Vale, D. S. West, A. G. Wooldridge, M. R. L. Zammit, P. J.

Adams, D. G. H. Baldwin, P. J. Brereton, L. J. Crean, S. F. Evans, M. J. Ferguson, M. J.
Grace, E. L. *
Hatton, M. Hollis, C. Jones, B. O.
Langmore, J. V. Lawrence, C. M. Macklin, J. L. McLeay, L. B. Melham, D. Morris, P. F.
O'Connor, G. M. Price, L. R.
Sawford, R. W. *
Tanner, L. J. Thomson, K. J.

NOES Albanese, A. Bevis, A. R. Brown, R. 1. Ellis, A. L. Ferguson, L. D. T. Fitzgibbon, J. A. Griffin, A. P. Holding, A. C. Jenkins, H. A. Kerr, D. 1. C. Latham, M. W. Lee, M. J. McClelland, R. B. McMullan, R. F. Morris, A. A. Mossfield, F. W. O'Keefe, N. P. Quick, H. V. Sercombe, R. C. G. Theophanous, A. C. Wilton, G. S.

PAIRS

Reid, N. B.

Willis, R.

Howard, J. W.

Beazley, K. C.

Anderson, J. D.

Beddall, D. P.

McGauran, P. 1.

Crosio, 1. A.

Scott, B. C.

Evans, G. 1.

Fischer, T. A.

Smith, S. F.

* denotes teller

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a third time.

WORKPLACE RELATIONS AND OTHER LEGISLATION AMENDMENT
BILL 1996

Consideration of Senate Message
Message received from the Senate acquainting the House that the Senate had agreed to the bill with the amendments indicated by the

annexed schedule in which amendments the Senate requests the concurrence of the House of Representatives.
Ordered that consideration of the message be made an order of the day for the next sitting.
House adjourned at 11.51 p.m.
NOTICES
The following notices were given:
Mr Williams to move:
That:
(1) the International Transfer of Prisoners Bill 1996 be referred to the Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and an advisory report to the House by 3 March 1997; and
(2) the terms of this resolution, so far as they are inconsistent with standing and sessional orders, have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the standing and sessional orders.
Mr Moore to present a bill for an act to provide for the recognition within Australia of regulatory standards adopted in New Zealand regarding goods and occupations.
Mr Williams to present a bill for an act relating to the transfer of prisoners to and from Australia.
Mr Reith to move:
That the House grants leave for Arthur Robinson & Hedderwicks to produce the following records in evidence in proceedings before the High Court in the cases .
(a) Laurence Nathan Levy v. The State of Victoria & Others
(b) Lange v. Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Parliamentary Debates, House of Representatives, 15 November 1994--Speech of Mr Lavarch-(pp 3336-3342).
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 19 November:
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1996 No. 247. Cattle Export Charges Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1996 No. 248. Cattle Transaction Levy Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1996 No. 249. Christmas Island Act-Ordinances 1996 Nos. 8, 9.

r, Tuesday, 19 November 1996

REPRESENTATNES

7139

Cocos (Keeling) Islands Act-Ordinances 1996 Nos. 6, 7. Corporations Act-Accounting standards No. AASB 1023. Interstate Road Transport Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1996 No. 250. National Health ActExempt Nursing Homes Fees Redetermination Principles 1996 Amendment No. 1.

Exempt Nursing Homes Principles 1996 Amendment No. 1.
National Health and Medical Research Council Act-National Health and Medical Research Council-Ethical guidelines on assisted reproductive technology, 1996.
Navigation Act-Marine Orders 1996 Nos. 6, 7.
Student and Youth Assistance Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1996 No. 246.

7140

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

QUESTIONS ON NOTICE

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Treasury: Financial Assistance to Employer and Other Organisations
(Question No. 295)
Mr Martin Ferguson asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 30 May 1996:
(1) Did the Minister's Department, any agency or statutory authority for which the Minister has portfolio responsibility, or their predecessors, approve or make available grants or other forms of financial assistance in (a) 1993-94, (b) 1994-95 and (c) 1995-96 to (i) employer organisations or (ii) individual companies; if so, in each case, (A) what was the name and address of the recipient, (B) what sum was involved, (C) what was the purpose of the grant or payment, (D) under what program was it made, (E) who approved the payment, (F) what acquittal requirements applied to the grant or payment and (G) is acquittal outstanding.
(2) Has the Minister's Department, any agency or statutory authority for which the Minister has portfolio responsibility, or their predecessors, approved or made available, or will it make available, grants or other forms of financial as~ist ance in 1996-97 to (a) employer organisations or (b) individual companies; if so, in each case, (i) what is the name and address of the recipient or prospective recipient, (ii) what sum is involved, (iii) what is the purpose of the grant or payment, (iv) under what program is it being made, (v) who approved it and (vi) what acquittal requirements apply.
Mr Costello--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Australian Bureau of Statistics (l)(a)(ii)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Head
Office, Level 4, 17 Castlereagh Street, Sydney NSW 2000
(B) $3,000 (C) The aim of the program is to teach students about the commercial world in a way that will give them the opportunity to learn skills which will help them make career decisions and equip themselves better for the workforce. (D) Program 3: Australian Bureau of Statistics (E) Approved by the Deputy Australian Statistician
(F) No acquittal requirements applied to the grant

(G) No outstanding acquittals (l)(b)(ii)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Head Office, Level 4, 17 Castlereagh Street, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $18,900 (approximately $3,000 each to YAA in ACT, NSW, VIC and $3,300 to YAA in QLD, SA and WA) (C) The aim of the prograrn is to teach students about the commercial world in a way that will give them the opportunity to learn skills which will help them make career decisions and equip themselves better for the workforce (D) Program 3: Australian Bureau of Statistics (E) Approved by the Deputy Australian Statistician (F) No acquittal requirements applied to the grant (G) No outstanding acquittals (l)(c)(ii)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Head Office, Level 4, 17 CastJereagh Street, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $9,900 ($3,300 each to YAA in ACT, NSW and QLD) (C) The aim of the program is to teach students about the commercial world in a way that will give them the opportunity to learn skills which will help them make career decisions and equip themselves better for the workforce.
(D) Program' 3: Australian Bureau of Statistics
(E) Approved by the Deputy Australian Statistician
(F) No acquittal requirements applied to the grant
(G) No outstanding acquittals
(2) No grants or other forms of financial assistance are proposed for 1996-97. Reserve Bank of Australia
(l)(b)(ii)(A) National Federation of Blind Citizens of Australia Ltd, 87 High St, Prahran Vic 3181
(B) $81,000 (C) To finance the production and distribution of note guides to assist the visually impaired to differentiate between currency note denominations (D) As part of the Reserve Bank's public education program for the new series of polymer currency notes

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7141

(E) Governor of the Reserve Bank (F) N/A (G) N/A (l)(c)(ii)(A) National Federation of Blind Citizens of Australia Ltd (B) $8,000 (C) To finance a feasibility study into the design of an electronic recognition device to assist the visually impaired to differentiate between currency note denominations (D) As part of the Reserve Bank's public education program for the new series of polymer currency notes (E) Governor of Reserve Bank (F) N/A (G) N/A (2)(a) Nil; (b) Nil The Bank pays annual membership subscriptions to the NSW Employers Federation and the Industrial Relations Society of NSW (for which we receive regular printed industrial relations updates, etc) but we do not regard a subscription of this nature as falling within the boundaries of Mr Ferguson's Question. In addition, as part of its community relations activities, the Bank makes donations to a range of groups in the community, principally charitable organisations. These donations are mainly in the range of $100 to $1,000. We assume that such charitable donations are not included in the ambit of Mr Ferguson's Question. The Bank is also one of the 'sponsor-banks' of the Australian Institute of Banking and Finance (formerly Australian Institute of Bankers), and along with other banks, we pay an annual amount, based on our staff numbers, to help defray the Institute's expenses. Again, we doubt that such 'sponsor-bank' payments form part of Mr Ferguson's Question. Australian Taxation Office (l)(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Level 4, 17 Castlereagh St, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $3,000.00 (C) Sponsor Business Skills Program (D) Corporate Services, Penrith (E) Board of Management (F) Paid on original invoice (G) No (2). Same financial arrangements for the above program will apply for 1996/97 l(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Level 4, 17 Castlereagh St, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $500.00

(C) Sponsor Young Achievement Australia to provide a Judges Luncheon at the Sydney Trade Fair
(D) Corporate Services, Parramatta (E) Deputy Commissioner (F) (G) No (2) No financial arrangements for the above program for 1996/97 have been planned. l(c)(i)(A)Young Achievement Australia, Level 4, 17 Castlereagh St, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $3,300.00 (C) Sponsorship of the Business Skills Program (D) Corporate Services, Geelong (E) Deputy Commissioner (F) Paid on original invoice (G) No (2) No l(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Level 4, 17 Castlereagh St, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $300.00 (C) Illawarra Business Person of the Year (D) Corporate Services, Wollongong (E) Deputy Commissioner (F) Paid on original invoice (G) No (2) Same financial arrangements for the above program will apply for 1996/97 l(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Level 4, 17 Castlereagh St, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $360.00 (C) Youth Achievement Program (D) Corporate Services, Wollongong (E) Deputy Commissioner (F) Paid on original invoice (G) No (2) Same financial arrangements for the above program will apply for 1996/97 l(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, PO Box 3800, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $450.00 (C) Sponsorship of the Business Skills Program (D) Corporate Services, Moonee Ponds (E) Finance Accommodation & Services Manager, Corporate Services (F) Paid on original invoice (G) No

7142

REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, 19 November 1996

(2) No grants/financial assistance for the above program have been planned for 1996/97.
1(c)(i)(A) Union Research Centre on Organisation and Technology, Levell, 171 La Trobe St, Melbourne Vic 3000
(B) $500,000.00 (C) Salary and administration funds for continuing research and advisory service on the ATO's technological and organisational change program
(D) Corporate Services, National Office
(E) Senior management, in line with the 1994 & 1996 ATO Agency Bargaining Agreement
(F) Full financial and activity reporting to the Commissioner of Taxation
(2) $425,000 is to be paid in 1996/97, same arrangements as above, and will be reviewed in June 1997.
l(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Level 4, 17 Castlereagh St, Sydney NSW 2000
(B) $2,300.00
(C) Young Achievement Program
(D) Corporate Services, Townsville
(E) Deputy Commissioner
(F) Paid on original invoice
(0) No
(2) No
1(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Mezzanine Level, Commonwealth Bank, 225 Bourke St, Melbourne Vic 3000
(B) $800.00
(C) Business Alive Program-Presentation of taxation package to High Schools, Year 10 students over a 10 week period. The basis of the package was the material contained in the ATO Schools Kit.
(D) Small Business
(E) SBI Director, Dandenong Office (Fil Camerota)
(F) No acquittal Requirements
(0) No (2) No grants/financial assistance to employer organisations and individual companies for the year 1996/97 have been planned. 1(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Mezzanine Level, Commonwealth Bank, 225 Bourke St, Melbourne Vic 3000
(B) $600-the total account was paid by Corporate Services. Small Business Income paid the $600 to Corporate Services.
(C) Sponsorship of the Business Skills Program
(D) Small Business

(E) SBI Director, Dandenong Office (Fil Camerota)
(F) No acquittal Requirements
(0) No
(2) No grants/financial assistance to employer organisations and individual companies for the year 1996/97 have been planned.
I (c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia (YAA), Rm 9, L30, ComaIco Place, 12 Creek Street, Brisbane Qld 4000
(B) $3,300.00
(C) To allow ATO in the Northern Region to sponsor a group of students in the program and provide development opportunities for ATO staff who participate as advisers.
(D) Northern Region SBI Regional Management Team
(E) Chermside SBI Director
(F) ATO Chermside would find advisers to participate and that YAA would allocate students from one or more schools to participate.
(0) No
(2) No grants/financial assistance to employer organisations and individual companies for the year 1996/97 have been planned.
l(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, ACT Office, PO Box 822, Dickson ACT 2602
(B) $525
(C) Business Skills Program
(D) Small Business
(E) SBI Director, Canberra Office
(F) No acquittal Requirements (0) No
(2) No grants/financial assistance to employer organisations and individual companies for the year 1996/97 have been planned.
l(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Mezzanine Level, Commonwealth Bank, 225 Bourke St, Melbourne Vic 3000
(B) $600.00
(C) Sponsorship of the Business Skills Program.
(D) Child Support Agency.
(E) Director Child Support Agency, Dandenong
(F) Acquittal requirements met by processing through Corporate Services Section in the appropriate branches.
(0) No acquittal is outstanding.
(2) No commitments have been made for the 1996-97 financial year.
l(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, ACT Office, PO Box 822, Canberra ACT 2600

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7143

(B) $500.00 (C) Sponsorship of the Business Skills Program. (D) Child Support Agency. (E) Director Child Support Agency, Canberra (F) Acquittal requirements met by processing through Corporate Services Section in the appropriate branches. (G) No acquittal is outstanding. (2) No commitments have been made for the 1996-97 financial year. 1(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, lA, 17 Castlereagh St, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $3,300.00 (C) Sponsorship of the Business Skills Program. (D) Child Support Agency. (E) Director Child Support Agency, Penrith (F) Acquittal requirements met by processing through Corporate Services Section in the appropriate branches. (G) No acquittal is outstanding. (2) No commitments have been made for the 1996-97 financial year. l(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Shop B-051O, L 5, Bldg B World Trade Centre, Melbourne Vic 3000 (B) $545.20 (C) Sponsorship of the Business Skills Program. (D) Child Support Agency. (E) Director Child Support Agency, Moonee Ponds (F) Acquittal requirements met by processing through Corporate Services Section in the appropriate branches. (G) No acquittal is outstanding. (2) No commitments have been made for the 1996-97 financial year. l(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, lA, 17 Castlereagh St, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $480.00 (C) Sponsorship of the Business Skills Program. (D) Child Support Agency. (E) Director Child Support Agency, Wollongong (F) Acquittal requirements met by processing through Corporate Services Section in the appropriate branches. (G) No acquittal is outstanding. (2) No commitments have been made for the 1996-97 financial year.

1(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Mezzanine Level, Commonwealth Bank, 225 Bourke Street, Melbourne Vic 3000
(B) $600.00 (C) Sponsorship of the Business Skill Program (D) Large Business (E) Corporate Services, Dandenong (F) No acquittal requirements (G) No (2) It is anticipated that the same arrangements for Dandenong YAA as above, will apply for 1996/97 l(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, ACT Office, PO Box 822, Dickson ACT 2602 (B) $400.00 (C) Sponsorship of Business Skills Program (D) IT Services (E) Milo Kadamas (F) Payment on invoice received (G) No (2) It is likely that the same arrangements as above will apply for 1996/97 l(c)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, ACT Office, PO Box 822, Dickson ACT 2602 (B) $500.00 (C) Provision of support to YAA who provide a business skills training program for the youth in the community (D) Large Business (E) Director LBI (F) Payment on invoice (G) No (2) It is likely that the same arrangements as above will apply for 1996/97 l(b)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Shop B-051O, Level 5, Building B, World Trade Centre, Hinders Street, Melbourne (B) $3000.00 (C) Sponsorship of Business Skills Program (D) Corporate Services, Geelong (E) Director, Corporate Services, Geelong (F) None (G) No (1)(b)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Shop B-051O, Level 5, Building B, World Trade Centre, Hinders Street, Melbourne (B) $3,300.00 (C) Sponsorship of Business Skills Program (D) Corporate Services, Moonee Ponds

7144

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

(E) Director, Corporate Services, Moonee Ponds (F) None (G) No (l)(b)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Level 4, 17 CastJereagh Street, Sydney (B) $3,300.00 (C) Sponsorship of Business Skills Program (D) Corporate Services, Wollongong (E) Director, Corporate Services, Wollongong (F) None (G) No (l)(b)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Level 30, Comalco Place, Brisbane Qld 4000 (B) $3,300.00 (C) Sponsorship of Business Skills Program (0) Corporate Services, Townsville (E) Board of Management, Townsville (F) Paid on invoice (G) No (l)(b)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Level 4, 17 CastJereagh Street, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $3,500.00 (C) Sponsorship of Business Skills Program (D) Corporate Services, Parramatta (E) Deputy Commissioner, Parramatta (F) Paid on original invoice (G) No (l)(b)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Level 4, 17 Castlereagh Street, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $500.00 (C) Sponsorship of Business SkiIIs Program, Trade Fair (D) Corporate Services, Parramatta (E) Deputy Commissioner, Parramatta (F) Paid on original invoice (G) No (1)(b)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, 12 Creek Street, Brisbane Qld 4000 (B) $3,000.00 (C) Sponsorship of Business Skills Program (D) Corporate Services, Chermside (E) Director, Corporate Services, Chermside (F) Paid on invoice (G) No (l)(b)(i)(A) Union Research Centre on Organisation and Technology (URCOT), Level 11171 Latrobe Street, Melbourne Vic 3000 (B) $411,000.00

(C) Salary and administration funds for continuing research and advisory service on the ATO's technological and organisational change program.
(D) Corporate Services, National Office (E) Senior Management, in line with the Modernisation Agreement (F) Full financial and activity reporting to the Commissioner of Taxation (l)(b)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, GPO Box 3800, Sydney NSW 2001 (B) $3,200.00 (C) Sponsorship of Business SkiIls Program and product launch (D) Corporate Services, Penrith (E) P. Murdoch, Director (F) Paid on invoice (G) No outstanding debt (l)(b)(i)(A) Australian Business Week, Cnr Marsden & Macquarie Streets, Parramatta NSW (B) $10,000.00 (C) Major sponsorship (D) Withholding and Indirect Taxes Program (E) John Seberry-Regional Deputy Commissioner, WHTAX, NSW (F) None (G) No (l)(b)(i)(A) The Australian Tax Research Foundation, Level 9, 64 CastJereagh Street, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $10,000.00 (C) The payment was made to the foundation for them to commission an evaluation study for the TLIP through Professor Ian Wallschutsky of Newcastle University. (D) The program was made as part of the administration budget of the TLIP which is within the Tax Law Services Line (E) The payment was approved by the project director, Mr Brian Nolan. (F) The sum was paid in full to the Foundation and they reimbursed the funds to Professor W a1lschutsky. (G) There are no outstanding acquittals. (1)(b)(i)(A) Australian Tax Research Foundation, 9th Level, 64 CastJereagh St, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $4,200.00 (C) Sponsorship for attendance at conference (D) Tax Law Services, National Office (E) M. D'Ascenzo, Chief Tax Counsel (F) None

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7145

(G) No (l)(b)(i)(A) Federation of Ethnic Communities Council of Australia (FECCA), 541 George St, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $9,200.00 (C) Final payment for consultancy commenced in 1993/94 to assist the ATO with the provision of 20 tax information sessions to ethnic community leaders throughout Australia. (D) Program 4.1 (E) National Program Manager, SBI (F) FECCA salary component of contract entered into in 1993/94. Paid in August 1994 after completion of the contract. (l)(b)(i)(A) Young Achievers Australia, ACT Office, PO Box 822, Dickson ACT 2602 (B) $3,000.00 (C) Sponsorship (D) Program 4.1 (E) Director SBI, Canberra Office (F) No acquittal requirements. (1)(b)(i)(A) Young Achievement Program, GPO Box 3800, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $880.00 (C) Business Skills Program (D) INB Moonee Ponds (E) Deputy Commissioner, Moonee Ponds (F) Paid on original invoice (G) No outstanding acquittals Response for 1993-94 l(a)(i)(A) Union Research Centre on Organisation and Technology (URCOT), Level 11171 Latrobe Street Melbourne Vic 3000 (B) $1,077.00 (C) Union representative on working party for ISDM version 2.0 to attend meetings (D) Information Technology Services, National Office (E) Project Manager (F) Paid on original invoice (G) No outstanding acquittals l(a)(i)(A) Union Research Centre on Organisation and Technology (URCOT), Level 11171 Latrobe Street, Melbourne Vic 3000 (B) $4,614.00 (C) Union representative on Maxess ReplacementlMainframe GUI Steering Committee to attend meetings
(D) Information Technology Services, National Office

(E) Project Manager (F) Paid on original invoice (G) No outstanding acquittals l(a)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, GPO Box 3800, Sydney NSW 2001 (B) $3,000.00 (C) To provide sponsorship for the Young Achievement Australia's Business Skills Program (D) Corporate Services, Albury-Wodonga (E) A/g Deputy Commissioner of Taxation, Albury-W odonga (F) Paid on original invoice (G) No outstanding acquittals l(a)(i)(A) Federation of Ethnic Communities Councils of Australia (FECCA), 541 George St, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $36,000.00 (C) Consultancy payment for provision of 20 tax information presentations to ethnic community leaders throughout Australia (D) Audit, National Office (E) First Assistant Commissioner, Taxpayer Audit (F) $26,800 in advance, now acquitted. (G) $9,200 paid after completion, on invoice l(a)(i)(A) Union Research Centre on Organisation and Technology (URCOT), Level 11171 La Trobe St, Melbourne Vic 3000 (B) $1,536.00 (C) Fares and accommodation for participants to attend 'Making Technology Work for You' seminar (D) Corporate Services, Newcastle (E) Director, Corporate Services, Newcastle (F) Paid on original invoice (G) No outstanding acquittals l(a)(i)(A) Union Research Centre on Organisation and Technology (URCOT), Level 11171 La Trobe St, Melbourne Vic 3000 (B) $672.00 (C) Reimburse travel costs associated with Change Briefing Session (D) Corporate Services, Newcastle (E) Director, Corporate Services, Newcastle (F) Paid on original invoice (G) No outstanding acquittals l(a)(i)(A) Young Achievement Australia, Level 4117 Castlereagh Street, Sydney NSW 2000 (B) $3,000.00

7146

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

(C) Sponsorship of Business Skills Program (D) Corporate Services,. Penrith (E) Board of Management, Penrith (F) Paid on original invoice (G) No outstanding acquittals 1(a)(i)(A) Union Research Centre on Organisation and Technology (URCOT), Levell, 171 La Trobe St, Melbourne Vic 3000 (B) $500,000.00 (C) Salary and administration funds for continuing research and advisory service on the ATO's technological and organisational change program. (D) Corporate Services, National Office (E) Senior management, in line with the Modernisation Agreement

(F) Full financial and activity reporting to the Commissioner of Taxation. Department of the Treasury Taxation Policy Division
(l)(a),(b),(c) The Commonwealth made a series of payments to State Governments over 1993-94, 1994-95 and 1995-96 under the Transitional Assistance Payments (TAP) Scheme. These funds were then forwarded to specified companies.
(A) The names and addresses of recipients are as follows:
Paper Converting Company Pty Ltd, PO Box 2261, Crestmead Qld 4132
Cosco Holdings Pty Ltd, Comer Antimony and Emery Sts, Carole Park Qld 4300
AusTissue Pty Ltd, 9 I1da Rd, Canning Vale WA 6940
(B) Sums received by companies in the years specified were as follows:

Company
AusTissue Cosco Holdings Paper Converting Company

1993/94
($) 1,422,659.58 3,691,336.00 3,478,152.20

1994/95
($) 1,190,316.52 2,676,903.69 1,323,096.00

1995/96 ($)
423,675.54 327,161.10

(C) The TAP Scheme was set up so as to provide transitional assistance to specialist manufacturers of recycled paper products adversely affected by the decision of the then Commonwealth Government to remove exemptions from a range of recycled paper products.
(D) Payments were made under Treasury program 3 'Payments To Or For Other Levels Of Government' .
(E) Payments requiring a policy decision were approved by Ministers. Payments which were clearly within the guidelines set by the Government were approved by Treasury officials. The latter category represented most payments made under the TAP Scheme.
(F) Acquittal arrangements included that the recipient companies backed their claims by reports from auditors, that these claims were verified by the government of the State in which the company was located, and that State Governments provided audited reports to show that all payments made to them were forwarded to the company for which the Commonwealth intended assistance be provided.
(G) All acquittal arrangement for 1993/94 and 1994/95 have been met. The only acquittal arrangement required after a payment is made is for the

State Government to provide audited reports showing that payments were passed to the companies concerned. All such reports have been provided for 1993/94 and 1994/95. We expect that all such reports for 1995/96 will be provided soon after the end of 1995/96.
(2) No Fiscal Policy Division
(l)(a)(A) Claragrove Pty Ltd C/- AW Simpson and Co, 121 Faulkner St, Armidale NSW 2350
(B) $902,598.00 was paid on 16 December 1993 (C) At the same time as the grant was made, Claragrove Pty Ltd made a gift of several properties to the Commonwealth. These properties were part of a subdivision which was situated on land contaminated by creosote and arsenic. The purpose of providing Commonwealth assistance to the residents of the subdivision was to assist them to move from the location in the interest of their health. (D) Treasury program 1 sub-program 1.1 (macroeconomic) (E) Cabinet (F) The payment of the grant, along with grants to other residents of the Martin Street subdivision,

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

has been audited by the ANAO. The properties gifted to the Commonwealth are under the management of the Department of Administrative Services.
(G) No (2) No

Aircraft Noise Complaints
(Question No. 622)
Mr McClelland asked the Minister for Transport and Regional Development, upon notice, on 9 September 1996:
How many aircraft noise complaints, and concerning which Sydney suburbs, has the Federal Airports Corporation received since March 1996.

Mr Sharp--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

I am advised that the Airport's Noise Enquiry Unit received a total of 27,218 complaints between 1 March 1996 and 30 September 1996. Airservices Australia assumed responsibility for the Noise Enquiry Unit from the Federal Airports Corporation on 1 July 1996. The breakdown of complaints per suburb is reflected in the attached table.

Suburb Abbotsbury Abbotsford Alexandria Alfords Point Allawah Annandale Ameliffe Artarmon Ashbury
Ailicr~
Ashfield Asquith Auburn Avalon Beach Balgowlah Balmain Balmoral Bangor Banksia Banksmeadow Bankstown Barden Ridge Bardwell Park Bass Hill Baulkham Hills Bayview Beacon Hill Beaconsfield

Complaints 23 42 46 158 18 348
666 5
76 1
185 2 12 4 13
467 4
496 171
1 15 178 367 6 18 1 9 2

Suburb Beecroft Belfield Bellevue Hill Belmore Belrose
Berala Berowra Berowra Waters Beverley Hills Beverley Park Bexley Bilgola Plateau Birchgrove Blacktown Blakehurst Bondi Bondi Junction Bonnet Bay Boronia Park Botany Brighton Bronte Bundeena Burraneer Burwood Cabarita Cabramatta Cammeray Campbelltown Camperdown Campsie Canada Bay Canley Heights Canterbury Caring bah Carlingford Carlton Carramar Carss Park Cartwright Castle Cove Castle Hill Castlecrag Centennial Park Chatswood Cheltenham Cherry brook Chester Hill Chifley Chippendale Chipping Norton

7147
Complaints 13 34 3
100 5 6 8 1 11 12
681 8
92 13 36 16 6 56 51 41 168 14 22 2 93 12 11
20 1
46 131 25
1 131 35 31 56
1 1 1 2
10 1 3
91 16 7
1 1 35 12

7148
Suburb
Chiswick Church Point ClareviIIe Clemton Park Clovelly Collaroy Como Concord Condell Park Connells Point Coogee Cottage Point Cremorne Cromer Cronulla Crows Nest Croydon Croydon Park Curl Curl Daceyville Darling Point Darlinghurst Darlington Davidson Dawes Point Dee Why Denistone Dobroyd Point Dolans Bay Dolls Point Doonside Double Bay Dover Heights Drummoyne Duffys Forest Dulwich Hill Dundas Earl wood East Hills Eastlakes Eastwood Edensor Park Edgecliff Elanora Heights Elizabeth Bay Emu Plains Enfield Engadine Enmore Epping Ermington

REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, 19 November 1996

Complaints
20 13 2
3 21 3 88 355 11 18 204
1 10 2 312 11 191
75 2 26 9 14 11 1 1 4 21 5 5 28 4 3 3 260 5 463 9 2080 31 47
13
1 3 1 11 1 7 188 40 10 4

Suburb
Erskine Park Erskineville Fairfield Faulconbridge Five Dock Forest Lodge Fox Valley Frenchs Forest Galston Georges Hall Gladesville Glebe Glenfield Glenhaven Girraween Gordon Granville Grays Point Green Valley Greenacre Greenwich Guildford Gymea Haberfield Hammondville Harbord Heathcote Helensburgh Henley Hillsdale Holsworthy Homebush Hornsby Horsley Park Hunters Hill Huntleys Point Hurlstone Park Hurstville Illawong Ingleburn lannali Kangaroo Point Kareela Katoomba Kensington Killara Killarney Heights Kings Cross Kings Langley Kingsford Kingsgrove

Complaints
1 91
1 2 110 18 4 29 1 20 79 262 1 3 1 41 4 94 1 17 26 1 34 356 5 1 105 2 39 4 18
13
78
3 448
33 277 250 386
5 26 2
11
2
17
175 1
1
6 145 212

, Tuesday, 19 November 1996

REPRESENTATIVES

f Suburb Kingswood Kirribilli Kirrawee Kogarah Kumell Kurrajong Kyeemagh Kyle Bay La Perouse Lakemba Lane Cove Lansvale Lavender Bay Leichhardt Leura Lewisham Lidcombe
Lilli Pilli LilyfieJd LindfieJd Linley Point Little Bay Liverpool Loftus Long Point
Longueville Lucas Heights Luddenham Lugamo Macquarie Fields Macquarie Park Maianbar Malabar Manly Manly Vale Marayong Maroubra Marrickville Marsfield Mascot Matraville Mays Hill McMahons Point Menai Merrylands Middle Cove Miller Milperra Miranda Mona Vale Monterey

Complaints
5 16 29 99 1753 1 33 5 17 34 631 1 1 415 1
221 3 5
165 83 46 11 4
27 27
238 135
1 36
1 2 2 5 10 4 2 90 555 9 223 8 1 10 427 6 5 1 89 13 1 58

Suburb Moorebank MortdaIe Mortlake Mosman Mount Colah Mt Kuring-Gai Narellan Narembum Narrabeen Narwee Neutral Bay Newport Newtown Norrnanhurst North Rocks North Ryde North Sydney Northbridge Northmead Northwood Not given Oatley Oyster Bay Paddington Padstow Pagewood Panania Parramatta Peakhurst Pennant Hills Penrith Penshurst Petersham Phillip Bay Picnic Point Picton Pleasure Point Point Piper Port Hacking Potts Point Prospect Punchbowl Putney Pymble Pyrrnont Quakers Hill Queens Park QueenscJiff Ramsgate Randwick Redfern

7149
Complaints
6 34 5 51 9 2
1 2 3 4 7 104 667 59 4 2 12 14 10 14 1246 52 113 29
72
72 83 18 53 18 3 84 508 5 79 2
1 3 1 6 3 6 23 563 3 6 6 1 34 117 28

7150
Suburb Regents Park Revesby Rhodes Riverview Riverwood Rockdale Rodd Point Rooty Hill Rose Bay Rosebery Rosehill RoseJands Roseville Round Comer Rozelle Ruse Rushcutters Bay Russell Lea Rydalmere Ryde Sandringham Sandy Point Sans Souci Schofields Scotland Island Seaforth Seven Hills Spit Junction Springwood St Clair St Ives St Marys St Peters Stanmore Stanwell Tops Strathfield Summer Hill Surry Hills Sutherland Sydenham Sydney Sylvania Taren Point Telopea Tempe Tennyson Thirlmere Thornleigh Turrell a Turramurra Ultimo

REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, 19 November 1996

Complaints 1
52 2 153 4 319 70 2 7 16 1 25 19 1 149
1 2 68 1 125 1
10
96 1 2 1 4 1 2 2
60 2 73 447 1 121 755 34
11
75 22 59
1 1 125 6 3 28 95 168 2

Suburb Undercliffe Vaucluse Wahroonga Waitara Wakeley Wareemba Warrawee Waterfall Waterloo Watsons Bay Wattle Grove Waverley Waverton Wedderburn Wentworthville
Westgate Westleigh Westmead Wetherill Park Willoughby Winston Hills Wollstonecraft Woollahra Woolooware Woolwich Woronora Yagoona Yarrawarra Yowie Bay

Complaints 15
11
190 1 2 1 5
I
I
2 95 5 3 2
11
3 7
I
I
6 41 27
1 32 8 60
4
16 5

Family Court of Australia: Audit Report

(Question No. 766)

Mr Price asked the Attorney-General and Minister for Justice, upon notice, on 18 September 1996:

(1) Further to the report of the Auditor-General entitled Use of Justice Statement Funds and Financial Position: Family Court of Australia Audit Report No. 4 of 1996-7, did officers of his Department advise the Family Court of Australia that they have been consistently concerned about significant aspects of the Court's approach to determining priorities and spending its funds.
(2) Did the Court respond to this concern; if so, how.
(3) Will he table the correspondence relating to this matter.

Mr Williams-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) As Attorney-General I have ministerial responsibility for the funds allocated to my portfolio. However, direct responsibility for the management

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7151

of the Family Court, including management of its financial affairs, is vested, under section 38A of the Family Law Act 1975, in the Chief Justice of the Family Court. Within that framework it was appropriate for officers of my Department to raise general concerns about the Court's approach to the use of its funds with a view to ensuring that, consistent with the independence of the Court, it took account, as far as possible, of the purpose for which those funds were provided. These concerns were raised with the Court, both orally and in writing, on a number of occasions.
(2) The Court referred to its concerns with the effect of the efficiency dividend and other budget reductions on its capacity to maintain its existing services.
(3) No. It would be inappropriate for me to table correspondence that relates to the internal administration of the Family Court.
Family Court of Australia: Head Office
(Question No. 767)
Mr Price asked the Attorney-General and Minister for Justice, upon notice, on 18 September 1996:
(1) Is the head office of the Family Court of Australia located in Melbourne, Sydney or Canberra.
(2) If the head office is split among these cities, what (a) benefits derive from this arrangement and (b) cost savings are achieved each year.
(3) If no savings are achieved from the arrangement, what extra costs in rent, personnel, office equipment, salaries and travel allowances result.
Mr Williams-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Chief Justice is responsible for the management of the Court under section 38A of the Family Law Act 1975. The current Chief Justice is located in Melbourne. The current Deputy Chief Justice is also a Judge of the Family Court of Western Australia and is located in Perth. The Act provides that the Principal Registry shall be located III Sydney. The Family Court of Australia is a national body and operates Australia-wide. Elements of the administration of the Court are therefore located in various capital cities.

(2) I am advised by the Family Court that: (a) the arrangements exist for historical reasons and reflect the geographic location of senior judicial and other appointees; and
(b) the cost savings of the present arrangements are those that would be necessary to effect a change, which the Court estimates would be more than $2 million to relocate the Sydney office to Canberra.
(3) I am advised by the Family Court that: Any extra costs would be negligible compared to the cost of relocating the Sydney establishment to Canberra, or vice versa. There are no extra costs in terms of personnel or salaries. The same staffing numbers would be required regardless of location. Similar office equipment and accommodation requirements would also exist. Costs of travel allowance would be reduced only slightly through co-location.
Dogs: Imports and Exports
(Question No. 776)
Mrs Johnston asked the Minister for Primary Industries and Energy, upon notice, on 19 September 1996:
(1) How many dogs were exported in each year since 1991 from each State and Territory.
(2) To which countries were dogs exported and how many dogs did each country import.
(3) Have changes been made since 1991 to the conditions under which dogs may be exported; if so, what are they.
(4) Are there procedures to prevent the export of dogs for human consumption; if so, what are they.
(5) How many dogs have been imported into Australia in each year since 1991.
(6) From which countries were dogs imported and how many dogs did each country export to Australia.
Mr Anderson-The answer to the honourable member's question was published on 29 October 1996. The amended answer is as follows:
(1) Total export of dogs from Australia by State and Territory at 25/09/96

NSW

NT

QLD

SA3

TAS

VIC

WA TOTAL

1991

6378

4

509

163

16

2816

983 1 10869

1992

8795

29

636

151

26

5832

2024 17493

1993

8366

23

634

207

13

3505

2653 15401

1994

5932

9

717

439

33

3697

2363 13190

1995

3469

10

806

601

46

3457

1795 10184

7152

REPRESENTATIVES

Tuesday, 19 November 1996

NSW

NT

QLD

SA3

TAS

VIC

WA TOTAL

1996 Total

5418 38358

16

708

284

91 4010 1845

21

2027

8582

9332

155 21334 10676 76469

1. Figures only available for first 6 months 2. Figures only available for first 6 months 3. Figures compiled on financial year basis with 1991192 shown as 1991, 1992193 shown as 1992 etc. (2) The details of to which countries dogs were exported and the number each country imported are shown in the following tables:

Country

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

19%

EXPORT OF DOGS FROM NEW SOUlH WALES TO COUNTRY OF DESTINATION AT 25109/96

1995 figures July to December only

Antigua

2

Algeria

1

Argentina

6

6

6

5

2

8

Austria

2

1

2

2

2

Bahrain

1

1

2

Banglad

1

Belgium

5

6

2

3

Bermuda

1

Bolivia

1

Brazil

1

2

2

Bulgaria

1

Brunei

5

1

Canada

15

16

10

16

14

20

Chile

11

17

13

5

3

3

China

1

159

149

126

100

Colombia

3

2

Croatia

1

Cyprus

5

3

1

Czechoslovakia

2

7

4

5

3

Denmark

4

5

3

6

9

4

Egypt

1

El Salvador

1

Fiji

6

6

12

10

2

11

Finland

8

3

25

8

7

10

France

14

11

12

3

7

9

Germany

10

21

8

11

6

10

Greece

11

13

7

12

1

8

Guam

163

243

86

146

75

141

Hong Kong

3832

5950

5096

885

226

169

Hungary

3

1

2

3

India

5

2

7

7

12

3

Indonesia

29

22

69

144

91

68

Ireland

1

3

6

4

5

Israel

I

5

1

1

2

Italy

4

11

11

5

5

2

Japan

39

63

147

297

176

201

Kenya

3

1

3

Sth Korea

3

2

15

36

106

150

Latvia

1

1

Lebanon

3

2

3

Macau

98

269

230

320

130

160

Malaysia

15

33

130

478

149

257

Malta

1

3

4

6

Marsh Is

I

Mexico

3

2

Monaco

I

Nauru

TOTAL
2 1 33 9 4 1 16 1 1 6 1 6 91 52 535 5 1 9 21 31 .1
1 47 61 56 66 52 854 16158 9 36 423 19 10 38 923 7 312 2 8 1207 1062 14
I 6 I I

,
I

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7153

Country

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996 TOTAL

Netherland New Caledonia
NZ Nigeria Norfolk Is Nth Korea Norway Oman Pakistan PNG Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Saudi Ar Seychelles Singapore R Sth Africa Slovenia Solomon Is Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Tahiti Taiwan
Thailand Turkey
UAE UK Uruguay USA USSR Vanuatu
Venezuela Vietnam
West Samoa Yugoslavia Zimbabwe TOTAUYEAR

8 12 466
I II
16
10 4 9
39 6
7
13 5 6 25 12 I
95 2
1318 I 2
I 6378

16 25 393
16
7
I 27
12 I 2
42 10
4
10 6 4 80 20 2 2 60 12 1310
4
1 8795

16 12 447 2 6
4 I
27 I 10 5 5
64 4
3 5
8
3 29 7 2
I 71
5 1535
2 9
7
8366

12 8 453
8
4
2 22
15 4 4 1
1 1012
10 1 I 2
8 6 1 II 17 3
56 8
1684
2 2 1
5932

7 2 258
12 2 2
1008 9
I 3 1 1 2 21 1 25 952
2 2 I 1 3469

14 I
413
2 2 I
9
14 3 4
2035 7
6 8 7 7 3 II 12 1 2 69 1 1417
2 1
5418

73 60 2430
3 43
2 18 I 4 101 I
73 19 26
1 1 1 4200 46 1 4 24 9 49 25 18 158 89 9 6 376 28 8216 3 20 3 10 2 1 3 38358

EXPORT OF DOGS FROM NOR'rnERN TERRITORY TO COUNTRY OF DESTINATION AT 25/09/96

Bermuda

1

Canada

1

France

3

Germany

2

Greece

2

2

Hong Kong

3

3

Indonesia

1

2

4

Japan

I

1

Marianas

1

Malaysia

14

6

22

Norway

1

PNG

2

2

New Zealand

2

3

10

2

19

Netherlands

I

1

Philippines

4

4

Scotland

1

Sweden

1

Thailand

2

7154

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

Country

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

UK USA TOTALIYEAR

6

4

29

23

1

1

11

9

10

16

EXPORT OF DOGS FROM QUEENSLAND TO COUNTRY OF DESTINATION AT 24/09/96

New Zealand

339

413

412

466

574

501

Hong Kong

45

45

73

69

50

44

United Kingdom

23

39

19

28

41

41

USA

23

19

12

15

19

15

Japan

10

19

7

15

14

17

Malaysia

12

17

10

6

12

17

Singapore

4

9

12

10

5

1

Canada

4

6

8

8

10

3

Hawaii

8

10

8

4

4

4

Taiwan

6

5

8

3

5

10

Germany

3

7

7

7

6

4

Fiji New Caledonia

4

4

5

10

5

4

3

5

6

7

'7

3

Vanuatu

0

2

7

10

2

5

Indonesia

3

4

7

5

4

2

Netherlands

2

0

5

5

5

5

Philippines

2

7

0

7

3

1

France

4

2

3

4

2

3

Norfolk Island

2

1

2

7

4

2

Thailand

0

2

4

5

5

2

Guam

3

3

2

5

3

1

Finland

I

3

4

3

4

I

South Africa

3

1

2

3

3

2

Sri Lanka

1

4

0

4

3

2

Solomon Islands

2

I

3

1

3

2

India

1

2

3

0

2

2

Saudi Arabia

0

2

0

2

2

3

Denmark

I

0

0

2

2

3

UAE

0

1

1

I

1

4

Sweden

0

1

3

0

2

1

Greece

0

0

1

2

1

1

Spain

0

1

0

I

I

1

Argentina

0

0

0

1

1

1

Italy

0

1

0

1

1

0

TOTALlYEAR

509

636

634

717

806

708

EXPORT OF DOGS FROM SOUTH AUSTRALIA TO COUNTRY OF DESTINATION AT 25109196 *nb figures have been provided in financial years, eg 90/91 for '91, 91192 for '92

Country Austria
Barbados Belgium Brunei
Canada Cyprus Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Guam Hawaii Hong Kong Hungary India Indonesia

*1991
2
2 I 8

*1992 1
2 I 8 7
8

*1993
3 1 2 3 4
5 1 1

*1994 6 7

*1995
2 1 I 4
8 3

*1996 I
I 8
5
3 3 4 I

TOTAL
1 19 91
2705 326 191 103 82 74 41 39 38 37 34 32 31 26 25 22 20 18 18 18 17 16 14 14 12 10 9 8 8 7 5 4 3 3
4010
TOTAL 2 1 1 1 18 2 3
16 4 23 1 1 3 39 1 9 I

,

Tuesday, 19 November 1996

REPRESENTATIVES

J

Country

Ireland

Italy

Japan

Korea

Lebanon

Malawi

Malaysia

Malta

Marian Is

Nauru

Netherlands

New Zealand

Norfolk Is

Norway

Oman

Pakistan

Philippines

PNG

Poland

Portugal

Singapore

Sth Africa

Sweden

Spain

Switzerland

Taiwan

Thailand

Turkey

UK

UAE

USA

W Samoa

Zimbabwe

TOTAL !YEAR

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

2

2

I

3

3

4

2

2

I

13

9

7

6

5

I

2

I

2

I

66

61

59

63

89

2

3

3

3

4

I

I

67

289

425

I

I

2

2

2

6

8

3

4

8

I

38

27

14

10

14

17

13

14

30

30

3

I

163

151

207

439

601

EXPORT OF DOGS FROM TASMANIA TO COUNTRY OF DESTINATION AT 25109/96

Country

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

Canada

3

Fiji

2

Greece

I

Guam

I

Indonesia

Japan

9

Malta

Malaysia

2

Netherlands

N Caledonia

I

New Zealand

13

16

7

21

23

Norway

I

Nth Ireland

PNG

Singapore

3

Sth Africa

3

UK

6

2

2

USA

I

3

5

I

I

TOTALIYEAR

16

26

13

33

46

EXPORT OF DOGS FROM VICTORIA TO COUNTRY OF DESTINATION AT 25109/96

Argentina

4

9

I

Austria

4

2

Bahrain

I

2

Bangladesh

2

7155

1996 TOTAL

2

2

2

14

2

2

I

20

60

I

4

4

2

3

7

49

387

I

I

2

3

I

2

9

6

2

I

117

899

3

6

3

I

I

2

19

I

13

I

22

125

I

I

31

135

3

I

284

1845

1996 TOTAL

3

2

I

I

I

10

I

2

I

I

16

96

I

2

I

3

3

2

12

3

14

21

155

2

16

2

8

4

2

.,

7156
Country
Belgium Bolivia Brazil Brunei Cambodia Canada Chile China Colombia Cook Is Croatia Cyprus Czech Denmark Egypt Fiji Finland France FSM Germany Greece Guam Hawaii Holland Hong Kong Hungary India Indonesia Ireland Israel Italy Japan Kenya Kiribati Korea Malaysia Malta Mexico Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Caledonia New Zealand Nigeria Norfolk Is Norway Pakistan Philippines PNG Poland Portugal Russia Saipan Sarawak Saudi Arabia Scotland Selangor Seychelles Singapore Solomon Is South Africa

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

1991

1992

I
2

2

3

12

11

3

I

3

I

I

I

2

2

2

7

7

3

1

3

6

3

2

9

7

16

5

2

2

12

53

52

52

11

14

1714

4262

1

5

5

13

26

2

7

1

4

7

35

43

4

I

77

83

7

2

2

2

15

21

3

1

322

294

1

5

3

8

5

26

77

4

7

1

5

6

160

502

9

3

1993

1994

1995

I

I

6

2

2

2

7

8

8

5

I

16

21

2

I

2

3

2

7

3

6

4

I

I

13

11

8

5

15

12

81

117

212

20

143

65

7

9

2

1735

391

89

2

3

I

3

4

46

26

43

4

5

2

I

3

7

6

I

26

60

46

I

I

1

4

170

162

162

1

3

3

2

42

49

21

4

4

5

4

I

275

360

315

I

4

2

2

4

9

6

3

40

41

23

1

I

3

3

5

6

I

26

40

2

4

2

776

1930

2156

1

6

12

1996 TOTAL

4

2

2

I

13

2

7

18

64

I

10

39

4

2

2

8

11

14

1

3

22

I

15

3

25

1

5

58

3

39

182

657

22

354

43

81

8272

6

7

25

13

167

20

5

4

29

38

248

I

1

10

121

775

3

19

6

7

155

I

I

4

17

I

10

268

1834

I

I

6

2

14

4

31

12

219

2

18

14

18

24

I

49

115

3

6

12

2

I

I

964

6488

I

2

15

45

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7157

Country

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey UAE UK Uruguay USA Vanuatu West Malaysia West Samoa Yugoslavia Zimbabwe TOTAUYEAR

4

5

2

15

7

11

2

3

2

84

132

4

3

2

2

I

61

48

2

73

63

I

5

4

I

6

5

11

6

2

42

114

3

7

2

14

I

37

46

30

I

2

61

90

110

I

I

2

2

2

2816

5832

3505

3697

3457

EXPORT OF DOGS FROM WESTERN AUSTRALIA TO COUNTRY OF DESTINATION

1991 from Inl91-31112191 only

1996 from 01101196 to 30/06/96 only

Austria

I

Argentina

2

3

Bahrain

Belgium

I

I

Brunei

4

8

27

10

36

Canada

I

6

3

2

5

Chile

I

Christmas Is

2

Cocos Is

2

Czecho

I

Cyprus

2

Denmark

I

I

I

East Mala

40

85

42

84

Fiji

I

Finland

I

I

France

2

I

3

Guam

I

Germany

5

I

7

Ghana

I

Greece

I

Hong Kong

375

477

580

169

39

Indonesia

70

216

326

284

321

Rep Ireland

I

6

I

India

8

2

Italy

I

Japan

5

3

64

354

207

Jordan

I

Korea

2

Kenya

Malaysia

2

New Caledonia

I

Netherlands

5

3

2

Nigeria

I

Norfolk Is

I

Nth Ireland

Norway

I

NZ

77

92

101

142

13

Oman

I

Pakistan

2

1996 TOTAL

10

4

31

6

46

2

15

2

13

388

12

42

I

6

2

3

40

262

5

10

75

472

2

2

3

2

5

3

I

3

2027

21334

2

5

I

I

3

28

113

3

20

I

2

2

2

2

6

10

113

365

I

2

3

9

3

4

3

18

I

2

I

22

1662

74

1291

8

4

14

I

135

768

I

2

I

2

I

4

15

I

I

I

I

69

494

I

3

7158

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

Country

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996 TOTAL

Philipp PNG Portugal Poland Qatar RSAfrica Seychelles Singapore Spain Sweden Switzerland Thailand Taiwan UAE
UK
USA Vanuatu Vietnam Venezuela W Malaysia Zimbabwe TOTAL/YEAR

3

1

2

3

1

2

6

1

7

15

12

370

957

1090

921

563

3

1

64

15

3

2

1

4

4

7

4

2

1

1

1

2

39

60

62

51

53

3

33

15

17

23

2

1

1

17

80

186

312

412

I

4

I

983

2024

2653

2363

1795

3

5

3

4

4

5

22

27

173

4074

I

5

80

10

17

3

4

27

292

9

100

3

2

4

1

167

1174

2

8

858

10676

(3) There have been no changes to the legislative conditions, namely the Export Control (Animals) Orders, under which dogs may be exported since 1990.

(4) There are no procedures in place to check on the use to which any animal will be put after its importation into another country. These matters are beyond Australia's control.

(5) Total import of dogs into Australia by State and Territory at 25/09/96

ACT

NSW

SA

VIC

WA

QLD TotallYear

1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 Total

399 309 227 483 679 382 2479

74

648

225

362

17082

47

403

171

452

13822

56

376

110

446

12152

47

420

149

510

16102

57

644

333

607

23202

0'

235

200

8172

281

2726

1188

2377

90522

1. SA Quarantine Station ceased operation for dog imports in December 1995.

2. In respect of some countries eg New Zealand, Australia does not require imported dogs to be quarantined and hence records for these are incomplete in some cases.

(6) The details of from which countries dogs were imported and the number of dogs exported from those countries are shown in the following tables:

Country

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

IMPORT OF DOGS INTO NEW SOUTH WALES FROM COUNTRY OF EXPORT AT 25/09/96

Antilles

2

Bahamas

2

Bahrain

2

Belgium

5

8

6

Bermuda

2

Brunei

2

Canada

12

14

12

Cayman

I

1

Cyprus

I

2

Fiji

6

4

2

1

8

4

Finland

4

10

2

France

2

9

5

French Polynesia

1

TOTAL
2 2 2 19 2 2 38 2 3 25 16 16 1

Tuesday, 19 November 1996

REPRESENTATIVES

7159

Country

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996 TOTAL

Gennany Greece Guam Hawaii Hong Kong Ireland Israel Italy Japan PenMal Malta Nauru Netherlands New Caledonia Norway Pac Is PNG Portugal Republic Sth Afr Seychelles Singapore Solomon Is Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tonga UK USA Vanuatu West Samolia TOTAUYEAR

5

8

3

16

I

4

I

6

I

2

3

55

27

9

15

1\

8

125

I

31

74

38

144

I

2

5

9

I

I

4

2

6

21

8

7

21

26

15

98

2

8

10

I

I

2

5

I

I

I

6

2

9

I

2

2

2

7

2

4

11

4

21

I

I

12

6

4

26

41

16

\05

3

3

2

2

I

I

23

21

16

60

2

2

I

2

3

3

2

3

1\

4

24

I

2

I

4

I

5

2

8

I

I

301

260

196

267

262

169

1455

40

108

63

211

2

5

7

I

I

399

309

227

483

679

382

2479

IMPORT OF DOGS INTO VICTORIA FROM COUNTRY OF EXPORT AT 25/09/96 New Zealand and Norfolk Is

figures are in financial years.

Belgium

I

5

6

Canada

16

3

3

5

27

Cyprus

I

I

2

Fiji

3

2

I

6

Finland

2

5

3

\0

France

I

3

4

Gennany

3

9

9

22

Greece

2

I

3

6

Hawaii

31

14

12

4

I

62

Hong Kong

9

25

9

43

Ireland

2

4

4

2

\3

Italy

I

2

I

4

Japan

3

2

6

3

15

29

Malaysia

I

10

2

13

Malta

I

I

2

Nauru

I

I

I

3

Netherlands

2

5

7

NZ

457

263

248

207

361

1536

New Caledonia

2

I

3

Norfolk Is

I

I

Norway

3

2

3

9

Pac Is

I

I

PNG

I

I

Portugal

I

I

2

Scotland

I

3

4

Singapore

9

8

12

29

7160

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

Country

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

Solomon Sweden Switzerland Taiwan UAE UK USA Vanuatu West Sam TOTAUYEAR

1

3

4

6

7

4

5

2

1

1

2

2

152

115

96

116

137

116

1

21

48

38

I

2

648

403

376

420

644

235

IMPORT OF DOGS INTO SOUTH AUSTRALIA FROM COUNTRY OF EXPORT AT 25/09/96

Canada

1

Fiji

1

Greece

1

Hawaii

2

Hong Kong

1

5

Malaysia

1

WMalays

1

Netherlands

1

Norway

2

Sth Africa

1

Singapore

2

2

Sweden

Taiwan

1

UK

74

45

55

37

38

USA TOTAUYEAR

2

4

74

47

56

47

57

0

IMPORT OF DOGS INTO WESTERN AUSTRALIA FROM COUNTRY OF EXPORT AT 25109196

Austria

2

Brunei

3

Canada

2

Cyprus

Denmark

France

2

Germany

Hawaii

4

5

Hong Kong

28

3

Korea

1

Italy

1

Japan

3

2

Malaysia

1

4

Netherlands

1

NZ

104

70

PNG

1

Singapore

2

13

3

Spain

1

Solomon

Seychelles

Sweden

2

Vanuatu

1

Taiwan

1

UK

221

166

108

128

154

115

USA

3

16

3

Xmas Is

3

1

TOTAUYEAR

225

171

110

149

333

200

IMPORT OF DOGS INTO QUEENSLAND FROM COUNTRY OF EXPORT AT 25109196

Norfolk Is

6

7

3

9

5

New Zealand

356

445

443

501

602

TOTAL

362

452

446

510

607

TOTAL
1 29 3 3 2 732 108 1 2 2726
1 1 1 3 6 1 1 2 3 1 4 I 1 249 6 281
2 3 2 1 I 3 2 10 32 1 1 5 5 1 174 1 19 1 1 1 2 1 1 892 22 4 1188
30 2347 2377

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7161

Applications for Registration
(Question No. 801)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Industry, Science and Tourism, upon notice, on 8 October 1996:
(1) How many non-syndicate applications for registration under section 39J of the Industry Research and Development Act did the Industry Research and Development Board have on hand relating to (a) 1992-93 and (b) earlier financial years at 2.30 p.m. on 6 December 1995 and which had not been registered by the Board at that time.
(2) How many of the outstanding registrations were lodged with the Board (a) nine months or more prior to 6 December 1995, (b) up to six months prior to 6 December 1995, (c) up to three months prior to 6 December 1995, (d) up to one month prior to 6 December 1995 and (e) in the period 1 December 1995 to 2.30 p.m. on 6 December 1995.
(3) What formal published registration procedures were in place during each period referred to in part (2).
Mr Moore--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1)(a) The Board had on hand 196 unregistered 1992-93 applications by close of business 6 December 1995.
(b) The Board had on hand 411 unregistered applications for years of income prior to 1992-93 by close of business 6 December 1995.
(2)(a) 49 applications were received prior to 7 March 1995 that had not been registered by close of business 6 December 1995.
(b) 80 applications were received prior to 7 June 1995 that had not been registered by close of business 6 December 1995.
(c) 150 applications were received prior to 7 September 1995 that had not been registered by close of business 6 December 1995.
(d) 232 applications were received prior to 7 November 1995 that had not been registered by close of business 6 December 1995.
(e) 324 applications were received between 1 December 1995 and close of business 6 December 1995. None of these has been registered.
(3) The Board's registration procedures are given at pages 221 to 230 inclusive of the Board's publication Guide to Benefits, 150% R&D Tax Incentive, Revised Edition-1994. Since that time,

there have been some minor administrative changes to the registration procedures mentioned in the Guide to Benefits. These changes are:-
(i) The example of an annual application form (1992-93) given in the Guide to Benefits (pages 509-516) has now been replaced by a generic form designed to be used for any given financial period. As indicated in the Guide to Benefits (refer page 223), the Board sends a copy of this form, together with explanatory notes, to all previous registrants on an annual basis; copies are also available at all times in all Department of Industry, Science and Tourism offices.
(ii) Retrospective applications are still being accepted (refer pages 224-225); however, in light of the changes to registration announced in the Innovate Australia Statement of 6 December 1995, confirmed and clarified by the current Government on 3 June 1996, the completion of processing of applications for years of income prior to 1993-94 has been given lower priority, while the Board deals with a very large number of applications for 1993-94 and later years.
(iii) The Board does not now acknowledge receipt of applications as stated on page 226 of the Guide to Benefits.
On 21 September 1995, however, the Board received legal advice that registration required the Board to be satisfied for each application that eligible R&D activities had taken place. Therefore, from that date, the Board initiated a more robust, although resource intensive, administrative approach to satisfy this requirement. This administrative change was notified in writing to industry through the accounting and conSUlting houses and in subsequent AusIndustry presentations to industry associations.
University Enrolments
(Question No. 805)
Mr Latham asked the Minister representing the Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 8 October 1996:
How many students are enrolled for the 1996 academic year at the (a) University of Sydney, (b) University of NSW, (c) Macquarie University, (d) University of Western Sydney, Macarthur, (e) University of Western Sydney, Nepean and (f) University of Western Sydney, Hawkesbury.
For each university referred to in part (1), (a) what size is the campus library floor space, (b) how many books does each library hold, (c) what is the

7162

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

annual budget allocated for (i) book acquisition and (ii) other library purposes and (d) what plans are there for expanding library facilities and services.
Dr Kemp-The Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The Department does not yet have access to final enrolment data for 1996. Figures detailed below have been based on the Student Statistical Collection-Census Date 31 March 1996. The Department does not collect data on enrolments for individual campuses.

Number of

University

Enrolments-1996

University of Sydney

28,443

University of New South Wales

23,369

Macquarie University

16,416

University of Western Sydney

23,266

(2) The Department does not obtain information on campus library floor space, the number of books in each library hold, the annual budget allocated by universities for book acquisition and other library

purposes. Nor does it obtain information on detail of plans for expanding library facilities and services apart from information relating to capital developments. These are listed below:

University

1996

1997

1998

University of Sydney University of New South Wales
Macquarie University University of Western Sydney
Blacktown Campus Richmond Campus Bankstown Campus Parramatta Campus

$m

$m

$m

2.2

0.4

2.0

0.3

0.3

5.0

0.8

5.9

2.0

3.6

1.9

Source: Institutions Capital Management Plans 1996-1999 Institutions annual reports for 1994 and 1995 show library expenditure as follows:

1999 $m 0.1 8.0
1.1

University

Library Expenditure-1994 ($Ooo's)

Library Expenditure-1995 ($Ooo's)

University of Sydney University of New South Wales Macquarie University University of Western Sydney
Source: Higher education annual financial reports.

16,631 17,122 9,950 13,799

16,055 18,301 10,493 16,862

Office of the Status of Women: Round Table Meeting
(Question No. 819)
Mr Cadman asked the Minister representing the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Status of Women, upon notice, on 15 October 1996:
Is the Minister able to provide membership details, on a State by State basis, of those women's organisations who participated in the round table meeting sponsored by the Office of the Status of Women on 12 June 1996.

Mrs Moylan-The Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Status of Women has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The information on membership details for non government orgariisations is provided on a voluntary basis. The details currently available on non government organisations which participated in the Round Table meeting sponsored by the Office of the Status of Women on 12 June 1996 is incomplete, out of date and, we believe, no longer accurate.
Below is a list of organisations which participated in the 12 June 1996 Round Table meeting.

Tuesday, 19 November 1996 REPRESENTATIVES

7163

Association of Non-English Speaking Background Women of Australia Association of Women Educators Association of Women's Apex Clubs of Australia Australian Council of Trade Unions Australian Federation of Business and Professional Women Australian Federation of University Women Inc. Australian Feminist Law Foundation Inc. Australian Local Government Women's Association Australian Women in Agriculture Australian Women's Education Coalition Australian Women's Health Network Inc. CAPOW! (Coalition of Australian Participating Organisations of Women) Catholic Women's League, Australia Coalition of Activist Lesbians Council for Equal Opportunity in Employment Country Women's Association of Australia Federation of Ethnic Communities Council of Australia Foundation for Australian Agricultural Women Girl Guides Association, Australia International Women's Development Agency Maternity Alliance Muslim Women's National Network of Australia National Council for the Single Mother and Her Child National Council of Jewish Women of Australia National Council of Women of Australia National Foundation for Australian Women National Women's Justice Coalition National Women's Media Centre Network of Women in Further Education Nursing Mothers' Association of Australia Office of Indigenous Women, ATSIC Older Women's Network, Australia Pan Pacific and South East Asia Women's Association
Playgroup Council of Australia Refugee Council of Australia, National Network on Refugee Women's Issues Soroptimist International of the South West Pacific UNAA (United Nations Association of Australia) Status of Women Network Union of Australian Women Women in Film and Television Women in Science Enquiry Network Women with Disabilities, Australia Women's Action Alliance Women's Electoral Lobby Women's Emergency Services Network Women's International League for Peace and Freedom
Womensport Australia Young Women's Christian Association (Australia) Zonta International, District 24
National Indigenous Women's Coalition (attended 12 June meeting as observer)

Kirribilli House: Security
(Question No. 859)
Mrs Crosio asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 28 October 1996:
(1) Further to his answer to part (3) of question No. 664 (Hansard, 9 October 1996, page 5065), what quotes have been received for upgrading the perimeter security and other security measures at Kirribilli House.
(2) What form will the security upgrade take and what costs will be involved in each part of the upgrade.
(3) Did he receive any advice or recommendations concerning the costs involved in upgrading security at his family home in Wollstonecraft before deciding on taking up residence in Kirribilli House; if so, what were the details of the advice or recommendations.
(4) What were his reasons for not having the security upgraded at his Wollstonecraft residence rather than at Kirribilli House.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Formal quotes to undertake the work have been obtained from several contractors. For security and commercial-in-confidence reasons details of those quotes cannot be provided. I note that the need for a comprehensive upgrade of security of KirribiJIi House was recognised by the previous Government.
(2) It is the long standing practice of Governments not to provide details of security arrangements. The total cost of the work will not exceed $386,500. I should point out that the upgrade will also have major benefits for the security of Admiralty House, which is within the same common perimeter.
(3) Yes. The advice indicated that guarding costs for my home in Wollstonecraft would have been approximately $lm per annum or $720,000 per annum if a further $500,000 was spent upgrading security arrangements.
(4) The costs were far greater than upgrading security at Kirribilli House, which already has a sound security infrastructure in place. A security upgrade of Kirribilli House will also have long term benefits for future occupants of, and any high profile visitors who may stay at, the house. I was also advised that security at my home in Wollstonecraft would intrude quite significantly on neighbours.

7164

REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 November 1996

Kirribilli House: Renovations
(Question No. 860)
Mrs Crosio asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 28 October 1996:
(1) Was a decision made to (a) paint four rooms, (b) lay carpet in rooms, (c) make minor carpentry, plumbing and electrical alterations and (d) purchase blinds and curtains for two rooms at Kirribilli House; if so, when.
(2) In each instance referred to in part (1), what was the contractor's name and when (a) were they engaged for the work and (b) did work (i) commence and (ii) finish.
(3) If the renovations mentioned in part (1) were decided upon, started or completed before 20 August 1996, why did he not include the information in his answer to part (3) of my question No. 425 (Hansard, 20 August, 1996, page 3320).
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l)(a), (b), (c) and (d) Yes, between March and August 1996.
(2) In relation to (a), (b) and (c) in part (1), the work was undertaken by Asset Services.
(a) Asset Services is engaged under the Department's normal annual repairs and maintenance contract for the residence.
(b)(i) and (ii) The work was undertaken between March and August 1996.
In relation to (d) in part (1), the contractor was Brian S. Peacock's Home Decorator Services Pty Ltd.
(a) April 1996 and May 1996.

(b) (i) and (ii) The curtains were installed in the first room on 24 April 1996, and in the second room on 3 June 1996.
(3) In relation to (a), (b) and (c) in part (1), reference to the work was included in my response to part (2) of question No. 425 (Hansard, 20 August, 1996, page 3320). In relation to (d) in part (1), the replacement of these furnishings was not itemised as the work was regarded as general repairs and maintenance, and not renovations. While this distinction is somewhat arbitrary, the term renovations was taken to mean more major structural works.
Kirribilli House: Wardrobes
(Question No. 861)
Mrs Crosio asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 28 October 1996:
(1) Further to his answers to questions Nos. 664 (Hansard, 9 October, page 5065) and 425 (Hansard, 20 August, 1996, page 3320), what timbers were used in the construction of the three wardrobes installed in Kirribilli House.
(2) What itemised costs were involved in the construction and installation of each of the three new wardrobes.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Kauri pine. (2) Wardrobe 1-$8,986.00; wardrobe 2$10,276.00; additional partitions, belt and tie racks, hanging rail brackets and rods for wardrobes 1 and 2-$976.00; wardrobe 3-$8,54l.00, including $125.00 for belt and tie racks.


