House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 123, 1981 Friday, 5 June 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3223

Friday, 5 June 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 9.30 a.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged [or presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in-
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley, Mrs Child, MI' Jacobi, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Charles Jones and Mr Kent.
Petitions received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
1. the proposal to introduce fees for higher and second degrees will mean that access to post-graduate and recurrent education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and ability to cope with technological change will suffer; this proposal must be seen as a step in the direction of the introduction of fees for all tertiary students.
2. the proposed introduction of a loans scheme for students will mean graduating with a heavy debt or being denied a tertiary education if loans are refused because a student is seen as a "poor risk" (particularly affecting women and those doing non-vocational courses); only the rich will be able to get a tertiary education without course restrictions and the burden of indebtedness.
3. in regard to the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the light of the availability of loans, it should be noted that any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate, can only further limit access to education.
4. the proposed restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance to those needing qualifications for employment will severely restrict access to a full high school education and necessary bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school early.

5. the proposal not to fund 30 Colleges of Advanced Education if they are not rationalised is an attack on teacher education. This attack will create teacher shortages in the mid 1980s, restrict access to education now and endanger the future quality of teaching available to Australian children.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(i) post-secondary tuition fees not be introduced for any courses or for any category of students.
(ii) that the TEAS scheme be extended so as to more fully meet the real financial needs of students.
(iii) that a comprehensive loans scheme not be introduced. (iv) that there be no restriction of Adult Secondary
Assistance. (v) that the proposal not to fund 30 CAEs unless they are
rationalised be rescinded.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley, Mr Robert Brown, Mrs Child, Mr Humphreys and Mr Jacobi.
Petitions received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) the financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) the imposition of post-secondary tuition fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1971 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study from doing so.
(iii) those students and potential students from social groups currently under-represent.ed and disadvantaged in the post-secondary education system would be most severely affected by the re-introduction of fees for post-secondary education.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
1. post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any courses or for any category of students.
2. the visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately.
3. the Minister of Education immediately clarify the government's attitude to the re-introduction of postsecondary tuition fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins, Mr Free, Mr Howe, Mr Kent and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. The hotel industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of the three basic needs of life: a place to cat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.

3224 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Petitions

2. The hotel industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The hotel industry is almost entirely within the private sector and makes a large contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The hotel industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The hotel industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry's 5811 hotels in Australia.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian hotel industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the hotel industry to pass on such increases to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
11. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates:
12. The hotel industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:
1. Recognise the importance and place of the Australian Hotel industry in the social and economic life of the nation.
2. Accept that the viability of the hotel industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the hotel needs of the nation in this period of growing population and increasing tourism.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fisher and Mr Jacobi.
Petitions received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
A substantial contribution to Australia's economy by the payment of taxation and to the quality of life of fellow Australians, is made by parents in the work-force who have preschool children.
Taxation relief for adequate child-care is necessary to enable these parents to avail themselves of child-care facilities in order to take paid employment.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that tax-payers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other taxpayers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(1) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-classified under Therapeutic Agents (not under "Cosmetics" as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
1. Uphold the principle that the seeds and cuttings of plants are a public resource and a common heritage to all and that accordingly seeds should be freely available to all, freely multipliable, able to be sold, exchanged, exported and imported by anyone who wishes. This is seen as a matter of national food security.
2. Recognise that plant breeding is a highly co-operative venture often involving private enterprise at the very last stages after basic seed collection, storage, and research has been publicly funded.
3. In view of the aforementioned paragraphs, recognize that any system giving 'property' or ownership rights over seeds to individuals, organisations or enterprises is inappropriate and unjust.

Petitions

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3225

4. Recognise that legislation establishing plant patenting schemes overseas has had serious adverse effects namely:
(i) a slowing-down of scientific information exchange and exchanges in basic plant breeding materials, that is, germ plasm,
(ii) subordination and/or curtailment of public breeding programmes,
(iii) farmer unrest at seed prices, (iv) monopoly control of seed production and sales has
passed into the hands of giant petrochemical and drug corporations also marketing crop chemicals, (v) increased uniformity of crop varieties leading to a vulnerability to pest and disease attack.
5. Reject any proposal to legislate for any system such as the drafted Plant Variety Rights Act, which gives exclusive ownership rights over seeds to individuals, organisations or enterprises.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham.
Petition received.
Privacy and Personal Information
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Personal Information discussion paper number 14, brought down by the Law Reform Commission in June 1980, undermines the family unit and the authority of parents, which is the Christian basis of our society, by proposing that between 12 and 16 years, a child should be entitled to object to disclosure of information to a parent.
It is your petitioners' sincere belief that:
(a) an adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a mature enough stage of life to decide whether or not the disclosure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.
(b) as a record keeper has no responsibility for the child, and as his moral standards may be different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.
(c) a parent has a unique position which may enable him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the right to guide the child in the direction he/she feels fit.
Your petitioners thllrefore pray:
That the Members of the House of.Representatives will reject the recomendation of the Law Reform Commission and find some other means to protect children from the excessive abuse of some pai:ents.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrDobie.
Petition received.
Proposed New Constitution
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we believe that Australia's constitution is undemocratic and should be replaced by a democratic constitution, particularly as regards the new standard for regulation of Vitamin and Mineral Supplements.

We believe:
1. This legislation will curb our individual freedom to care for our own health according to need, environment, climate, etc.
2. These substances have proven their efficacy in maintaining health rather than destroying it and should remain freely available.
3. Why curb these substances while other noxious and toxic substances are freely available to the obvious thorough detriment of our society-e.g. commercial alcohol and tobacco.
This new constitution should be drafted at a representative directly elected people's convention following extensive public debate, and then put to a referendum of the people. The petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament, as a matter of urgency, will help to promote such public debate and will arrange for the holding of such a people's convention and referendum.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrGroom.
Petition received.

Health Insurance
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programs will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a system of health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHowe.
Petition received.

Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels

To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of

Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The

petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully

showeth:

'

Owing to an overwhelming and continuous demand by the Australian people for a cruise service within the economic scope of the working man and his family, we request the Government to lift the ban placed on Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels entering Australian Ports.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Mountford.

Petition received.

Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Your petitioners

3226 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Petitions

most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should:
Take action as it deems appropriate to ensure the continuing functioning of the Betsy Women's Refuge and the network of shelters in Australia.
We ask that the Federal Government acknowledge that 'Betsy' and its counterparts provide housing and care for women and children in violent situations, and the Government agree to meet the financial responsibilities for continued and effective Refuge functioning.
The Federal Government should be informed that one in every five applicants are not accommodated at the Betsy Refuge due to overcrowding or full occupancy.
We therefore petition for full and adequate funding, and as petitioners for this we humbly pray.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
l. Present income tax laws discriminate against singleincome families.
2. It is unfair that the less equally the income of a family is divided between spouses, the more tax is payable by the family.
3. All marriages should be recognised as partnerships by allowing spouses to divide their joint income for taxation purposes.
4. The family, which is the natural and fundamental unit of society, should be an economic unit in tax laws.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament will:
Reform income tax laws to allow the joint income of husband and wife to be equally divided between them for taxation purposes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Theophanous.
Petition received.
Defence Service Home Loans
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the members of the Women's Services of the 1939-45 War not at present considered eligible for Defence Service Home Loans should qualify as 'Australian Soldiers' under the Defence Service Homes Act. They volunteered for service with the Naval, Military and Air Forces, serving wherever they were sent in whatever capacity they were required and yet are refused Defence Service Home Loans.
They took the oath to resist His Majesty's enemies which meant to fight His Majesty's enemies, and although not used in actual combat in war zones, they were available for that use and had a sufficiently grave need. arisen would have been used, to serve with distinction as have women of other lands.
In accordance with the Acts and Regulations of the period, the women of the Military Forces had enlisted for service anywhere, some of the Naval women to sail in any waters, others with service on warships optional, while the women of the Airforce could have been sent to Papua New Guinea or other territories under the control or care of Australia.

Ex-servicemen of the Royal Australian Navy, the Australian Imperial Force and the Royal Australian Air Force who volunteered in the 1939-45 War but were not sent to War Zones are granted home loans. Not to grant eligibility to all Ex-servicewomen of 1939-45 War is unjust and unfair.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you favourably consider amending the Defence Service Homes Act by repealing Sub-section 4 (2A) (b) (c) (d) of the Principal Act as amended by No. 137 of 1978, and grant eligibility to all members of the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service, the Australian Women's Army Service, the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force, the Australian Army Medical Women's Service, and the Voluntary Aid Detachment of 1939-45 War.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMI'White.
Petition received.
Wollongong: Multicultural Broadcasting
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the electors and residents within the City of Wollongong, (State of New South Wales), respectfully showeth that:
(1) Despite promises from the Government Radio 2EA did not begin transmission in Wollongong until 1979. (2) Wollongong has one of the largest migrant populations in Australia, in that over half the population are born overseas or have one or more parents born overseas.
(3) We cannot receive Channel O.
(4) The cost of privately installing UHF aerials is prohibitive for many migrants in this City.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives use its powers to ensure that a repeater transmitter be opened in Wollongong on both UHF and VHF bands.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrBaume.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives, Federal Parliament, Canberra. The humble petition of the undersigned residents of Salisbury in the State of South Australia.
Petition that: Competition between banks and finance companies by giving ever increasing interest rates to obtain the investors' capital, is against the nation's best interest. It penetrates every form of activity by constant demands for higher wages to meet these explosive conditions.
It is an intolerable burden to the younger generation of family life, that by necessity arc the recipients of these excessive interest rates that are catastrophic to house purchase and natural living.
We therefore respectfully petition for an urgent annual realistic controlled reduction right 'across the board' on all existing and future interest rate agreements. With a maximum interest percentage ceiling on investors' capital, and a scale of interest charges for loans as appropriate.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honouTable House will give effect to our submissions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.

Petitions

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3227

Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Parramatta respectfully showeth:
that beer is the drink of the working man and that any increase in the excise on beer will place it in the lUxury bracket and beyond the means of ordinary people. Australians are already the highest beer taxed people in the world; further increases in beer prices will both harm the brewing industry and fuel inflation.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government not proceed with any proposals it may have to increase the excise on beer in the 1981-82 Federal Budget as such a move would be unacceptable to all beer drinking voters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr John Brown.
Petition received.
Staging of American B52 Bombers
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned in the Northern Territory respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base for American B52 bombers:
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52s:
(b) Carried nuclear weapons (b) Were engaged in bombing missions against another
State. Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy. Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region. Jeopardises the welfare of the Citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents. Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of Peace in the pacific region and violates Australia's committment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrKent.
Petition received.
Garden Island, Western Australia
To the Rt. Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The

humble petition of undersigned citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That although cottages Numbers 11, 12, 13 and 14 on Garden Island in no way impede construction at HMAS Stirling, they are now required by the Department of Administrative Services to move by 30th June, 1981.
Your petitioners humbly pray that:
Cottages Numbers II, 12, 13 and 14 on Garden Island be allowed to remain and to move only when the remaining northern end cottages do so.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrShack.
Petition received.
POLICE ACTION
Notice of Motion
Mr FRY (Fraser)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House deplores and condemns the blatant display of double standards of this Government, and particularly the Minister for Administrative Services, in seeking to apply the law differently to different sections of the community as evidenced by the failure of the police to take action against Royal Military College Duntroon cadets who have committed serious offences against citizens of the Australian Capital Territoryas compared with police action against political demonstrators within the precincts of the Parliament.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS: TELECOM DISPUTE
Mr HAWKE-I preface my question by reminding the Minister for Communications that he regarded it as appropriate and necessary to have considerable communications and consultation with industry representatives before finalising amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act. In that context, I ask the Minister whether he will explain to the House why he has refused repeated requests from the Telecom Australia union, the Australian Telecommunications Employees Association, to meet with it prior to the current dispute, including the telex of 7 May which said, in part:
As part of an endeavour to resolve our claims without a major industrial dispute the Association is seeking an opportunity to meet with you in the near future to have discussions regarding the salary levels of trades and technical staff in areas within your responsibility as Minister for Communications.
Mr SINCLAIR-I am grateful to the honourable gentleman for giving me a chance to say to the House that in spite of the very real concern that we have about the failure of a number of employees of Telecom Australia and, apparently, of Australia Post to undertake their responsibilities, the Government has encouraged Telecom and Australia Post to continue their negotiations with the unions. We have done that in spite of

3228 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

of Australia Post to undertake their responsibilities, the Government has encouraged Telecom and Australia Post to continue their negotiations with the unions. We have done that in spite of what I regard as the extreme provocation by their continued bans imposed against any common sense and against the proper procedures available through the anomalies conference of the conciliation and arbitration process. We are appalled at the irresponsibiliy of those concerned and hope that, in spite of the degree to which Telecom and Australia Post have tried to pursue responsible negotiations-the unions seemed to have moved away from them-even now a responsible conclusion will be reached.
The honourable gentleman seems to feel, in his question, that the Government should be involved in industrial negotiations of that kind. In fact, I have seen representatives of ATEA on a number of occasions. I will continue to do so, but not in a context where the Minister, in any way, can be drawn into trying to resolve an industrial conflict. I am prepared to talk in general with them about matters that affect their well-being and about the effective operation of those instrumentalities. I do not believe it is appropriate for me, as Minister, to become personally involved in that type of an industrial negotiation when there are proper conciliation and arbitration processes available to which they should have turned in the first place.
PASSPORT APPLICATIONS
Mr RUDDOCK-Has the Minister for Foreign Affairs received a significant number of complaints from clergymen and others who now find that, according to the passport application form, they are no longer a proper functionary listed for completing certificates regarding applicants? Were regulations made to effect this change or was it an error or omission in the design and printing of new forms? If it is the latter, may clergymen still complete certificates?
Mr STREETI have received representations on this matter, including representations from the honourable member, since the passport application form was changed in August last year. My departmental records show that when the application form was revised in August ministers of religion were unintentionally omitted from the categories of people who may complete the certificate regarding applicants. The reinclusion of ministers of religion will be considered when the certificate of applicant is next reviewed. I cannot give the honourable member an absolute assurance that they will be included because we are looking at a proposal to change the nature of the certificate. In the meantime I can assure the

honourable member that certificates given by clergymen are still perfectly acceptable.
GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS: CAPITAL GRANTS
Dr JENKINS-I draw the attention of the Minister for Education to the most recent Schools Commission report for 1982-84 and, in particular, to a survey conducted by the Commission into building needs in Australian schools. The survey indicated, as stated on page 299 of that report:
. . . the total cost of' providing facilities in the existing schools to meet minimum basic educational needs in Australia's present stock of Government schools is likely to be approximately $1,360 million.
The Commission then recommended that the Commonwealth increase its contribution to government school capital grants by 10 per cent per annum for the next triennium and invite the States to act similarly. Can the Minister inform the House of the precise reason or reasons that he has now decided to reduce capital funding for government schools by 5 per cent?
Mr FIFE--The responsibility for financing government schools throughout Australia rests largely with the State governments. For some years, of course, the Commonwealth has made specific purpose grants to the States both for recurrent and capital purposes. Indeed, as a result of the announcement that I made yesterday in respect of capital funds for government schools it is a fact that the Commonwealth will be continuing to provide approximately one-third of all moneys spent on school buildings throughout Australia. That figure is an average figure across the Commonwealth and it is plus or minus in various States according to the amounts that the States put forward. In the context of indicating to the honourable member and to the House the prime responsibility for financing government schools throughout Australia, let me say that the Commonwealth also provides substantial sums to the States by way of tax reimbursement grants. It is up to the States, of course, to order their own priorities.
I would like also to take this opportunity to refer to another aspect of the statement that I made yesterday that has relevance to the question asked by the honourable member. It relates to a procedure that has existed for the past few years whereby the States have had a flexibility to transfer funds from specific purpose grants for recurrent purposes to capital purposes or, vice versa, from capital to recurrent. Most States have taken advantage of this flexibility in the past, but in the last three or four years only the New South Wales

Questions Without Notice

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3229

Government has taken advantage of this proBecause of the report in the Australian this morn-

cedure. As has been pointed out by the honouring I thought that the public record should be put

able member for Macarthur on a number of right.

occasions, the New South Wales Government has transferred millions of dollars from the capital grants provided by the Commonwealth to recur-

SCHOOL TO WORK TRANSITION PROGRAM

rent. That has severely disadvantaged many Mr FREE-I direct my question to the

schools in New South Wales that could otherwise Minister for Education. I remind him of his state-

have had either new schools or new school ment on 14 May that 'all State governments

buildings.

strongly support the School to Work Transition

Program'. I ask the Minister: Firstly, have the

INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS: TELECOM States made any direct financial contribution to

DISPUTE

this Program; and, secondly, can the Minister ex-

Mr COLEMAN-Will the Prime Minister inform the House whether he has intervened in the current Telecom dispute?

plain why in the face of the alleged strong support of the States he has found it necessary to drop the requirement of matching State contributions, which was an initial part of this Program?

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The short answer to that question is no. The communication that I had with Mr Dolan on 23 May on other issues seems to have been confused with current issues in one report this morning. On 23 May I wrote to Mr Dolan suggesting that it might be desirable to bring forward the first of a series of regular discussions that the Minister for Industrial Relations and other Government Ministers, as necessarydepending upon the agenda-will be prepared to have with the Australian Council of Trade Unions. Honourable members might recall that on about 23 May the ACTU executive had made certain decisions about not co-operating with an inquiry, which all Premiers had discussed and which, I think, basically all Premiers wanted to support, into the wage fixation system and the capacity of Australia to achieve non-inflationary growth and to lift the living standards of all Australian families and all Australian working men and women. This was something which the Premier of Tasmania certainly supported in the terms which have been discussed between Premiers. I hope that New South Wales will support the proposal. I believe it has no objection in principle.

Mr FIFE-The honourable member in framing his question has indicated a complete misunderstanding of the facts of the matter. For the information of the honourable member-and to remind other honourable members. I point out that in 1979 the Commonwealth announced its intention to provide additional substantial resources for the School to Work Transition Program. As a result of consultation between the Commonwealth Ministers of the time and State Ministers, it was identified that additional effort in this area-I put emphasis on the words 'additional effort'-was required to the tune of approximately $250m spread over a period of five years. The Commonwealth undertook to provide all the funds required in the initial year of 1980 and also to provide the substantial funds needed for 1981. However, it did say that it would require the States to provide matching funds on a dollar for dollar basis for 1982, 1983 and 1984. Up to the present time the States have not agreed to provide these matching funds, despite the fact that in 1979 they agreed with the Commonwealth that additional effort was needed in this area. So the Commonwealth has now said that if the States are

Obviously the co-operation of the ACTU would be a significant factor in the success of that exercise. It was not regarded as a short term, one-off exercise. In addition to that, there were

{lot prepared to provide these additional matching funds it will earmark some of the recurrent funds that go from the Commonwealth to the States for general purposes.

concerns about the 35-hour week and decisions The honourable member, in the first part of his

that the ACTU had also made about that at that question, asked whether the States have made any

time. For that reason I wrote to Mr Dolan on 23 contribution in this area. The answer is yes. Most,

May. I learned afterwards that he had gone overif not all, States have been conducting transition

seas, maybe the day before, and that perhaps the programs for some time. That is why I placed em-

ACTU had not passed on the letter to him. I do phasis on the words 'additional effort'. In 1979

not know if that is the way in which the ACTU there was a recognition by the Commonwealth

always used to work. In case it had not passed on that there were some transition programs in pro-

the letter to him, I telexed to him a few days ago cess throughout the Commonwealth, but we

the substance of the letter and the reasons for it, needed this additional effort and so asked the

none of which was related to the Telecom dispute. States to match us in the way I have outlined.

3230 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

PARLIAMENT HOUSE: CARAVAN PARK
Mr TUCKEY~-Does the Minister for the Capital Territory propose action to formalise Canberra's latest caravan park, now located in front of Parliament House, so that the obvious benefits of free camping will be available to all Australians? If so, does he propose that it will still be necessary to display a protest sign to gain entry?
Mr HODGMAN-I think honourable members on both sides of this House would always respect and uphold the right of individual citizens and groups to bring their views to the attention of the Parliament. Nobody disputes that basic right. But I must say that the question raised by the honourable member involves a matter which is of considerable concern not just to me, not just to the Government but to the Parliament. This matter has been drawn to my attention by a number of members from both sides of the House and from another place. The situation is-l believe those who are presently camped on the lawns in front of Parliament House would be well aware of it-that camping in that area is in fact illegal and has been for a considerable period pursuant to the provisions of the Trespass on Com-- monwealth Lands Ordinance 1932. I further believe that the people who are camped there are also aware of the fact that the Ordinance provides for their removal. The fact of the matter is that the Ordinance provides for inspectors appointed by the Minister or indeed the police to remove persons who camp unlawfully in that area, a~d their tents. It may well be that those who are m that area are wishing for that event to occur because it would bring about a considerable amount of national publicity. There is a very serious aspect to the situation which relates to the dignity of the Parliament and particularly to the precincts of the Parliament.
Opposition members inteljecting-
Mr HODGMAN-It is interesting to noi~ the attitude of the Opposition. I have every rea:"n to believe that some irresponsible members !);' the Opposition are encouraging or exhorting these people to remain there knowing it is in breach of the law. I want to draw attention to the quality of the precincts of the Parliament and in particular the condition of the lawns. This is a matter of very considerable importance. Whether the campers are aware of it or not those lawns have to be cared for and require regular watering. The campers are in fact camped in the midst of in-ground sprinklers which have to be used to keep those lawns in proper order. At the moment the City Parks Division of the Department of the Capital Territory

has not turned on the sprinklers. However, very serious concern is being expressed that permanent damage will be done to those lawns. I make an appeal to those who are camped on the lawns: They have made their point; they have indicated publicly their point of view. Would they be go?d enough now, in a spirit of good will and recogl1lSing the dignity of the Parliament, to move. I do not want to be placed in a situation where the City Parks Division tells me it has to turn on the sprinklers. The City Parks Division has advised me that the best form of sprinkling to keep those lawns in order is a five minute sprinkle every hour
on the hour.

I ask, in the spirit of good will which I hope

exists between both sides of this House and the

ladies and gentlemen out on the lawn, would they

be good enough to pack up their tents quietly and

fade away. They have made their point. We do

not want confrontation. I simply say in conclusion

hthoant~utrhaeblpeoimntehmabveinrgfobreeFnrmaseard

e-I will

am sure the agree with

me-it is appropriate for the honourable member

for Fraser and other honourable members in-

volved to go out to tell the people on the lawns to

move quietly away. I am certain the House would

not want to see a situation develop in which the

lawns are permanently damaged.

CHURCHLANDS COLLEGE
Mr DAWKINS-Is the Minister for Education to open a new facility at the Churchlands College in Perth tomorrow? I remind the Minister that in March he opened new premises for the Curriculum Development Centre and a new building at the Newcastle College of Advanced Education and then in April threatened to close both. Given that the staff and students at Churchlands College are understandably apprehensive-indeed, I might say that they are numb with fright, to borrow a phrase-can the Minister assure them that his visit there does not herald the imminent closure of the College?
Mr FIFE-The short answer to the honourable gentleman's question is yes. I take the opportunity to assure him and the students and staff at Churchlands that their college is not about to be closed. The honourable gentleman's question highlights the very: large a~ount of mone,Y ~hat this Government IS spendmg on new bUIldmgs around the Commonwealth. I am grateful to him for highlighting this fact.
The honourable gentleman referred to the threatened closure, as he put it, of the Newcastle College of Advanced Education. Let me repe~t for his benefit, for the benefit of members of thIS House and, in particular, for the benefit of the

Questions Without Notice

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3231

people of Newcastle and district, that provided have not been given an opportunity to bid for the

the New South Wales Government agrees to property.

bring the University of Newcastle and the Newcastle College of Advanced Education under one governing body, both bodies will continue to be funded by this Government.

It should be borne in mind that a number of acquisitions-not all of themhave occurred in areas where there has been no interest on the part of Australians and where benefits are clearly

FOREIGN INVESTMENT REVIEW BOARD GUIDELINES
Mr IAN CAMERON-I direct a question to the Treasurer. Why has it been necessary to increase to $350,000 the minimum that the Foreign Investment Review Board allows to be invested in Australia and, in particular, the Darling Downs, without review? I point out to the House that the Darling Downs is a small portion of my electorate, about the size of Tasmania. It is populated by the family farms of which the Germans have taken--

available as a consequence of the acquisitions. As the honourable gentleman knows, it is our policy to foster a climate in which foreign investment is welcome in this country whilst preserving a keen eye to national benefits. I can assure the honourable gentleman and other honourable members who are interested in this matter that I am keeping a particularly close watch on the level of foreign investment in real estate in Australia. I am conscious of the concern that the honourable gentleman expresses and, if necessary, as a result of that very close monitoring I shall be proposing to the Government changes to the policy.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Maranoa will be out of order if he continues giving information.

BROADCASnNG AND TELEVISION AMENDMENT BILL: FOREIGN OWNERSHIP PROVISIONS

Mr IAN CAMERON-I will continue my question, Mr Speaker. With concern voiced throughout Australia against rapidly increasing foreign land ownership, what is the Government doing to control excessive purchase of land by foreigners?

Mr HAYDEN-Can the Minister for Communications tell the House whether Thomas Nationwide Transport Ltd, the Murdoch company behind Channel lOin Melbourne, is a company which would not be deemed to be foreign controlled under the foreign shareholding

Mr HOWARD-I thank the honourable member for Maranoa for his question. The adjustment that was made in the threshold below which real estate acquisitions of a one-off character do not require approval took account of the increases

provisions of the proposed broadcasting and television amendments but which would be under the present provisions? Was a section therefore inserted in the Bill for the benefit of TNT and Mr Murdoch?

which have occurred in property values since that threshold was introduced. On that basis it can be seen as a sensible and logical response to the change in property values, bearing in mind the very rapid escalation which has occurred in certain parts of Australia including, in particular, the metropolitan area of Sydney.

Mr SINCLAlR--Although I would be delighted to give the honourable gentleman legal opinion on any occasion, this is not the place to do so. There are certainly changes to the ownership provisions within the broadcasting and television legislation about to be introduced into the House. Those changes lay down, in a more precise way,

The honourable gentleman's question raised more general issues. I say to him and to the House that I believe there has been an increase in the level of concern felt in the Australian community about the incidence of property acquisitions by overseas interests. That is a proper concern. The rules governing acquisitions of property under our foreign investment policy are designed to reduce the number of speculative purchases. In many cases the rules are in outright opposition. In administering the policy a test of national benefit is applied. So far as rural property is concerned, there is a firm administrative requirement that

the position, as I understand it, that now applies. I am not aware of the structure of ownership of the company to which the honourable gentleman refers. I understand that there is some overseas ownership in a number of companies, including a number operating in the broadcasting area. He will know also that an overseas citizen but Australian resident who owns a licence has received some publicity in recent times. A clause included within the legislation ensures that any existing owner is able to continue in the ownership that the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal has determined should be conferred on him.

Australians be given an opportunity to buy the I am not certain of the exact circumstances of

property. On many occasions proposals are dethe company to which the honourable gentleman ferred or refused on the basis that Australians refers. Certainly, the intention is to ensure that

3232 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

Australian citizens henceforth will be able to hold a licence and that no one else, other than those who have a continuing right to one, will be able to do so. With respect to companies, the definition of Australian ownership will ensure that Australian companies similarly own the licence. Nothing in the legislation in any way impinges on the continued restraints that are contained within the foreign investment review legislation to which the Treasurer referred a moment ago.
PARLIAMENT HOUSE: SECURITY
Mr INNES-My question is directed to you, Mr Speaker. Is it now a fact that the Parliament House Security Co-ordinator, Mr McLaren, takes precedence over the Serjeant-at-Arms in this House and the Usher of the Black Rod in another place? If so, why did this happen, and when did it happen? Is it now a fact that the Security Coordinator and/or the police take precedence over the officers running the business of this Parliament?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman has based his question on a completely mistaken set of facts. The security adviser has no precedence over the Serjeant or the Usher. They are within different departments. The Serjeant is part of--
Mr Innes-Who is the first point of reference?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Melbourne will remain silent. The honourable member has asked his question and I will answer it. The Serjeant is within the House of Representatives and the Usher is within the Department of the Senate, whereas the security adviser is within the Joint House Department. As the honourable member will know, the Joint House Department provides services that relate to both chambers. The Serjeant and the Usher answer directly to me and the President for matters around the House, as does the security adviser. There is no question of precedence. The question is simply one of how the issue to be handled can be best handled. I would like to take this opportunity of saying in relation to the Serjeant, Mr Cochran, that I believe his handling of the situation here, both on Tuesday of last week and on Tuesday of this week, was superb in terms of his coolness and his concern for the preservation of the dignity of this Parliament.
FAMILIES: GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE
Mr GOODLUCK-Is the Prime Minister aware that there are many families in Australia crying out for increased family allowances and additional personal tax concessions? Will the Prime Minister make absolutely certain that the Government is not over-pressured by the State

Premiers, particularly the Premier of Tasmania, who has scattered money like a windmill to the detriment--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will ask for information and not provide it.
Mr GOODLUCK-Of the legitimate demands of families that the Government is dedicated to helping?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There is a good deal of substance in the honourable gentleman's question. The short answer to the first two parts of his question is certainly yes. Of course, this provided a large part of the reasoning behind the Commonwealth's decisions at the Premiers Conference. The honourable gentleman is right to draw attention to these matters because the Loan Council meeting is coming forward in a few weeks' time. At that time the Commonwealth and the States acting together in Loan Council will have to determine the total level of borrowings that will be appropriate for the public authorities in Australia. Whether that is sought to be done within the Australian markets or overseas, it necessarily has an impact on interest rates in Australia. It has an impact on the money supply and thereby on inllation. There is not the slightest doubt that the greater the amount for which authority is given to the States' borrowing authorities or through infrastructure programs, the more pressure there will be on the capital markets of Australia, and the more difficult it will thereby be on those who want to borrow to buy a home, to establish a business or to run a farm.
There is a very direct correlation between the level of borrowings by all governments and the pressures on the capital markets and the access to those markets which ordinary Australians may have for themselves in the pursuit of their own interests, whether it is building or buying a home or running a small business. The Commonwealth will certainly be very conscious of these matters when it meets with the States in a few weeks' time. The honourable gentleman is right to bring public notice to bear on these matters. I hope that Mr Lowe will also pay attention to the conflict of interest--
Mr Good luck-He had better not spend money on monuments.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I have no doubt that the Tasmanian Premier may sometimes want to spend the money on a monument, but the Commonwealth will not encourage him in doing so. I can only suggest that the honourable gentleman urge restraint on the Premier of Tasmania because that will certainly be in the best interests of all Tasmanians, the ordinary people of

Questions Without Notice

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3233

Tasmania-the small business people, the people wanting to buy a home and the people wanting to run their own farms. I hope that the honourable gentleman's advocacy is successful because it will make the Treasurer's task and my task easier on 19 June.
PARLIAMENT HOUSE: SECURITY Mr SPEAKER-Before I call an honourable member, reflecting on the answer I gave to the honourable member for Melbourne, it may seem that, not having mentioned my satisfaction with Mr McLaren's role, I should do so in case it is thought that I had in any way had dissatisfaction with Mr McLaren. The situation is quite the reverse. Mr McLaren, the former Commissioner of Police for the Northern Territory, has discharged his obligations and duties here admirably.
LAW OF THE SEA CONVENTION

I asked yesterday of the Acting Minister for Defence. The Minister made some statements in Malaysia and Singapore about the future of Australia's deployment of Mirage jets in those two countries. Can the Minister outline to the House what decisions the government has made on this matter? In particular, can he indicate what are the implications ofthose decisions for the fivepower defence arrangement and the integrated air defence system? Furthermore, can he indicate what consideration has been given to the position of the locally engaged staff at Butterworth, who have been dependent on employment with the Australian forces?
Mr KILLEN-Mr Speaker-Mr Hayden--How is the Empire going? Mr KILLEN-I remind the Leader of the Opposition that I am still in a satchel-swinging mood.

Mr LIONEL BOWEN-My question is directed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. Apart from the damage done to Australia's national interest, is the Minister aware that the delays in the conclusion of the law of the sea negotiations has caused grave concern amongst our Pacific Island neighbours whose economic and strategic interests are vitally affected? For example, Fiji loses the benefit of some thousands of square miles of economic return from the oceans. Will the Minister now agree that this House should unanimously adopt the motion of which I gave notice on 26 May and by so doing follow the precedent set by Canada of encouraging the United States of America to agree speedily to the conclusion of the negotiations on the Law of the Sea Convention?
Mr STREET-I have on several occasions, both in this House and outside it, expressed the view that I hope the current review of the Law of the Sea Convention being undertaken by the new United States Administration will be completed as soon as possible. We understand that it needs to do it. Equally, we regard our interests, as well as those of other nations, as being affected by delays in adopting the Convention. As far as I am aware, there has been a bipartisan attitude in this House to this question. I have had a look at the wording of the motion moved by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and, whilst there are some difficulties with its precise wording, I believe it should not be too difficult, with a few amendments, to get a wording which would be acceptable to both sides.
DEPLOYMENT OF MIRAGE SQUADRONS
Mr FALCONER-My question is directed to the Minister for Defence and follows the question

Mr Hayden-Well, I have my new guard up.
Mr KILLEN-Do not worry about the new guard. The Leader of the Opposition should keep his eyes on the new shunter from Wills. I acknowledge the very sustained interest that the honourable member for Casey has shown regarding the Australian presence at Butterworth and the deployment of Mirage aircraft to Tengah. May I say to him and to the House that these are matters that I had the opportunity of discussing with the distinguished Prime Minister of Malaysia, senior officers within his Government and the Malaysian chiefs of staff, and similarly with Singaporean authorities.
The honourable gentleman will be aware that the Government has decided to re-equip the Royal Australian Air Force with a new tactical fighter. Several requirements will be attached to the implementation of that decision. Firstly, the existing Mirage aircraft must be refurbished in order to enable them to occupy the interregnum between the decision-making and the actual acquisition of the new aircraft. In addition, pilots must be trained on the new aircraft and ground crews must be trained in the servicing of them. We have indicated to Malaysian and Singaporean authorities that with the refurbishment of the first squadron we will nevertheless maintain a presence at Butterworth and at Tengah. I give that clear assurance to the honourable gentleman.
It is our intention to seek to withdraw the first squadron some time in 1983. I must perforce excuse myself from giving a definite date, but it will be some time in 1983, depending on when we can make the decision regarding the new tactical fighter. We have also indicated to Malaysian and Singaporean authorities that somewhere around

3234 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

1984 we will make a decision regarding the second squadron of aircraft. I hasten to assure the House that, subject of course to the continuation of agreement from the Malaysian and Singaporean authorities, we will maintain a presence in the area. I have the clear assurances of the Prime Minister of Malaysia and of Singaporean Ministers that that remains a most agreeable circumstance to them.
As far as the intergrated air defence system is concerned, Australia has played a significant role in the maintenance of that system over a long period. We will continue so to do. In addition we deploy through Butterworth a small number of long range maritime patrol aircraft. Again, provided that meets the wishes of the Malaysian Government, that activity will be maintained.
I would hope that my honourable friend would acknowledge the fact that since the five-power pact agreement was embarked upon, both Malaysia and Singapore have developed a significant and-if I may say with respect-a very professional air force capability. That must be acknowledged. Finally, I say to the honourable gentleman and to the House that as far as the civilians who are employed at Butterworth are concerned, I made it quite clear to Malaysian authorities that we would negotiate to see that there would not be any abrupt severance of their services and that their return to other forms of activity would be done with a minimum of dislocation.
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT Mr COHEN-Did the Prime Minister or his
office supply a draft copy or other descriptive material on the Broadcasting and Television Act amendment proposals to Murdoch interests or representatives during the first half of May?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Minister for Communications has indicated that the Government has had discussions with a number of people concerning the preparation of this legislation. I have been involved in discussions with more than one group of interests in relation to the legislation.
Mr Lionel Bowen-I'll bet! Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Yes. The test of legislation is the test of the Bills that are introduced into this House. Whether they are right or wrong will be judged and debated in this House. It would be an odd government indeed which introduced legislation on technical matters of this kind and did not consult widely with those people who have a particular interest and a very significant stake--

Mr Hayden-Did you provide documentation?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Obviously if there are to be discussions, as the Minister for Communications has indicated, of matters which are highly technical, you have to have those discussions with the proposals in front of you. You cannot just do it on the basis of statements alone. Quite plainly, there have been discussions and there ought to have been discussions. I think it is an odd matter for the honourable gentlemen to question.
TRADE WITH SOUTH AMERICA Mr O'KEEFE-Can the Minister for Trade and Resources advise the House of the purpose of his forthcoming visit to Argentina and Brazil? In particular, can he indicate what trade matters he will be discussing?
Mr ANTHONY-On 7 June I will be leaving for Argentina and Brazil. I believe it is a very timely and important visit as far as bilateral trade is concerned. This is a very extensive and growing market, particularly with Brazil. For example, Brazil's steel industry is to double in the next four years and it is keen to source from Australia some supplies of coking coal for that industry. Australia does share common interests with Brazil as a major exporter of a number of commodities. This situation also applies in relation to Argentina. Australia and Argentina are amongst the biggest exporters of meat, wool and wheat. With Brazil, we are the largest exporters of iron ore, bauxite and sugar. There is a need for closer co-operation and understanding in the marketing of these commodities. Already I have had officials over there talking with Brazilian officials, but I believe a political visit does show the high priority we give to a better relationship in international marketing of these commodities.
In addition, views have been expressed by some of the Ministers and officials from both of those countries concerning the behaviour of the European Economic Community in the dumping of its surplus agricultural commodities on third markets. This is a point of view shared very much by Australia. The effect that this dumping is having on efficient producers of agriculture around the world is quite horrendous. There is a need for close co-operation and a concerted approach as to how we handle the EEC in this sort of behaviour. It is within these areas of activity that I believe it is important that Australia should have a close relationship with both Brazil and Argentina in the interests of our producers and in the interests of international trade.

Great Barrier Reef' Oil Exploration

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3235

REQUESTS FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Parliamentary Departments
Mr SPEAKER-I understand the honourable members for Capricornia, Batman, Henty and Lalor intend to lodge requests for detailed information relating to the administration of parliamentary departments.
Dr EVERINGHAM-Mr Speaker, I seek information in relation to the operation of each of the parliamentary departments.
Mr HOWE-Mr Speaker, I seek information in relation to the Department of the Parliamentary Library.
Mrs CHILD-Mr Speaker, I seek information in relation to the operation of the Department of the Parliamentary Library.
Mr BARRY JONES-I also seek information in respect of the Department of the Parliamentary Library.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable members will give their questions to the Cleric If they are in order they will be printed in Hansard. In due course I will make a reply which will be printed.
BILLS RETURNED FROM SENATE
The following Bills were returned from the Senate without amendment or requests:
Housing Assistance Bill 1981.
Customs Tariff Validation Bil11981.
Airlines Agreement Bill 1981.
ARMY HOUSING, TOWNSVILLE Report of Public Works Committee
Mr BUNGEY (Canning)--In accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, I present the report relating to the following proposed work:
Provision of Army Housing at Townsville, Queensland.
Ordered that the report be printed.
GREAT BARRIER REEF: OIL EXPLORA TION
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The inexcusable delay in declaring further sections of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park and the increasing danger to the Reef from the intention of the Queensland and Federal Governments to permit oil exploration and drilling in adjacent waters.

T call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.

More than the number a/members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-

MI' WEST (Cunningham) (10.23)-Over six years ago the Federal Labor Government passed the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act.

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:

That the business of the day be called on.

MI' SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Cunningham will resume his seat.

Mr West-What is the problem?

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.

Mr West-Do not tell me that the Government has actually moved that this important matter not be heard by this House?

Mr SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Cunningham. According to the Standing Orders, when it is moved that the business of the day be called on, I must immediately, without allowing debate, put that question.

Question put:

That the business of the day be called on.

The House divided,

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

65

Noes

45

Majority

20

AYES
Adermann,A.E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N. A. Bungey, M. H. Cadman. A. G. Cameron, Donald
Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J.D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Goodluek, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. MeD.

Hunl,R.J.D. Hyde,J. M. Jarman,A. W,
Jull,D. P. Katter, R. C. Killen. D.J. Lusher, S. A. I.yneh, Sir Phillip MaeKelbr, M. 1. R. MacKenzie, A. J,
McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar,P. C. I\'ewman, K. E. O'Kcefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter,J.R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair,1. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.

3236 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Bill

AYES
Hicks, N. J. Hodges, 1. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.

Tuckey, C. W. White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel
Brown,John
Brown, Robert Cass,M.H, Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duft-y,M. J.
Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. 1. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B.L lIumphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. 1. Innes, U. E,

Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A.
Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R, J. Kent,L Kerin,J. C.
Klugman, R, E,
McLeay,Leo
McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris,P.E. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J, G, Scholes, G, G, D,
Theophanous, A. C, Uren. T. Wallis,L.G,
West,S,J,
Willis,R,

PAIRS

Drummond, p, H. McMahon, Sir William Nixon, P. J. Viner, R.1.

Campbell,G, Keating, P. J. Scott, J,L. Cross,M.D.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 3 June, on motion by Mr Sinclair:
That the Bill be now read a second time,
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)-Mr Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill, the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill and the Overseas Telecommunications Amendment Bill, as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate,
Mr SPEAKER-Is it the wish of the House to have a cognate debate? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed,
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (10.31)-The House is debating the amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act, the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act, as well as amendments to the Overseas Telecommunications Act. I indicate from the outset that the Opposition does not intend to oppose the amendments to the Overseas Telecommunications Act or the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act; but it will oppose very

vigorously the amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act. In recent times the situation in the national Parliament has been rather like a scene in a bargain bazaar or a street market in Soho, with favours being bought and sold, We have seen the situation in the airline industry in which Ansett Transport Industries, in particular, has been involved in log-rolling through Government back benchers and Ministers in order to get its way in relation to the two airlines agreement. We have seen an extraordinary series of events involving the mm industry, The film industry in the first instance tried to get honoured commitments given before the election. Then the Government tried to get out of those commitments or to amend them very substantially. There has been a lot of haggling and wheeling and dealing in that industry. We have seen in relation to the amendments to the health scheme that the vested interests ,of the health sector~the doctors and the health insurance funds have also been involved in extracting very substantial promises and undertakings from the current Government.
We come now to the Broadcasting and Television Act. The chief trader in the sleazy deals in this area has been, of course, the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair). He has been involved in quite blatant interference in this industry in a way unparalleled in the history of this country, His interference in this industry, his attempt to involve politics in the question of who should obtain and who should keep licences under this Act, flies in the face not only of his Liberal Party predecessors but also his National Country Party predecessors, 1quote from one of his predecessors, the then Postmaster-General, Mr Davidson, who on 19 April 1956 spoke about the importance of avoiding concentration in the industry. He said:
Ownership of commercial TV stations should be in as many hands as practicable and it should not be possible for anyone organisation to obtain control of any substantial number of stations,
Then, in 1960, he said:
The area of mass communications is one in which the Government has consistently taken the stance that there should not be an undue aggregation of power in the hands of any few,
Yet the Minister on this occasion, with his political interference, has one objective and one objective only--to increase the level of concentration in this industry, As I said, his interference in this industry flies in the face of one of his very distinguished Liberal predecessors, Eric Robinson, who at the time he introduced very substantial amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act in 1977, said:

Broadcasting and Television Bill

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3237

The principle of a Broadcasting system not subject to politipersonal integrity of a Minister. He is not free to

cal interference is one of the basic aims of the changes proposed in this Bill.

do that.

But this Minister cares nothing for the sorts of principles which were espoused on that occasion by Eric Robinson. He knew the importance of insisting that the question of who got television or radio licences and who retained them was not a matter to be in the hands of a single Minister; not

Mr DAWKINS-Mr Deputy Speaker, I will go on to justify the claims which I have made, that the Minister has quite blatantly set out to mislead this Parliament and to mislead the public in terms of the real purpose of this legislation. That is beyond dispute.

a matter which could be bought and sold in return Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair will

for other favours. Eric Robinson knew that the hear the honourable member further, but must in-

communications industry was very influential. It sist that this is not the time for personal reflections

is important that it be free and unfettered, that it on any member of this House. If the honourable

be not under the control of any particular politimember is of the mind that a member is answer-

cal party-because the possibilities of patronage able on the grounds mentioned there is another

are immense. The possibilities of deals existing beform through which he can introduce the matter.

tween political parties and those who have subWeare now discussing Bills and the honourable

stantial interests in the communications industry member is required to be relevant to them.

represent a very great danger to the whole democratic system. So Eric Robinson at that time placed-or thought he was placing-the question of who got television and radio licences and who kept them beyond the influence, beyond the manipulation, of Ministers by establishing the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal which had the power to determine who would get licences and who would keep them. The Minister for Communications cares little about the principles espoused by Eric Robinson at that time. He cares even less for the fundamental so-called principles of the Liberal Party which are supposed to ensure that the communications industry remains free from political manipulation. The Minister, fresh from his forgery trials, was doing what he does best--

Mr DAWKINS-I have been setting out to indicate the way in which this Minister, flying in the face of all his predecessors, has set about to involve political interference in the communications industry. He wants to be the one who determines who gets television licences; he wants to be the one who determines who keeps them. Of course, this has been an embarrassing time for him because, as I have said, some people on the Government side are opposed to that process. Some people on the Government side believe in the principles which Eric Robinson espoused in
1977 when he said that there should not be any political interference in this industry and, in fact, that there should be an independent tribunal beyond the reach of sleazy politicians to determine who gets television and radio licences. Of course,

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- the Minister for Communications had a long ap-

Order! The' honourable member for Fremantle prenticeship in this regard. He came to communiwill refrain from making reflections on any cations from the primary industry portfolio where

honourable member.

he was used to pushing around the leaders of the

Mr DAWKINS-That is only a matter of fact. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member's remarks are in breach of the Standing

agricultural industry. They were no match for his fast talk and his loose handling of the truth. He could always get his way with them.

Orders. I call on him to withdraw.
Mr DAWKINS-Mr Deputy Speaker, I will rephrase it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Orderl The honourable member will first withdraw.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fremantle still offends. The honourable member is perfectly free to canvass the hazards attached to leaving powers within the hands of any particular Minister or with the Government, vis-a-vis the Tribunal. He

Mr DAWKINS-I will withdraw in deference is not free to attribute motivation for any of the

to you, Mr Deputy Speaker. The Minister, fresh faults he sees as being implicit in the new pro-

from the trials in which it was alleged that he was visions. The honourable member for Fremantle

involved in forgery, was doing what comes best to may proceed but 1 exhort him to observe the

him-misleading the Parliament and the public, Standing Orders in that respect.

and disguising his real purpose.

Mr DAWKINS-As I was saying, he was used

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The to pushing around the leaders of the agricultural

honourable member persists with a line of debate industry but even they, after years of his slick talk,

which, by its very nature, must reflect upon the got the better of him and, in the end, he had to

3238 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Bill

leave that portfolio. Of course, he has found the area of broadcasting and television a little more complicated and the leaders of the industry a little more intransigent. It took months and months of haggling and disputation before the Minister finally could introduce an amendment to the Broadcasting and Television Act-which was not asked for by anybody; it was not sought by the industry. Indeed, the whole justification of it was a manufacture as far as he was concerned. The real reason, as everybody knows, and there was only ever one reason, was to get Rupert Murdoch off the hook. The problem was that Rupert Murdoch was having difficulty in obtaining the licence of Channel 10 in Melbourne. As a consequence of buying into Ansett Transport Industries Ltd he was able to obtain effective control of the television station in Melbourne so long as the Broadcasting Tribunal approved the transfer of the licence to him. Of course, the trouble was that the Broadcasting Tribunal refused to approve that transfer.
There is no question that the Minister had in mind only one objective when he introduced this legislation. In November he indicated that it was necessary to introduce some amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act. His excuse at that time was twofold. He said that there were some problems)n relation to institutional investors in the communications industry inasmuch as some of them, as a result of purchasing shares in particular companies, had found themselves inadvertently in breach of the Broadcasting and Television Act. He expanded on this in the Parliament on 4 December and indicated the reasons for the amendment. He said that one was the decision by the Broadcasting Tribunal with respect to ChannellO in Melbourne. He went on that the other was the inadvertent transgressions of the provisions of the Act following stock exchange dealings which resulted from the takeover of the Ampol company. There was never any question that the real reason for introducing these amendments was related primarily to the question of Rupert Murdoch's difficulties in obtaining the licence in Melbourne. On 9 April the Minister was interviewed on the Australian Broadcasting Commission show P.M. The Minister was asked the question:
Minister the Opposition has charged that by doing these alterations you have handed ATV Channel Ten to Mr Murdoch on a plate. What's your response?
Inter alia, the Minister said:
There is no truth whatsoever in these amendments being related to any particular application.
The Minister had already admitted on 4 December that that was one of the two primary

purposes for introducing these amendments. This Minister is the master of deception and could not resist another opportunity to mislead us all on this occasion. The Minister set about to change the circumstances in order to improve the chances of Mr Murdoch's obtaining the licence. He set about to change the areas of public interest as defined in the Act.
At the moment there is no definition of what the public interest is. It is up to the Broadcasting Tribunal to determine what questions ought to be considered in relation to public interest. One of the important areas which the Tribunal has always kept in mind is the question of the concentration of influence and the concentration of ownership in the television industry. Even now the Minister is prepared to acknowledge in the current amendments that concentration of influence and concentration of ownership is still an important factor to be kept in mind in the regional areas only. It is confined to the regional areas because this Minister does not care whether there is concentration of influence in the metropolitan areas. The reason that he does not care about that is that it is clearly Mr Murdoch's objective to increase his influence in the industry and, in doing so, reduce the number of licence holders and the sort of diversity of ownership in metropolitan areas. The Minister was quite open about this admission. In one of his rare moments of candour on 4 December in the same answer from which I quoted before, he said:
It-
That is the Government-
is concerned that there should be three major networks operating, if at all possible, in the Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne and Adelaide context.
There it is; it is quite clear. In order to pursue that objective of the Government it was important that Mr Murdoch or one of the other owners of licences in one of the other capital cities obtain the licence in Melbourne. So the Minister is quite disinterested. about the question of concentration of power and concentration of ownership in this very sensitive industry. Of course, he had to keep an eye on the regional interests which have been very important to the National Country Party over many years.
The Government has set about to change the practice which Eric Robinson established whereby the Tribunal had the power to determine what was in the public interest and what was not. The Bill sets out very narrow and exhaustive criteria that have to be considered by the Tribunal in terms of what is and what is not in the public interest. For instance, the first criterion is whether a company or a person is a fit and proper person

Broadcasting and Television Bill

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3239

to hold a licence. It seems to me that that addition mind in terms of what was in the public interest

to the Act is going to open up a Pandora's box. and what was not.

The Tribunal is going to have enormous trouble in working out, in response to representations which will clearly be made from the community about particular applicants, who is and who is not a fit and proper person to hold a licence; either that or the reference is almost entirely meaningless. The Tribunal will probably have to decide that almost everybody is a fit and proper person unless that person has a serious conviction behind him. If that is the case, it does not really represent a real criterion in determining what is and what is not in the public interest.

Again in July 1979 the Tribunal blocked the sale of 2HD in Newcastle on the grounds that it would have too high a concentration in one citythat is, two out of three radio stations and the sole television station. The ATV case in Melbourne was blocked on the grounds that the ownership of the Sydney and Melbourne channels would have given too much power to the 0-10 network. It was the Tribunal taking that decision, using the degree of concentration as the grounds for blocking the transfer of the licence to Mr Murdoch's interests, which gave rise to the necessity for these amend-

The only other area in which the Tribunal has ments. So the Minister has decided that the Tri-

any say and has any right to determine whether a bunal will no longer have any effective discretion

particular application is in the public interest or in the area of the public interest. Of course, he had

not is in respect of the commercial viability of the earlier proposed that once the Bill was amended

applicant, whether the applicant will provide the applicant, or in this case the appellant before

comprehensive programming and so on and so the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, the

forth. What that means is that anybody who is Murdoch interests, would have the opportunity of

already in the industry, anybody who has already having its case heard either under the law as it

demonstrated a capacity to operate a television exists now or the law as it would have existed if

station will, of course, be quarantined against that the 9 April amendments had been carried into

criterion. Anybody who has demonstrated that effect.

capacity will, of course, not be able to be opposed That piece of retrospective legislation, that by any disputant before the Tribunal. Along with piece of fancy footwork, designed to put Mr Eric Robinson and, for that matter, Mr StaleyMurdoch exclusively and uniquely in a very privi-

the two most recent predecessors of the present leged position, has of course been dropped. InMinister-the Opposition believes public interest stead, the Minister has simply said that there will is something which can be determined only by the be only two grounds on which the Tribunal can

Tribunal. One cannot define public interest in make the determinations on the basis of the public simple terms. One cannot exhaustively define interest. That means quite simply that the those matters which the Tribunal has to take into Murdoch interests can at any time withdraw from

account when determining whether a particular the appeal in which they are now involved or, if

application or the retention of a particular licence they are unsuccessful in that appeal, either way

is in the public interest or not.

than can then simply move to transfer the shares

This concern has come about because the Tribunal indicated in three cases that it is concerned about the question of concentration, it is concerned that the broadcasting and television industry will be compromised if there is a great increase in the level of concentration in the industry. I refer to the case in Townsville which dealt with the takeover of 4AY and 4GC Charters Towers by TNQ Television in Townsville. The Broadcasting Tribunal approved of that takeover, but it said that it kept in mind the criteria-that is, the extent of concentration of ownership of broadcasting in one area; the cross-ownership of the radio and television industries. This is the first time, as far as we know, that the question of cross-

which they now hold to other friendly interests or other companies within the Murdoch empire and make a fresh application for the transfer of those shares under the law as it will exist if this legislation is passed. Then, of course, the Tribunal will have very limited capacity to reject the transfer. Quite clearly, Mr Murdoch satisfies certainly the second part of the new public interest criteria and, unless the question of who is a fit and proper person is extended to crazy lengths, presumably he will satisfy that criterion as well. So Mr Murdoch has won all the way through. It will not be quite as easy for him as it would have been had the Minister had the ability to force through the amendments which he first proposed on 9 April.

ownership has ever been raised in the rule-making There are other objectionable features to this

context. It was raised firstly by the Tribunal itself. Bill to which the Opposition takes great excep-

So there was an indication that the Tribunal was tion. The first is that the foreign ownership pro-

going to take very seriously the question of the visions which now limit the ownership of foreign

concentration, that it was going to keep this in interests to effectively 20 per cent have been

3240 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Bill

increased to a maximum of 50 per cent. The Opposition takes the view that the communications industry is not one in which it is proper for foreign interests to have such a great in:tluence and level of ownership and control as that would imply. The communications industry-television, radio and newspapers-ought to be in the hands of Australian interests. They ought to re:tlect a distinctive Australian :tlavour and not act as agents of foreign interests in this regard.

least to obfuscate on its real purpose, the legislation is extremely complicated and ambiguous. It will lead to an extension of the amount of dispute and litigation which already exists in this dispute torn industry. In this context, having indicated the Opposition's position on this Bill, I now indicate that I will be moving a second reading amendment. However, if that amendment is not agreed to, the Opposition will persist with its objections and oppose the second reading of the Bill.

Another change to which the Opposition objects is the requirement that a shareholder must be an Australian citizen rather than have Australian residency qualification, as was previously the case. Again, this has quite clearly been fixed up for the sake of Rupert Murdoch, who, we all know, whilst he is an Australian citizen, spends a great deal of his time outside the country. At the same time as the Government is moving to advantage Mr Murdoch in this regard to get him off the hook it is opening up an area of very questionable value. Many Australian citizens live outside Australia and are involved in foreign corporations. What this means is that those people can act as agents for foreign interests in getting a foothold in or, indeed, control of the Australian communications industry.
Another change is that there is now no need to have prior approval before takeovers are effected. The Minister has said that this requirement is clumsy, that it complicates the whole procedure and that what ought to happen is that once people have taken over a particular television or radio station they ought to be able to get approval after the event. There is no great justification for this change. Other people who have been involved in takeovers of very large broadcasting and television interests have not had any difficulty getting prior approval. Therefore, it seems to us that the takeover of these licences should not be made any easier. After all, the applicants for the licences have to go through a very rigorous process before the Tribunal before they ever get the licences. It seems to me to be a distortion of the current law if someone, having been through that process and having been awarded a licence, has that licence taken off him as a result of a takeover by somebody who has not been exposed to the public scrutiny of the Tribunal. That can happen after the event as a result of these changes. Any takeover company which is in breach of the law can, in fact, remain in breach while also in control for several years.
Because the purpose of this legislation has been disguised and because the Minister has set out not to disclose the real purpose of the legislation, or at

I now deal with the extraordinary lengths to which this Minister has gone in order to disguise what he has been doing in relation to the amendments in the Bill. I mentioned that when he first heralded these amendments in November, and again in December oflast year, he said that they had only two purposes-to overcome the problems of institutional investments and the problems which had been created as a result of the Murdoch takeover of Channel 10 in Melbourne. It was quite clear that the amendments would be designed simply to advantage one of the large interests in the television, broadcasting and newspaper industry. Why did the Minister go to such lengths to disguise the extent of his consultations with those interests? It took about eight questions over two days in this House to force the Minister finally to come anything close to clean on this matter. It appears from the information before us that in early May the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) or his office gave to the Murdoch interests a copy of a draft. They replied shortly after with their views. Directly afterwards, the Cabinet, as a result presumably of the Murdoch representations, decided that Australian citizenship should be the qualification for ownership rather than residency, as it is now.
Shortly afterwards the Packer interests were supplied with a copy of the draft legislation. They too made a written response. It was not until after that happened that the back bench committee of the Government was told what was in the Bill. That seems an extraordinary way to go about amending legislation. It is an indication of the extraordinary sense of priority of this Government that it would provide to only two, but two of the largest interests in this industry, the details of what it proposed and that it would wait for the responses from those interests before providing the back bench committee with details of what it was doing. At that stage the representative body of the industry itself, the Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations, had not been given a copy of the proposed new legislation. It was restricted to two of those interests on a very selective basis.

Broadcasting and Television Bill

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3241

The Minister, having been very flamboyant in his quest for information during his so-called review, in relation to the amendments, which commenced in December, did not give a copy of the draft legislation to any other group which made a submission at that time. The Opposition does not object to the concept of consultations with the industry. What the Opposition does object to, however, is the selective way in which the Minister has gone about the matter, the way in which he has confined his consultations to only two areas of the industry and preventing others from having a say in the proposed legislation. I take this opportunity to move this amendment. I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'the House is of the opinion that the Bill should be withdrawn and redrafted because-
(l) many of the provisions of the Bill are ambiguous and vague and, if enacted, will place extraordinary hardships on those who have to administer it;
(2) the Bill removes the possibility of the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal considering the concentration of media ownership as a criterion of public interest as it has done in the past;
(3) the Bill will jeopardise the autonomy of less financially strong stations by making them more vulnerable to takeover, and
(4) the Bill will permit 50 per cent foreign ownership of each and every radio and television station in this country'.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. Is the amendment seconded?
Mr Barry Jones-I second the amendment and reserve my right to speak later.
Mr JULL (Bowman) (11.1)-1 suppose in some respects this debate today is almost an anticlimax after the most incredible amount of publicity that has probably ever been generated for a Bill that was to come before this House, after the incredible tirade we have heard from members of the Australian Labor Party for months on end and after the incredible speech of the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) who has just resumed his seat. The debate is an anti-climax when we consider that the amendments contained in the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill frankly do not cover many of those areas promoted so fiercely over recent weeks by the Press and the Opposition. I suppose it will be almost boring not to wake up every morning and be able to pick up the Fairfax group's newspaper or the Melbourne Age and go to either the page 1 or page 3 story which, to put it in crude terms, is boring it into the Murdoch organisation. We will actually lose that traditional third paragraph, which seemed to appear in every story for the last 200 days or so and which usually had regard to the whole purpose of the Bill.

I think it must be terribly disconcerting for the Opposition because Mr Murdoch would not have too much joy from the legislation which is before the House today. I will not go into the background of that. In fact, I think we have a much better Bill than perhaps that Bill that was originally proposed. Indeed, a great deal of work has been done in this regard. I think we have a much fairer system. There is no doubt in the world that at the moment Mr Murdoch is facing the music in his court case being heard under the provisions of the old Act. That is really what the situation is all about. I do not intend to make any conjecture on the result of that court application, or indeed to make terribly much reference to it. I think we should make it perfectly clear that the point is that Mr Murdoch is undertaking this action at the moment under the provisions of the old Act and that he has no protection in this present court inquiry under the terms of the new amendments that are before the House today.
I think probably one of the saddest things about the debate as it has ensued so far is that one of the most exciting aspects of the Bill has not to this stage even been mentioned. That concerns the future development of radio and television in this country, and the opening up to so many people of the opportunity to have a much greater diversity of programs, especially in the radio field. This matter has not got a mention. All we have had over the recent months is an unbelievable obsession with what the Murdoch organisation is allegedly getting out of the Government. I repeat: Mr Murdoch, who in the present court case is undergoing a hearing under the terms of the previous Act, does not really have any joy or protection under what is proposed in this legislation.
The honourable member for Fremantle raised a couple of points that I think should be replied to. He made very great play indeed on the fact that so much attention was being given to the country and regional stations rather than to the metropolitan stations. He failed to say that the principal Act already applies much stricter limits on the ownership in metropolitan areas than it does in the regional areas of Australia. It is just not possible for any individual to hold interests in more than one television station and one radio station in any State capital city within the limits of the two television station and eight radio station provision concerning ownership. It is true of course that it would not be illegal at the moment for one person to control up to two television stations and four radio stations in a regional city. Obviously, it is clearly desirable that the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal be able to limit that sort of undesirable concentration. The situation that exists in the city

3242 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Bill

is covered already by the principal Act. I think that is important to remember too.
In terms of the ownership and control provisions of the Bill it is proposed that the requirements for prior approvals of such transactions be relaxed. But we must preserve the principle that the changes in the ownership and control of licences be subject to effective public scrutiny. That is why the Tribunal is being given powers to collect information on those proposed transactions and to give directions to avoid the adverse effects on the licensee prior to approval being given. There has been no change in the terms of ownership and control provisions in Australia since 1965. It is about time that the market-place was brought up to date and that we faced the business realities of the 1980s in technical terms. These amendments before the House today give vent to that and make that possible. In those respects there is a lot to be said for the amendments contained in the Bill.
I mentioned a moment ago that it is disappointing that two of the most exciting prospects in recent times, especially for people in rural areas, have failed to get a mention in this debate. It was very hard indeed to decide whether the decision to go ahead with the supplementary television licences should be made at this time. I think the Government, wisely, has stated that it will wait for the inquiry into subscription television, pay television and indeed cable television to present its report in March 1982 before making a decision. One point that came out of the previous debate and deliberations on this Bill was that there is probably a need to look at the restructuring of the definitions of television stations in Australia. At the moment we have a situation where we can make provision on the one hand for metropolitan stations and on the other hand for regional stations. I think it is true to say that there is an area in between that is really a no man's land.
I guess we have all read the publicity surrounding the decision to drop the supplementary licences for the CTC television organisation here in Canberra. Obviously in a city of this size and in cities the size of Hobart and perhaps Newcastle there could well have been a decision made that would have allowed them to have those supplementary television licences. There is no doubt in my mind that Canberra definitely needs a better selection of television programs than it is getting at the moment. The supplementary television licences offered ways and means of providing better programs. Because of the restrictive nature of the Bill as it stands at the moment and because of that particular definition of metropolitan stations on the one hand and of regional stations on the

other hand, that situation could not really be accommodated. Perhaps in any future revision of the Act and in future deliberations that is one thing that this House could look at-we should apply a third definition to cover those major centres that do not constitute themselves as the mainland capitals. I think that is important too.
H we look now to the other side of the supplementary licence provision there is a great deal of joy to be gained in the fact that by the provisions of the Bill we will have a greater diversification of radio programs, especially in nonmetropolitan areas. Of course, in looking at the background of the radio industry I think it is quite obvious in the Bill that the provision of supplementary licences for radio stations in nonmetropolitan areas is certainly a ploy. It is a ploy by the Government to make sure that in this country we get established a decent system of frequency modulation radio.
I have spoken in this House about the problems faced by this country in the spectrum management. Indeed, we have some very real problems there. Some of the decisions that were made by the previous Government, and indeed by this Government early in 1976, led to a stage where we could have been waiting a very long time indeed before there was full acceptance of FM radio. Some of the most stupid decisions that have been made concern the fact that so many of the public broadcasting stations have been allocated FM frequencies. Do not get me wrong; I think we should make distinctions, in terms of the public broadcasting stations, between those stations that provide a musical service and those that provide a talk service. That flexibility has not been present before. Unfortunately, the FM spectrum is a pretty precious commodity. I hope that in the overall planning for the spectrum in future and in the review of spectrum management there might be provision to make FM radio primarily a mode for music and that the talk programs could well be on amplitude modulation broadcasts. This problem has just grown up in our spectrum management over the years. The supplementary licences will enable established commercial country organisations to apply for an extra licence in the FM mode. There are provisions in this legislation to make sure that a station which applies for a supplementary licence will provide a much greater diversity of programming. Most of us know the kind of radio programs which are received around Australia at the moment. Overall, I suppose it would be true to say that Australian have been reasonably well served over the years by present commercial interests and, indeed, the Australian Broadcasting Commission. The

Broadcasting and Television Bill

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3243

nature of radio these days is to specialise in prostation that is only marginally viable. I think that

gramming formats. Many areas admittedly have should be taken into account.

some sort of mixture of programs through the ABC, but perhaps some have to rely on a top 40 format radio station and have very little possibility of receiving any other type of general programming. Stations with the supplementary licences will be required to provide that diversification in their programming.

Because it is the object of supplementary licensing essentially to provide country listeners with that wider choice and the best programs possible it would not always be in the best interests of a community to close down a supplementary station and to replace it with a separate station on economic grounds alone. Each case would be

The establishment of an FM station within an different and would depend on the circumstances. existing licence holder's facilities obviously will I think it is appropriate that the Australian Broad-

not be nearly as expensive as establishing a whole casting Tribunal should be able to make an assess-

new commercial station organisation. It is still not ment in the inquiry for renewal of a licence not cheap but it certainly involves a great money savonly as to whether the station would be commer-

ing for some of these country concerns in terms of cially viable but also whether the granting of the

running a station. This is a much better propindependent licence would be in the best interests

osition than operating under standard licences of the community being served. That would be a

straight away. This is not to say, of course, that in responsible procedure. Another consideration is

some markets new standard licences will not be what might happen in terms of the declining

issued; they certainly can be applied for, the case population in an area. The area may be already

reviewed by the Australian Broadcasting Triserviced by a number of radio stations broadcast-

bunal, and the licence ultimately granted. In those ing from another area. In that respect this Bill will

fringe areas, in those areas where it would be possprovide a much wider range of service in the FM

ible to sustain a second commercial licence the mode. The FM mode could be used to revolution-

provision of supplementary licences will overise radio in this country.

come that problem. There will be an eight-year guarantee for those licence holders to go their own way, with an extra three years notice of termination. If a market expands perhaps a fully fledged extra licence may be granted. However the supplementary licence may be able to continue to give the necessary diversity In programming.

It is interesting that it took so long in the United States of America to get FM radio off the ground some years ago. It took almost 25 years before it really became a proposition. When the first FM radio licences were issued in Australia under the old Wireless Telegraphy Act I was very worried indeed that we might get a situation in Australia, because of the nature of those licences granted, in

There is one aspect of the Bill-in clause 17 containing proposed sub-section 86Athat causes me some concern. I know that there are areas of minor concern within the radio and television industry, most especially in the radio industry in rural areas, about some of the provisions concerning supplementary licences. The Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) pointed out in his second reading speech that supplementary licensing was conceived as a means of providing that additional service in those places where an additional standard licence would not be a viable proposition. The reason a supplementary licence may be viable in these circumstances is simply stated as economy of scale. Of course, we have

which there would never be full acceptance of the FM mode. I think everybody in the House generally agreed at the time that simulcasting by existing licence holders probably was not the best solution to getting the FM radio mode accepted within the community. However, the present proposal is certainly a proposition. It is an exciting one that will take the FM mode out of the capital cities-it is being established reasonably effectively in them now-and provide it throughout the length and breadth of the country. Of course, it will free up in the long run so many of those other licences on the AM mode that presently exist. That will certainly make for a much better management situation in the years to come.

acknowledged that it is much less expensive to set I support the amendments. I have some slight

up and to operate a second station in an existing reservations. They are purely technical ones,

broadcasting organisation than to establish and to especially with regard to the section dealing with

operate one under a separate independent licence. the supplementary radio licences. I believe that

By the same token, because of the economies of the legislation will provide for a much greater

scale, in some situations a station with a supdiversification of radio services in Australia. The

plementary licence will be able to spend more fact that the provision of supplementary tele-

providing a much better programming service vision licences has been deferred, I think, should

than perhaps even a new and separately licensed be understood to mean that they have not gone

3244 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Bill

altogether. The Government will review that situation when the report on sUbscription television and on cable television is presented in March 1982. The legislation is bringing the whole nature of the operations in the commercial ownership and control provisions of the Act up to date for the 19808. 1 think it should be repeated that I do not think there is any particular joy in this legislation for any of the present licence holders in the capital city stations. The legislation will begin that process which is heading towards the revolution within the communications industry in this country through the 1980s and beyond.
I believe that these amendments that are coming through now are only the start. The principal Act, which is being amended today, for the first time for about 12 months, will in the years to come more and more frequently be back before the House with provisions being made to accommodate the tremendous explosion in the communications industry which is about to happen in this country. With the advent of satellites, with the possibility of cable television, and with data processing applications, we have to make sure that within this House we have a concept of the tremendous changes that are about to come about, that we have an understanding of the tremendous ramifications and the tremendous benefits that that revolution will bring to all Australians. These amendments are a part of that.
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (11.l9)--We have before us at last the amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act. As the honourable member for Fremantle (Mf Dawkins) said, incorporated in this debate is consideration of the Overseas Telecommunications Amendment Bill, which we support. I just say at the outset that of course the Australian Labor Party believes that in the future there should be public ownership of the satellite to which that Bill refers. We hope that such ownership will come about. We support this Bill, which will allow the Overseas Telecommunications Commission to manage the interim stage of the satellite after it gets off the ground. Returning to the amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act, there has been a lot ofkerfuffie for quite some time. The Australian Financial Review said on 1 December last year, over six months ago:
Amendments to the TV Act may reach the Parliament this week.
Some six months later the legislation is before us, and I must admit that 1 agree with the honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull) that at last we may be able to get some sanity into the whole situation. However, I disagree with him that these

amendments do anything for the industry. I believe they will do a lot of harm. Once the Act is fiddled with to suit certain people, as this legislation does, 8 Pandora's box is opened up that causes more trouble than it does good. This is a terribly complex piece of legislation. In fact, it is absolutely dreadfuL Taken all in all, the legislation is an absolute scandaL
Let us consider one very important part of the legislation, the public interest provisions. The Australian Broadcasting Tribunal which this Government set up in 1977, has been going along in what I think is a very good fashion. It has been working very hard to get criteria that are in the best interests of the community and will benefit the majority of Australians. One such criterion relates to the concentration of ownership. The Tribunal has been doing some good work in that area, but under these amendments it will lose its teeth. Certain criteria are set down for it, but public interest and the welfare of Australians as they are affected by the concentration of media ownership or monopolies will go out the window. Thecriteria to which the Tribunal has to have regard have been specifically laid down. I wish to comment particularly on proposed new section 83 (6), sub-paragraph (i) (A) and (B). Subparagraph (i) (C) relates basically to technical areas that flow on, such as complying with the conditions of the licence, et cetera, to which any rational person applying for a licence would adhere. The provisions state that a licensee:
(A) is a fit and proper person to hold the licence; and
(B) has the financial, technical and management capabilities necessary effectively to operate the relevant broadcasting station or television station, as the case may be.
What is a fit and proper person? How do we establish whether someone is a fit and proper person? How do we establish whether someone has the financial, technical and management capabilities necessary? The only way that can be done in a public hearing, which the Tribunal must hold, is virtually by character assassination. If a person applies for a licence, the only way he can be stopped from getting it is by somebody raking up all the muck possible about him. If enough sticks, he might be prevented from getting a licence. That is the only way, because it has to be proved that he is not a fit and proper person. The whole thing is ridiculous. The muck-raking and the mudslinging that will go on in the courts and in the Tribunal hearings will be outrageous, but that is what the provisions of this Bill will bring it down to. The Bill restricts the Tribunal in an unreasonable way. It does not give the Tribunal any discretion at all in what is best for Australia and

Broadcasting and Te levision Bill

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3245

the interests of Australia. In relation to concenwithin three months. Taken all in all, it could

tration of ownership, the Postmaster-General, Mr occupy a period of six or seven months.

Davidson, said in 1956 when the Act was being set up:

What will that mean? It could mean that a major television station or network would be able

The Government is firmly of the opinion that the ownership of commercial television stations should be in as many hands as practicable and that it should not be possible for any one organisation to obtain control of any substantial number of stations.
In an address to the South Australian Liberal Party Conference on 5 December last year, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) said:

to buy as many licences as it wants by saying to a regional station: 'You will take our programs for X amount of money or we will buy you out'. If the network buys out that regional station, it then has virtually six months to sell the station to one of its friends who will take its programs for the price asked. That could happen. It may not be the original intention of the legislation, but it could hap-

Liberalism believes that society is healthier. . . when responsibility, enterprise and power are spread widely throughout the community rather than concentrated in one of a few places. That is the ideal to be aimed at and any deviation from it requires special justification.

pen. It virtually means that a network can buy and sell shares and get rid of them in six months, which would allow the major monopolies to put the screws on the little fellow or, as some people

What is the special justification in this case? In More magazine in November 1977, this is what Mr Rupert Murdoch had to say:
I think it would be a pity if I grew any bigger in Australia. There are now basically three groups in Australia and that's too few already. If I were to grow bigger and take over one of the other groups-or to be taken over-that would be against the public interest. I'd like there to be six groups. The fewer there are the worse it is.

might say, stand over them by using blackmail. As the honourable member for Fremantle said, there is a loophole in this for Rupert Murdoch. Under this new legislation he can divest himself of his interest in Channel 10 but through a separate company-another nominee company or whatever-because the public interest criteria have been drastically changed, he can take over the control of Channel 10 again.

That was Mr Rupert Murdoch in 1977. It is funny, but there has been quite a reversal. This legislation is an about-turn because it will allow concentration of ownership. In that regard, the honourable member for Bowman mentioned supplementary radio licences, and I will touch on that later. The paranoia of the Government and the media with this Act goes back to 1965, when major changes were made to it. I believe certain provisions were to be included in those amendments. However, before they came into the House they were pushed aside to satisfy certain interests and enable them to keep hold of a number of television stations. Now 16 years later we are again debating amendments which will satisfy certain interests. The late Eric Robinson, when he was Minister for Post and Telecommunications, said in a debate in the House on the 1976 amendments:
The whole thrust of this legislation is to take politics out of broadcasting.

It seems to be terribly coincidental that the residential qualification has been changed. As I mentioned at the outset, once the requirement is changed for someone and once we start fiddling with it it can open up a Pandora's box. Under this legislation the only requirement is that a person be an Australian citizen. There are numerous Australian citizens around the world who have control of companies throughout Asia, Hong Kong and South America. Although they do not reside here, they will be perfectly eligible to have a prescribed interest in a licensee company.
One matter which has not been brought out terribly much in the Press is the proposed change relating to the foreign ownership. As I think the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) interjected earlier, through the back door foreign companies can have a major share in Australian broadcasting. Under this Bill foreign interests can hold up to 49 per cent control of an Australian

As the honourable member for Fremantle said company. As an example, a foreign company can
again and again in his speech, this Minister is buy up to 49 per cent interest in illl Australian

putting politics back into the communications funeral company say RIP Investments, and that

area. There has been a rather major change to the funeral company can then buy 50 per cent of the

ownership and control provisions of the Act. That shares in Channel HSV7 in Melbourne. That

major change provides that the Tribunal does not foreign company would then have a rather large

have to be notified about share transactions and say in the Australian communications system. I

takeovers until 28 days after the acquisition. The must genuinely ask the Minister how and why this

word used is 'may', and any good lawyer knows foreign ownership percentage has increased in the

what that means. The Tribunal must then hold an legislation. On the one hand we are selling out to

inquiry within three months. In addition, it must foreign ownership and on the other we are treat-

take all reasonable steps to finish the inquiry ing our own Australian Broadcasting Commission

3246 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Bill

with contempt. Over the last five years the Government has dropped funds to the ABC by about 20 per cent in real terms. The Commission is some $30m down the drain, if given the inflation rate over the last five years.
Let us turn to institutional investors. Their .minor interest is to be upgraded from 5 per ceni to 10 per cent. It has been intimated that that will prevent inadvertent breaches. Unfortunately some companies have found themselves in trouble. I understand that situation but I do not know whether the best way to fix the problem is to up the ante. The Government cannot tell me that 10 per cent is not a real interest-I had better not use the word 'prescribed'-in a company. Companies such as the AMP insurance company or whatever have an obligation to their shareholders. A 10 per cent interest is quite a substantial slice of any organisation. Someone with such a percentage must have some influence. The AWA company knocks the Government's argument down. It has a minor interest of less than 5 per cent. Under the institutional investment provision it can now have an interest of up to 10 per cent. At present it has a minor interest in 15 television stations. Obviously the company thinks it is worthwhile having a share in everything. It will now be able to double its investment in the 15 television stations which it now has an interest in.
I now look at the situation in relation to supplementary radio licences. Once again, there is a concentration of ownership in regional areas. A supplementary licence can be applied for only by the existing local licensee. I must admit that the licence term of eight years is reasonable. Investors have to be given time to get their money back. But again there is a concentration of ownership. I am not against big business but if we have monopolies there will not be the freedom of speech that we in Australia would like there to be.
I now refer to the foreign investment clausesthe Thomas Nationwide Transport clause, the Murdoch clauses, the Herald-Sun clause or the public interest clause. The Government proposes to move some amendments to these clauses. We have not seen them yet. I believe they are just hot off the press. These clauses make this whole legislation a scandal. There is already too much concentration of ownership in Australia. I am not sure whether I correctly picked up the point made by the honourable member for Bowman about metropolitan and regional stations, but I tend to agree with him that we should be looking at that area in a broader sense. One cannot compare a company owning one television station in Melbourne and one in Sydney with owning one in Hobart and one in Darwin or one in Hobart and

one in Brisbane. In that area the legislation is not as diversified as possibly it should be.
A pet hobby of mine relates to the crossownership of the media. I am against it. During 29 of the last 32 years, when the coalition parties have been in government they have really mucked this whole industry around with their attempts to pamper to their friends. From 1956 right through to the present day we have had a rag bag of an Act which should be cleaned up in many areas. I believe it will be cleaned up in many ways when we have a Federal Labor government in 1983. Things must change for the benefit of Australia and Australians-for the whole community, not just a select few, as is the situation under this legislation. This situation has applied from 1956 to 1981. Mark my words, when a Labor government comes into office there will be changes to the Act. The changes will be in the interests of all Australians. The public interest criteria and the concentration of ownership are just two areas that I believe we will be looking at. These are two areas of great deficiencies in this legislation. This Bill will make the Act once again a rag bag that will be good for only a select few and not good for the welfare of the community at large.
Mr STEELE HALL (Boothby) (l1.39)-In supporting the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill at this rather late stage of the sittings of the Parliament I wish briefly to raise a couple of points which interest me. I recognise that this is a most important amending Bill to a most important piece of parent legislation. It attempts, through the machinery set up under this legislation, to adjudicate fairly in the very important area of public broadcasting and to adjudicate fairly in regard to a number of interests which are involved in different directions within that area. I also understand that the machinery under this Bill is a proper way of distancing the Government from making decisions which affect people in a commercial way and vitally affect the public interest. The alterations we are sanctioning today do, in effect, alter the machinery to some significant degree as to how the adjudication between the varying interests in public broadcasting is carried out. Briefly, I am rather disappointed that we are again presented, at this late hour, with amendments to this Bill. I am sure that the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) will adequately explain them to the House. But it seems to me to be a very untidy way of getting legislation through this place, when a matter of great public importance is subject to amendments placed before us at this late stage. I think in the public interest this Bill should ideally have been left until all the amendments had been presented so that

Broadcasting and Television Bill

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3247

the public could have a jolly good look at what is in fact a fairly intricate measure.
Mr Barry Jones-There will be a new Senate.
Mr STEELE HALL-I would not have thought the honourable member would have mentioned the Senate. It has not been advantageous to him in recent years. I am disappointed at the definition affecting the decision of the Tribunal and the definition of public interest. Quite obviously, by defining it, its meaning is severely limited. I prefer the old method of the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal having the availability of its own expertise as to what the public interest really is. I must agree that this definition is very restrictive and the matter seems in the endbecause nearly every applicant would have the technical expertise and the financial backing to carry out what is required of him or his or her company-to devolve, so far as the public interest is concerned, for all practical purposes, to the fit and proper person definition. That seems to me to preclude the Broadcasting Tribunal from considering a whole host of other matters which cannot be fitted into the definition but which could affect the quality of broadcasting in Australia. One could imagine that links that might be associated with the company in control of other areas which also affect the public might be of concern to the Tribunal. Whilst I support this Bill, I express my deep disappointment that there is such a restrictive definition which will affect the application of the rule of public interest to inquiries conducted by the Tribunal.
Secondly, I mention the point which has been much discussed in the media and which has been referred in the debate today, and that is the point relating to the current appeal which is before the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. I congratulate the Minister for altering his original intention that any current appeals could have been withdrawn and proceeded with under the new Act. I welcome the amendment to the original Act, that is, clause 50 of the amendment Bill. Clause 50, in part, states:
(a) any proceedings before the Tribunal instituted before, on or after the date of commencement of this section in which approval by the Tribunal of a transaction entered into before that date was or is sought; or
(b) any application made before, on or after that date to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal for the review of a decision of the Tribunal in any such proceedings,
the Principal Act applies as if this Act had not been enacted.
That would seem to be a clear direction by this Parliament that the existing appeal should proceed under the old unamended Act. There has been discussion in the media as to ways and means by which this particular amending clause may be

circumvented. But it does seem a clear direction of Parliament. I hope that the existing appeal, which has been well publicised, will proceed under the principal Act. I say that without any animosity or any particular view as to how that result should be achieved. I say it, basically, in support of the free enterprise system and Mr Murdoch who is involved in it, because obviously it would have seemed publicly to have reflected on him and his organisation if he were to benefit by legislation passed while the existing appeal was in progress. I believe it is a protection to him, to his organisation and to this Parliament that, in fact, he is precluded by this Bill from altering his direction and taking the benefits of this very restrictive new definition of public interest. The Broadcasting Tribunal, in its findings, quite clearly refused the original application for transfer of ownership of ChanneII0 on its own definition and view of how the public interest would be affected.
It is interesting in viewing the operation of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal to understand how, if action is not taken to prevent the operation of the legislation, the Administrative Appeals Tribunal must act in relation to a change of legislation. Quite clearly, under the rules which are adopted by the Appeals Tribunal, it must take account of the law as it exists at the time of the making of its decision. The Appeals Tribunal becomes, in fact, for all intents and purposes of making a decision, the original body about whose decision the appeal is being made. It has been stated that, as the Tribunal's decision is to be treated as if it were the primary decision maker, the Tribunal has to apply the law as if it were the decision maker. It has also been stated that the Tribunal is a decision-making body and must apply the law as it exists at the date when it makes its decision.
The amending clause 50 is of vital interest in this matter and will preclude this legislation from applying to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal in its present consideration of the current appeal and, as I said, will in my view, be a protection to the Murdoch business interests as well as a protection to this Parliament in that it will have been seen to have remedied a situation which could have otherwise been taken as a benefit to a particular party as a result of the passage of this legislation. I indicate that I support this Bill and again reiterate that I am disappointed at the very restrictive definition that will affect public interest. I applaud the Minister for his consideration and acceptance of amendments which were necessary to make this a better Bill, while at the same time, expressing any disappointment that we are confronted again with amendments which, at this

3248 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Bill

late hour, cannot be subjected to public scrutiny outside this place.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (11.47)-We are debating, cognately, three Bills. I want to talk briefly on the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill and the Overseas Telecommunications Amendment Bill before devoting the bulk of my remarks to the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill. The Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill is a piece of consequential legislation which will come into operation following the assumed passage of the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill. That Bill legislates for the provision of supplementary licences for radio stations, and this Bill amends the parent Act to provide that references to licence fees will also be taken to cover the supplementary licence fees provided for in the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill we are debating today. The second Bill is extremely important legislation. 1 regret that there will not be an opportunity to discuss it separately.
The Overseas Telecommunications Amendment Bill gives the Overseas Telecommunications Commission the responsibility of setting up a national satellite communications system. This is not to say that OTC will ultimately be the authority which runs the satellite. It is in the nature of a holding operation, a particularly apposite position for a satellite to be in. A strong casepossibly even a stronger case-might have been made for giving Telecom Australia the responsibility for setting up the system. But the Opposition accepts that at least a public corporation is to be given responsibility and with this Government we learn to be grateful for small mercies. We must adopt a national information policy as a matter of urgency. Such a national information policy is not to be confused with the freedom of information legislation which is about to come before this House. We need to recognise the significance of information as a factor of production. We need to recognise that access to information is central in determining the future shape of society and the whole configuration of power. We should look also at the concept of a national information utility.

oligopolistic control of information is as unthinkable as entrepreneurial control of air, water or sunlight for profit.
The Australian communications satellite must be a common carrier open to all potential users and not used to increase the power of the strong against the weak, or as an instrument of manipulative control over passive but receptive consumers. I think its ownership should be vested in an Australian information utility. Corporate interests should not necessarily be excluded from sharing control of the utility but they must not dominate it. Government, trade unions, and other special interest groups such as consumers, environmentalists, women and ethnic minorities must be part of the utility management and able to share in the collection, dispersal and feedback of information. At least OTC, like Telecom, has a strong tradition as a common carrier. That is perhaps one of the hopeful elements for the future. The question of control of, and access to, information should become one of the major political issues of the 1980s. If it does not it will be a national tragedy. If we pass through 1984 without even discussing the issue this may mean that the battle for control has already been won by oligopolists and centralisers and we never even noticed.
There are two major options and a variety of smaller ones in between. The first and most likely option is that information networks will be centralised, oligopolistic and limited, essentially a means of preserving existing power structure, controlled by the same people who own newspapers, television networks .and radio stations and who see the computer-with some justification-as an instrument of counterrevolution. The other major and much more preferable option is that information networks should be regarded as public utilities open to all who can pay an appropriate low-cost fee for data. The telematic revolution will either threaten Australia's media oligopoly or consolidate it, depending on our political responses to technological change. Australia has a heavier concentration of media ownership than any other Western country except Ireland.

In Europe and in the United States there has been a lot of discussion about what is sometimes called telematics; that is, the association of the computer with the international telephone system. Telematics, assisted by communications satellites, can expand or cripple human capacity and understanding. Pluralist, democratic and decentralised management of information facilities is an indispensible prerequisite for an ideal information-based society. Monopolistic or

Three major groupings dominate Australia's metropolitan newspapers: The Herald and Weekly Times Ltd, with 52 per cent of circulation; News Ltd-Rupert Murdoch's group-- with 24.7 per cent; and John Fairfax Ltd, with 22.6 per cent. Together with Australian Consolidated Press Ltd-that is to say, the Packer family-the same interests control radio stations, television stations magazines and suburban newspapers. Would the same groups control

Broadcasting and Television Bill

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3249

Australia's proposed communications satellite designed to conceal information rather than pro-

and/or national or international information servide it. I want to concentrate on the worst parts of

vices? If matters are allowed to drift the present the Bill-those parts which refer to the transfer of

pattern of media control will be extended and ownership in television and, in particular, to the

intensified.

protection of the interests of Mr Rupert

In the United States and Great Britain Press and television ownership are separated and elements of the media tend to be fierce rivals rather than complaisant allies. There is a far greater tradition of radical dissent and citizen participation in both countries. Where such traditions have evolved in Australia they have frequently been legitimated because of overseas activity, not a spontaneous domestic reaction-another

Murdoch. This is a public, general act which manipulates and perverts the law to provide a specific benefit for a particular sectional interest-in this case a particular person. Then it compounds the offence by attempting to cover it with a very thick coating of hypocrisy. Only a very small proportion of the Bill actually deals specifically with Rupert Murdoch but it is quite clear what its intention is.

example of the cultural cringe. Congress and the British Parliament are more independent of the Executive than Parliament is here too.
I draw attention to something that I raised with the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) on 14 May 1981. I asked the Minister whether the Packer interests had already lodged a $5m deposit with the RCA corporation in the United States for the purchase of a next generation domestic satellite with much more capacity than the Intelsat style of satellite about which we have been talking. The Minister, in his reply, I thought, said in effect that this matter really could be left to the market. But he did not deny my suggestion. People from Sydney tell me that I was given a terrible donging over the media in Sydney-it did not percolate down to Melbourne for obvious reasons-from Mr Kerry Packer who threatened to have the law on me. He said that he would sue me if I talked any more about it. As we are not exactly on an even balance in terms of financial resources, I think I should take advantage of my natural and constitutional rights in this Parliament just as he will continue to take advantage of his resources outside.

Back in 1941 Orson Welles produced one of the greatest films in the English language, Citizen Kane. Citizen Kane was a fictionalised biography of a character, a composite of William Randolph Hearst and Robert McCormick-great media magnates of the 1920s and 1930s. It showed the enormous power that they wielded in the United States. We have our own Citizen Kane but a much more powerful figure-a figure whose ramifications are international, not just national-Citizen Murdoch. Citizen Kane was a piker compared to Citizen Murdoch. I ask the Minister: Would it not have been more courageous and more direct simply to introduce a separate Bill-the Citizen Murdoch Beneficiary Bill-a very short Bill which would not have to go to 55 pages? The key clause would simply say: 'In radio and broadcasting Citizen Murdoch, irrespective of where he lives, and without regard to the precise corporate form in which his ownership is clothed, can have whatever he wants and, where he requires a change in the law, the law will automatically adjust to his demands'. That is exactly what this legislation is designed to do. All the other pages of the Bill, all the repetitition and

I turn to the Broadcasting and Television all the other elements that have been brought in Amendment Bill, a Bill which, in its present form, are simply designed to disguise it.

I regard as one of the most appalling pieces of legislation that has ever been brought down by If honourable members were to go through the this Government. The entire Bill, including the Minister's second reading speech they would find

Schedule, runs to 60 pages. It is a very complex and very repetitive Bill, very difficult to read, and sometimes it is very difficult to work out exactly what is meant. It is written, I suppose, in code language. I must say that one does not get much

that there is not one reference to Rupert Murdoch, to News Ltd, or to the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal's rejection of Rupert Murdoch's application to carryon with the licence to Channel 10 which had previously been

help by looking at the Minister's second reading owned by Ansett Transport Industries Ltd. There

speech. One can look at it, one can test it for invisis not one word to that effect. The honourable

ible inks, one can hold it up to the light and still one does not learn anything much about it.
Mr Beazley-You can weigh it too.

member for Bowman (Mr Jull) described the common theme running through the legislation as: 'The basic realities of the 1980s'. We must have regard to the basic realities of the 1980s! That is a

Mr BARRY JONES-One can weigh it also. code term for saying: 'Citizen Murdoch has the

But it is a perfect example of something which is Fraser Government by the throat and at least one

3250 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Bill

other sensitive part of its anatomy'. Citizen Murdoch has developed a client relationship with this Government and to him media support is the price for political influence. From our experiences in 1972 Rupert Murdoch-Citizen Murdochproved to be a very dangerous ally. One accepts his help, with great reservation. It is quite clear that there has never been a media proprietor-not even Sir Frank Packer-who has been prepared to use his power so nakedly, so obviously and so much against the public interest. There are no papers in Australia so concerned to distort or omit information. They are instruments of misinformation and I think it is appalling that this legislation should be used to extend rather than limit the power of Citizen Murdoch.
Mr Coleman-He supports the Labor Government in New South Wales.
Mr BARRY JONES-He has his own reasons for that which no doubt the honourable member would be prepared to talk about later. The original plan was to change the law retrospectively; in other words, to change it in such a way that the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal had virtually to approve Citizen Murdoch's application for the Channel 10 licence in Melbourne. Some Liberal members concerned about the principle of retrospectivity as applied in tax evasion cases in the past drew the line at retrospectivity in this case. All that was needed, and what has happened in this Act, was a change in the law to provide for flexible transfer procedures for the future, to limit the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal's power to define public interest and give Citizen Murdoch the opportunity to transfer ownership from Murdoch company A to Murdoch company B and then compel the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal to approve the transaction which was identical to the transaction which the Tribunal had already rejected-namely, the acquisition by the Murdoch interests of Ansett Transport lndustries and with it Channel 10.
In effect, the law says that past transactions are bad and new transactions are good. It all depends on how one characterises these matters. It makes me think of the famous story of the chain smoker who went to his rabbi and said: 'Rabbi, is it ac-- ceptable if I smoke while I pray?' The rabbi answered: 'No, that is an outrage'. The man then asked: 'Very well, is it all right if I pray while I smoke?' The rabbi said: 'Of course, certainly, because your whole life shOUld be devoted to prayer'. I do not think Citizen Murdoch's whole life is devoted to prayer, but it is obvious that he can do what he wants to do pro\'ided the law is characterised in a particular way and the right questions are asked.

Every major media interest in Australia has a client relationship with this Government. The House is in the embarrassing situation that we are still waiting for the Herald and Weekly Times Ltd amendments. They have not been prepared yet. We are not sure whether they will be prepared by the Government or whether they will be prepared by Parliamentary Counselor by the legal department of the Herald and Weekly Times. Perhaps it is very inconvenient to the Herald group that the Parliament has to get up next week and they have to do it all in a rush. Presumably, I think in this case if Citizen Murdoch has second thoughts about the Bill that has been prepared for him, it might have to be delayed so that his views can then be expressed in the legislation.
Let me turn for a few minutes to a couple of the extraordinary pieces of drafting in this terrible Bill. One is the definition of a 'fit and proper person'. The only test as to whether one is entitled to get a licence is not the quality of programs to be shown or a person's integrity or long term view about the sort of society this would be. It is a simple definition of whether the person is 'fit and proper', In case the Government feels that we do not get the message - in case the slow readers in the Government do not understand it-the entire formula as to what is a 'fit and proper' person is repeated word for word in six different clauses of the Bill. I will not repeat it six times; I will just read it once. It is found for the first time in clause 13 which, in effect, seeks to insert the following new sub-section:
The Tribunal shall not refuse to grant a licence to a person unless it has held an inquiry into the grant of the li,ence and-
(c) it appears to the Tribunal, having regard only to the following matters or circumstances,---
Nothing else; it says 'only'
that it is advisable in the public interest to refuse to grant the licence to the person:
(i) it is not satisfied that the person(A) is a fit and proper person to hold the licence; (D) has the financial, technical and management capabilities necessary effectively to operate the relevant broadcasting station or television station, as the case maybe; and (e) is otherwise capable of complying with the conditions of the licence;
They would not need to be long hearings; it could be done in 20 minutes. Only two or three questions would need to be asked. 'Citizen Murdoch, have you been certified as insane?' Answer: 'No'. Question 2: 'Are you a convicted felon?' Answer: 'No'. If counsel then says there are more questions, the chairman of the Tribunal could quite

Broadcasting and Television Bill

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3251

legitimately say that under the Act they are the only questions to ask.
Mr Ian Robinson-Come on!
Mr BARRY JONES-All right; perhaps a third question could be: 'Do you have the financial assets to run a station?' Answer: 'Yes'. Then, 'Are you technically competent to the extent that you could comply with the licence?' Answer: 'Yes'. They are the four questions. What other questions could be asked if the legislation says that these are the only matters to be raised? It does not say they are among the factors that have to be taken into account; it says they are the only factors. The effect of this is to castrate the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal. A party like the National Country Party, that is used to crutching everything in sight, would understand the significance of crutching the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal. In case it is slow enough to miss the point, that formula is repeated after clause 13-in clauses 16, 18, 19, 28 and 38. In other words, the Government is asking the Tribunal: 'Have you got the message? We have said it six times. Do you understand now? We have told you six times you can ask only four questions'. The other point I wish to raise is this extraordinary reference in clauses 26 and 36 to the definition of an Australian citizen. The Act states:
. . . a foreign person shall not at any time during the currency of the licence be in a position to exercise control, either directly or indirectly, of the company holding the licence.
Then there is the definition clause, to be found in clause 26 and again in clause 36 in case we missed it the first time. It seeks to insert the following new sub-section.
(3) A reference in this section to a foreign person shall be read as a reference to-
(a) A natural person who is not an Australian citizen . . .
In other words, so long as the applicant is an Australian citizen it does not matter where he lives; it does not matter where his real centre of activity is so long as he carries that Australian passport. If he had dual nationality but still had an Australian passport he would qualify. This is an infamous piece of legislation. It is one of the most appalling pieces of legislation brought down by the Minister for Communications and I think the Government should be ashamed of it. Government members should vote for the Opposition amendment. I hope to see some of the people who are worried about the concentration of media power in Australia cross the floor and vote with us on our amendment.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Question put:

That the words proposed to be omitted (Mr Dawkins's amendment) stand part of the question.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

64

Noes

41

Majority

23

AYES
Adermann, A. E, Anthony, J. D. Baume,M,E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman. H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A. G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife.W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F.
Katter, R. C. Killen,D.J. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLeao, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, J. M. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. 1. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson,I.B.C.

NOES
Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Brown, John Brown, Robert
Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M. J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, V.E.

Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. 1. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Theophanous, A. C. Wallis, L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R.

PAIRS
Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Nixon,D.J. Viner,R.I.

Campbell,G. Keating, P. J. Scott, 1. L. Young,M.J.

3252 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Amendment negatived.

Original question put:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker---Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

64

Noes

41

Majority

23

AYES
Adermann, A, E. Anthony, J, D. Baumo,M.E. Birney, R, J, Bourchier, J. W,
Bradfield,I.M. Braithwaite, R, A, Brown,N.A, Bungey,M, H, Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,!. ], Chapman, H, G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D, M. Cowan, D, B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J, D, M. Edwards, H. R. Falconerl p, D. Fif., W.C Fisher, p, S, (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B, J. Groom,R,J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N,J, Hodges, J. C, (Teller) Hodgman, W, M.

Howard,]. W. Hunt, R.], D.
Hyde,J.M. Jarman,A. W. Jull,D,F.
Katter, R. C.
Killen, D,J. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip
MacKellar, M, J, R, MacKenzie, A. I. McLean,R.M.
McVeigh, D. T. Macph.e, 1. M. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L.
Peacock, A. S. Porter,l. R, Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C,
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R, F,
Sinclair, I. Mce. Spender,]. M, Street, A. A. Tambling, G, E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, 1. B. C.

NOES
Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N, Brown, John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D, E, Child,]. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M,J. Everingham, D. N. Froe,R, V, Fry,K,L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C, (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E.
PAIRS
Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Nixon.P,J. Viner, R. I.

Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. MeLeay,Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B.- Milton,P, Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G, G, D, Theophanous, A. C, Wallis, L. G, West,S,], Willis,R,
Campbell,G. Keating, p, J. Scott, J, L. Young,M.J.

Broadcasting and Television Bill
Question so resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.

The BilL

In Committee

Mr SINCLAIR (New England)-Minister for Communications) (12.20)-by leave-I move:
(1) Clause 13, page 11, line 40, omit "90G", substitute "90G".
(2) Clause 16, page 13, lines 22 to 27, omit proposed subparagraph (iv) , substitute the following sub-paragraph:
'(iv) tbe need for the commercial viability of the station operated by virtue of the licence; or'.
(3) Clause 17, page 14, lines 29 to 33, omit all the words after "the opinion that" down to the end of proposed subse~~~n 86A(2), substitute-
(a) an additional commercial broadcasting station to serve that area is reasonably likely to be commercially viable after the expiration of the period of 3 years (in this section referred to, in relation to the licence, as the 'prescribed period') commencing on the renewal of the licence; and
(b) having considered the need for an adequate and comprehensive service to be provided in pursuance of a licence for such an additional station, having regard only to(i) the nature of the community to be served in pursuance of such a licence; (ii) the diversity of the interests of that community; and (iii) the nature of the broadcasting and television services of which satisfactory reception is being obtained by that community, it is advisable in the public interest that applications for such a licence be invited".
(4) Clause 18, page 17, line 41, omit "to any of', substitute "only to",
(5) Clause 28, page 27,line IS, omit "to any of", substitute "only to".
(6) Clause 32, page 35, line 28, after "(10)", insert "or section 92FAB".
(7) Clause 38, page 41, line 34, omit "to any of", substitute "only to".
(8) Clause 38, page 45, after proposed section 92FAA insert the following proposed section:
Certain transactions to require prior approval "'92FAB. (1) In this section"prescribed company" means a company that, but for the operation of sub-section (3) of section 92, would be in contravention of that section; "transaction" means a transaction in relation to which section 92F applies, being a transaction in respect of shares in a prescribed company. '(2) A reference in this section to the proportion of a
person's shareholding interests in a company has the same meaning as in section 92F.
'(3) For the purposes of this section, the following persons are associates of a person:
(a) a partner of the person; (b) where the person is a company-
(i) a director or secretary of the company;

Broadcasting and Television Bill

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3253

(ii) a company that is related to the first mentioned company;
(iii) a director or secretary of a company that is related to the first-mentioned company;
(c) a director or secretary of a company of which the person is a director or secretary;
(d) a company whose directors are accustomed or under an obligation, whether formal or informal, to act in accordance with the directions, instructions or wishes of the person or, where the person is a company, of the directors of the person;
(e) a company in accordance with the directions, instructions or wishes of which, or of the directors of which, the person is accustomed or under an obligation, whether formal or informal, to act;
(f) a company of which the person is in a position to exercise control;
(g) a person with whom the person is acting in concert in relation to the transaction concerned;
(h) a person with whom the person is associated, whether formally or informally, in any other way in relation to the transaction concerned;
(j) if the person has entered into a transaction (including any transaction as defined by section 91), or has done any other act or thing, with a view to becoming an associate of a person as mentioned in paragraph (g) or (h)-that last-mentioned person;
(k) a person who is, by virtue of the regulations, to be regarded as an associate of the person;
(m) a person who is, by virtue of paragraph (g), (h), (j) or (k), an associate of any other person who is an associate of the person by virtue of any of those paragraphs or by virtue of another application or other applications of this paragraph.
'(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3), the question whether companies are related to each other shall be determined in the same manner as the question whether corporations are related to each other would be determined under the Companies Ordinance 1962 of the Australian Capital Territory as amended and in force for the time being.
'(5) A person shall not be taken to be an associate of another person by virtue of paragraph (3) (g), (h), (j) or (k) by reason only that the person furnishes advice to, or acts on behalf of, that other person in the proper performance of the functions attaching to his professional capacity.
'(6) This section applies to a person in relation to a transaction if, and only if-
(a) the person is a party to the transaction;
(b) as a result of the transaction, the person becomes the holder of shareholding interests in a prescribed company; and
(c) by reason of the person being the holder of those shareholding interests (together with any other shareholding interests of which he is the holder) the person(i) is in a position to exercise control of that company; or
(ii) would be in such a position if he were also the holder of the total shareholding interests in that company held, whether or not as a result of the transaction, by any associate or associates of the person.
'(7) Where-
(a) this section applies to a person in relation to a transaction; and
(b) the transaction takes place without the Tribunal first havinll approved the transaction in whole or in part in so far as it affects the person,

the person is guilty of a separate offence in respect of each day (including the day of a conviction under this sub-section or any subsequent day) during which he holds shareholding interests in the prescribed company to which the transaction relates exceeding in amount or proportion the shareholding interests that he had in that company immediately before the transaction took place.
'(8) Where a transaction in relation to which this section applies to a person takes place as described in paragraph (7) (b)-
(a) notwithstanding anything in section 92F or 92FAA, the Tribunal shall not approve the transaction in whole or in part in so far as it affects the person; and
(b) sub-section 92F (7A) does not apply to the person in relation to the transaction.
'(9) This section does not apply in relation to a transaction that takes place on or after I July 1983.'.".
(9) Clause 40, page 47, line 6, omit "or 92FAA", substitute ", 92FAA or 92FAB".
(10) Clause 40, page 47, line 30, omit "or 92FAA", substitute ", 92FAA or 92FAB".
(11) Clause 40, page 48, line 31, omit "or 92FAA", substitute ", 92FAA or 92FAB".
(12) Clause 40, page 49, line 13, after "92FAA,", insert "92FAB,".
There were three packages of amendments. The first amendments are those referred to in my second reading speech. They are designed to give those companies that still enjoy the protection of the grandfather clause under the existing legislation the benefit of proposed new section 92FAB. This will provide a continuation of the benefits of the legislation in its restrictive application in relation to the transfer of shares until 1 July 1983. The second group of amendments relates to submissions made to the Government by the Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters. They specifically refer to changes that flow from the introduction for the first time of a new type of licence-supplementary licences for broadcasting. As these licences are in a new area, the Government has some sympathy for the concern of the broadcasters. I will refer specifically to the nature and character of those changes later. Obviously, they are in an area where there is to be a new extension of the broadcasting network for the benefit of the Australian community.
The Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters has made a number of other requests. Some of these the Government would like to consider further. It is necessary therefore that they be taken into account in the consideration of general submissions on the Administrative Review Council's recommendations on the procedures to be adopted before the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal. The third group of amendments corrects typographical errors or contains amendments consequential on the other two packages. The purpose of the first amendment is to correct a typographical error at clause 13, page 11, line 40 of

3254 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Bill

the Bill: '90C' should read '90G'. The purpose of the second amendment is to exclude from consideration during the licence renewal process what is now believed to be an inappropriate factor, that is, the requirement to have due regard to the need for the commercial viability of the other stations in the area. Whilst this issue continues to be of relevance at a licence grant, it has not in practice had any significance in the licence renewal process. The Government is taking this opportunity in the present Bill to clarify the situation. This is one of the amendments 1 referred to which results from the submissions from FARB.
The third amendment is to provide that in considering the renewal of a supplementary licence at the 8-year renewal stage and at all subsequent J.year renewals the Tribunal will take into account not only the question of possibility of commercial viability of an alternative fully commercial licence station, but also-this is again at the request of FARB-whether, having regard to community needs and the overall program services provided to the community, it is advisable in the public interest to invite applications for fulllicences. The Government considers that at the first stage of the Tribunal's consideration of possible non-renewal, both aspects of commercial viability and public interest should be taken into account. In the light of the remarks made in the speeches during the second reading debate 1 sllspect that this amendment will have common acceptance. The purpose of the fourth and fifth amendments is to correct a drafting ambiguity. The criteria are exclusive criteria and the amendments are designed to provide for this.
The sixth amendment is consequential upon the eighth amendment which introduces a new section 92FAB. The seventh amendment is to correct a drafting ambiguity as are the fourth and fifth amendments. The eighth amendment is to make appropriate transitional arrangements for certain companies in relation to the new share transaction procedures. This amendment was foreshadowed in my second reading speech. The Government believes that there should not be immediate application of the new share transaction procedures to companies whose interests have been virtually frozen under special provisions of the Act introduced in 1965. There is no doubt that market circumstances have changed. Those whose general situation has been locked in since that time have been at a disadvantage in adjusting in the market place. The freezing provisions to which I have referred are contained in section 92 (3) of the Act, which is known as the grandfather clause. They allow persons who at that

time held interests in excess of the ordinary limitations then introduced to continue lawfully to hold those interests as long as the interests were not increased or restructured in any manner. One consequence of this freezing provision, which today applies to only a few companies, has been to inhibit the ability of these companies to adjust their corporate structures to the present commercial environment.
The Government believes that these companies should have some time and a reasonable opportunity to restructure their interests before becoming subject to the full effect of the new share transaction procedures provided for in the Bill, including on-market share trading. Accordingly, proposed new section 92FAB, which will be oflimited duration, provides that the purchase of shares in these companies will be subject to the prior approval of the Tribunal. This restriction ceases on 1 July 1983, after which time these companies will be subject to the same share transaction procedures as any other company. To ensure that the Government's intentions are realised, the provisions extend in appropriate cases to the interests of persons associated with the purchaser. In addition, the section provides that non-adherence to the provisions will create an offence and will render the person ineligible for subsequent approval by the Tribunal. Amendments Nos. (9) to (12) are simple additions which tie the provisions made under proposed new section 92FAB into the related enforcement provisions of the Bill.
I apologise to the House that honourable members have not had a longer opportunity to consider the details of these proposals. We have been talking fairly extensively to FARB. Honourable members will know that the provisions for supplementary radio licences will not come into place until a date to be proclaimed. It is a new procedure. There is a desire by the Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters to extend broadcasting facilities to the community but it is concerned that the new facility should be beneficial to everybody. It is for that reason that the Government has included the other bracket of amendments. That is the essential reason for these amendments not being circulated earlier.
Dr CASS (Maribyrnong) (12.28)-1 oppose these amendments. I think the Bill is quite irrelevant to the needs of the community. The sole purpose of this Bill is to worry about the commercial interests of broadcasters and not to worry about the media or communication needs of the Australian community. It strikes me that in a democracy it is essential that a diverse range of opinions be expressed. By that I do not mean, as is often said, that we are free in this country, that we

Broadcasting and Television Bill

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3255

can stand on the steps of Parliament House and say what we like and a cop will not run us in, whereas if we tried that in the Soviet Union we would be shot. What I mean by the ability to express our opinions is that we are free not only to express our views, but also to express them in a way which will enable them to be communicated to the whole community which is then free to judge whether it accepts or rejects them. It is pointless to say that we can stand in a corner and recite whatever we like.
That is the point on which I wish to concentrate, namely, the ability in our present media system to communicate a diverse range of opinions. I want to tie in that point to the whole concept of private ownership of the means of communication. I think that is the fundamental weakness in our approach to this problem. We bestow on people rights of ownership of broadcasting and television stations. That gives those individuals an enromous amount of power in real terms. I noticed this when I was Minister for the Media and applications for renewals of licences were put before me. I realised that in the assessment of whether licences should be renewed any assessment of their value to the community in terms of what sort of service had been provided was pointless and irrelevant. It was not even taken into consideration. To do so would have been impractical. Let us suppose that in a hearing, evidence was presented in the public interest which suggested that a licensee was not fulfilling his obligations and was not providing the sort of programming material that was considered in this vague public interest concept to be what the community wanted or needed.
If the television station were owned by a particular group what would we do? Would we say that we will take the licence away from that group? What would happen then? What about all the hardware and the millions of dollars invested in land, studios, equipment and so on? The proposition is unreal. There is no way of ever assessing a licence in the terms of public interest in the way which I would envisage which would be by seeing whether the particular applicant would provide for a diverse range of opinion and expression of view essential to democracy. 1 fast accepted the fact of life that commercial licences in this country will never change hands, for better or for worse, through a public hearing which seeks to ascertain whether the purposes of the communication system are being fulfilled. Licences will change hands only when they are bought by someone else.
That brings me to the next point in the debate concerning the diversity of expression of view. We

have private ownership. The trouble with the amendments to the present legislation is that they will enable a greater concentration of power in the hands of fewer people. What is wrong with that? To me the problem lies in the fact that this will limit still further the diversity of opinion able to be expressed. I will make one point clear: I defend the right of owners of the media to run media outlets the way they want. 1 defend their right to have the sorts of views expressed through those outlets that they want expressed. That is their right. I may disagree with those views. The purpose of our communications policy ought to be to ensure a diversity of expressions of interest so that all the conflicting views will give the diversity of expression that the community desires and needs. I emphasise the word 'needs'. After all, what is democracy about if not the right to hear all contrary points of view? No one has the truth. None of us are gods. No one of us has the truth or knows what it is. We arrive at what we think is an approximation of the truth after hearing and discussing all points of view.
Allowing a greater concentration of interest and ownership into fewer and fewer hands is inevitably limiting the prospect for diverse expression of view. That can only be to the detriment of the whole community including, I suggest, honourable members on the Government side. I would like to think that some of them take seriously the question of liberty and freedom of expression. By pursuing the present approach the Government is in fact limiting in very real terms the options for freedom of expression. There is another problem associated with leaving control of the media-in the sense of ownership-mainly in the hands of private individuals. I want to differentiate between owning the media and having a licence to broadcast because I think a far more intelligent alternative-one which I would like to think the Government, in espousing liberal principles, would adopt-is the practice of not allowing ownership of outlets but providing them for a range of licensees who do not have to have millions of dollars to invest in building studios and so on, who have much less in the way of funding but enough resources to allow them to attract the program makers. This would allow expressions of different opinions, interests and tastes in the community to be broadcast over the airwaves.
I suggest that hardware should be funded through a range of publicly owned stations but not publicly controlled. Privately and individually the licensees should determine what goes over the airwaves. In that way I think we would have much more flexibility. What is the prospect now? If a present private owner feels he has had enough

3256 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Bill

he sells to someone who inevitably has basically the same values because that person can only be someone with the same level of resources. This person is someone who has a very big stake in the status quo. It cannot be someone, like me for instance, purporting to present the point of view of a minority such as I might wish to espouse. Where could I get the resources? Control could go only to someone who has equivalent resources to the person wanting to sell out. This would never happen, but if the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal determined that the present licensee was not doing the job properly it could only offer the licence to someone with equivalent resources, and inevitably with the same basic interests. I am not denying the rights of people to express those interests. I am simply expressing the view that not enough opportunity is provided in this democratic society. Inevitably this can lead to a quite undemocratic society. There is no need for the imposition of authoritarian control of either the Left or Right; this could occur simply by virtue of a natural shrinking of interests which inevitably will accompany the narrowing of the range of ownership. To me this is the greatest tragedy of what could have and should have been a radical rewriting of the legislation to ensure that we have available in what purports to be a democratic society a larger range of interests, modes of expression and different points of view on what society should be about.
I repeat that no one knows what the truth really is or where it lies. If we are to have the sort of society we think we should have and if the society is to last into the future-given the increasing pressures from all around us for conformity and compliance with whatever our betters tell us is good for us-if we are to have a really democratic society survive, we need a bit of legislation which encourages diversity and which enables people who do not have massive resources to express their points of view. Sadly, inevitably this legislation will lead towards a further concentration of expression of view and it will take us closer towards a totalitarian-style society because only one point of view will be able to be expressed. This will not be because there will be a dictator but simply because by the mode of ownership dissident points of view will never gain expression.
Mr MacKENZIE (Calare) (12.37)-In the few minutes available to me in the Committee stage of the debate on the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill I wish to deal with some of the advantages and some of the very significant moves forward that the Bill introduces, particularly for non-metropolitan area services. I refer in

particular to the provisions for supplementary licensing of existing radio station operators in non-metropolitan Australia. From the outset I must complain bitterly that the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) referred to my party as one interested in crutching everything in sight. Perhaps the honourable member should realise that that is a temporary operation; we are more interested in the permanent operation-like mulesing. Perhaps my friend the honourable member for Mallee (Mr Fisher) might bring his mulesing shears here next week to give a demonstration.
Mr Barry Jones-On somebody else I hope.
Mr MacKENZIE-Removing wrinkles. This provision for supplementary licensing introduces a concept originally envisaged by the commercial broadcasting industry. I think it was as long ago as October 1977, at the annual conference of the Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters, that the Federation said:
The unanimous view of our industry . . . is that all existing commercial broadcasters should have the opportunity to participate in FM.
The statement continued:
We maintain that the only logical way to introduce commercial FM--
And to increase the diversity of broadcasting-
is to encourage the existing commercial AM operators to transmit their programs in both modes.
It was pointed out:
There should be no need to create new licences--
In terms of the original standard licences-
in these circumstances since FM is not another medium. but merely provides an alternative method of transmission and reception.
It is interesting to note also that at the FARB conference it was also said:
Transmitting in both modes would preserve stations' essential viability and allow them to maintain program standards while at the same time allowing the public to exercise a choice as to the type of transmission which suits them best.
The Federation further pointed out that this was the only conceivable way of introducing FM and further diversity in broadcasting in many smaller markets and non-metropolitan areas. It is interesting to note that that was the view as far back as 1977. Of course, the provisions of this Bill essentially confirm that view of FARB. This Bill provides for an increased range of broadcasting services in non-metropolitan areas. It recognises areas where an additional fully competitive station may not be viable. In fact, in many market areas, in many listening areas, another commercial station would probably result in both operators getting into a situation of serious financial

Broadcasting and Television Bill

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3257

difficulty. The Bill recognises that this is one way tremendous degree of diversity-whereas a few

of bringing diversity into an area where an adyears ago there were only two stations.

ditional station would jeopardise the viability perhaps, of both stations.

Another town that I mention is a much smaller market, namely, Parkes where there has been a

Of course, the supplementary licence concept has been conceived as a means of providing additional radio and television services while at the same time protecting the viability of the existing operator and protecting a degree of localism which is important as far as non-metropolitan areas are concerned. Of course, the legislation also

commercial broadcasting station for many years. There is no other alternative to the station there other than the ABC station. A supplementary licence will provide the opportunity for that station to provide a very real alternative. People will not have to listen to popular music, hard rock, soap opera or sport.

provides a new mode of transmission. That will be Mr Barry Jones-Or Parliament.

welcomed, indeed, in many country areas. Many people in those areas may not recognise what frequency modulation transmission is. It is simply a technical method of transmitting radio signals which differs substantially from the present amplitude modulation method. FM is subject to far less interference from other electrical impulses, climatic storms or man-made interference, including other radio stations, and it therefore more suitable to a higher quality type of transmission. The honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull) I recall made a comment about FM being used for public broadcasting services. I must agree with him to some extent in that many of the public broadcasting services have the spoken word as a large proportion of their programing. To use a large degree of the spoken word is a waste in a mode of transmission like FM.

Mr MacKENZIE-Or Parliament. They will have an alternative. They may be able to listen to more high-brow classical popular music. They may also be able to listen to current affairs programs. Perhaps there will be a broader opportunity for talk-back programs. Those people who do not wish to listen to the races and the football on a Saturday afternoon have a very real alternative. This is provided for a relatively small community. I think there are tremendous advantages for other groups that we tend to forget about-the people who do like to listen to the radio who are not necessarily totally wedded to television. This includes the aged persons in homes and hostels, many of whom cannot afford or who are not allowed to have a television set in their own rooms. I refer to patients in hospitals, farmers on their tractors, truck drivers on their trucks, motorists

What does supplementary licensing mean for the listener? We have heard much comment and a certain amount of controversy from the operators. I think it needs to be pointed out that the advantages for the listener are very significant indeed. Let us see what can happen in a couple of instances. I refer to the local listening market in my electorate. In Bathurst, for example, the people receive the regional network of the Australian Broadcasting Commission. The people also have a public broadcasting station associated with the Mitchell College of Advanced Education called 2MC-FM. They have a regional operator-2BS. Two other commercial operators come in to the Bathurst market-one from Or-

and housewives who do not necessarily want to listen to serials early in the morning. There will be a very real alternative provided.
The Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) has introduced some amendments which will overcome some of the difficulties-I hope most of the difficulties-that the station owners have foreshadowed. T have pointed out that the Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters originally had supported the idea, in fact, perhaps had initiated the idea, of supplementary licensing. The Federation expressed some considerable concern when it became aware of the fine details of the Bill. I believe it has one legitimate grouch. The Federal Director of the Federation wrote:

ange and one from Lithgow. The provision of supWe reiterate our very deep concern at the haste with which

plementary licences means that the commercial this legislation is being rushed into Parliament without adoperator-2BS-will be able to apply for a supequate consultation . . .

plementary licence and broadcast in FM. PresumAs far as consultation is concerned, I believe there

ably the other two stations broadcasting into that could have been a better opportunity for that sec-

area, from Orange and Lithgow, may also be able tion of the industry to discuss the provisions of the

to apply for translators to go with their supBill, notwithstanding the fact that it is impossible

plementary licences so that they may be able to for any Minister dealing with any legislation to be

come into that market also. So, we have a country able to consult with all groups. Perhaps the radio

town in this case which can have six or perhaps broadcasting industry, which is one of the sig-

eight relatively local stations-that provides a nificant groups concerned, should have been given

3258 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Bill

an earlier opportunity to discuss the detailed provisions of this Bill.
One area that has not been included to this stage is the provision of supplementary licensing for television stations. Briefly, I agree with that decision. I look forward to further diversity for country people when they can have additional television stations. That may well be on a subscriber or pay television basis. To my mind that brings in further diversity and further opportunities so that many people in Australia will benefit very significantly from the provisions of this Bill. Together with other innovations that are occurring in the radio and television industry, in broadcasting generally, I believe country people throughout Australia will be given very real benefits and will welcome these moves in providing much greater access to a wider diversity of listening and viewing opportunities.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (12.47)-The Opposition protests most vigorously at the way in which this House has been treated in relation to this legislation and to these amendments. The Government's whole handling of this legislation has been characterised by intrigue and secrecy in the first instance and now, finally, panic. It just demonstrates the absolute shambles which has attended the whole of the consideration of this legislation.
In the first case, in November last year, the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) announced that there would be a review of the Broadcasting and Television Act. That review was not asked for by the industry. It was not justified by the Government until in December when the Minister revealed the true purpose of that review. The review was to provide a cover for amending the legislation in order to fix up the problems which had been created as a result of the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal rejecting the transfer of the licence in relation to ATV-10 in Melbourne. There were some other minor justifications given at that time, but that was t11'O real purpose of the review which was disclosed ~it that time. Then we went through the farcical pretence of providing the public with an opportunity to make submissions to that review. The Minister invited interested members of the community and the industry to provide him with their opinions about the amendments which should flow from the review. This is a review for which there was no justification and which had not in the first place been sought by anyone. Meanwhile the appeal in relation to ATV-10 was before the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and, therefore, there was a need to take some urgent action in order to provide for a favourable decision as a result of that appeal.

On 9 April the Minister came into this House and made a statement of the intentions of the Government in relation to the legislation flowing from the review.
There are three matters in the Ministers statement to which I particularly want to draw attention. In the first instance, he decided to intrude into the Act for the first time a constraint, a precise and exhaustive description of what the public interest would be in relation to the Tribunal's consideration at the time of the transfer or granting of a licence, except that he also included that at any time any Minister could add to that list of matters which the Tribunal had to take into account in relation to the public interest criterion. He also provided that retrospectivity would apply so that in the appeal currently before the Administrative Appeals Tribunal the appellant could decide whether his appeal would be heard under the proposed amendments to the Act or under the existing legislation. It is quaint that on the same day the Minister should deny on a radio program his December statement that the amendments had anything to do with the ATV appea\. Everybody knew that that was the case and any amount of obfuscation by the Minister at that time would not disguise it.
At this time the alarm bells started ringing in the industry. It was concerned about some of the proposals included in the 9 April statement of the Minister, and some of the back benchers started to get toey as well. They were concerned about the Minister being able to amend the Act, in effect, without any reference to the Parliament. They were concerned about the retrospectivity provisions which were to be included in it. Nevertheless, a draft Bill was prepared and distributed selectively to the major interests in the industry. Only a small number of favoured people were to be allowed to see the draft Bill, which was to include those matters which the Minister had outlined in his 9 April statement.
In effect, the major interests in the industry were asked these questions by the Government when they were shown the draft Bill: 'Are these amendments sufficient for you to extend your interests in the industry? Are these sufficient for you to increase your concentration of ownership in this industry? Is this sufficient for you to establish networks across the country? Is this sufficient for you to take over regional stations and therefore have nationwide control over the industry?' Those questions were asked not of the whole industry but of selected people within it, selected powerful interests. The problem was that, just as one of those powerful interests said

Broadcasting and Television Bill

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3259

'Yes, they will do me fine', other sections of the industry discovered that those provisions would hurt them. So whilst the Government was trying to help one of its friends on the one hand it was hurting others on the other hand. This led to brawls in Cabinet. The Ministers could not agree on who was the most powerful of their friends, which friends they were going to advantage and which they were going to disadvantage. At this time also the back bench was getting increasingly restive. They had not been advised; they had not been consulted about what was going to be in the provisions. It was not until after the consultations had taken place selectively with some areas of the industry that the back bench committee was finally informed of what the Government or the Minister intended. As I said, some back bench members who still have some streak of decency were concerned about the power of the Minister to amend the Act without reference to Parliament. They were concerned about the retrospectivity provisions, and particularly they were concerned about the appearance of the Government amending legislation just to protect and advance the interests of a particular individual in the industry. There were more brawls within Cabinet, more brawls with the back bench committee, threats of revolt in the Senate, threats that the legislation would not get through the Parliament. The urgency was there as far as the Minister was concerned. It had to go through this session so that the appeal before the AAT could be heard under the new provisions.
Finally, a very changed Bill came before the Parliament only on Wednesday, with 55 pages of amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act, 55 pages of very complex, very intricate amendments. Most of them were not foreshadowed in the 9 April statement because the changes which were necessary were enormous as a result of the objections not only within some parts of the industry but also within the Government parties. Those 55 pages were presented to us on Wednesday, and we are asked to debate them on Friday, just two days later. We are supposed to complete the consideration of this legislation in the next five minutes.
To add insult to injury, the Minister came in here just an hour ago and gave us the details of eight pages of further amendments, which he has now moved during the Committee stage. We are supposed to express an attitude to those eight pages of amendments having had them before us for only one hour. The Minister has to recognise and the Government has to recognise that this industry is not their private plaything. They cannot determine the future of this industry in secret

deals and secret cabals. We will not sit meekly by while the Government destroys this industry, creates chaos in it and completely wrecks its future. The industry is important, not only because it is financially important to those who own it but also for the reasons that the honourable member for Maribyrnong (Dr Cass) talked about. It is essential to the democratic process that there be diversity, not only in terms of ownership but also in terms of the opinions expressed through the mass media.

These amendments are necessary because of the secrecy and the selectivity of the consultations that have taken place. That is, as they help one group they hurt another. Only last Friday representatives of the Herald and Weekly Times group went to see the Prime Minister and said: 'This is no good. We are going to be disadvantaged by these amendments by which you have sought to advantage the Murdoch group'. The Prime Minister agreed that there should be other amendments, but it was too late. The Bill had gone to the Printer. So the additional amendments had to be brought in today, and we were given only an hour's notice of them We have not had an opportunity to look at them. Even today there are representatives of the industry crowding in King's Hall wanting to make representations, wanting to protest about provisions in this Bill.

This is no way to consider the future of this industry. We believe that these matters need very much more consideration than the Government has been prepared to allow. We are not intending to conclude the discussion of this matter in the next four minutes, as the Minister wants. There is plenty of time available next week. We will sit an extra day if necessary in order to give adequate consideration to this legislation. We want an opportunity not only properly to examine the first amendments but also to examine the amendments which have been thrown at us today. With that in mind, I move:

That progress be reported.

That course would enable us to defer consideration of this Bill and bring it back next week.

Question put.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Speaker-Mr G. O'H. Giles)

Ayes Noes .

. 41 . 64

Majority

. 23

Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N.

AYES

Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H, A.

3260 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Bill

AYES
Brown, John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child, J. Cohen,B. Cunningham,B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. DutTy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E.

Johnson, Les (Teller)
Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C.
McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les
Mildren, J. B. Milton,P.
Morri" P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. O. D. Theophanous, A. C. Wallis,L.G.
West,S.J. Willis,R.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. BrowD,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J.
Chapman, H. G.P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D. B.
Dean.A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R, Falconer, P. D.
Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (TeUer) Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodge., J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W,

Hunt, R. J, D,
Hydc,J.M. Jarman,A. W. Jull,D.F. Kalter, R. C.
Killen,D.J. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKeUar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A, J. Mclean, R. M.
McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar, P.C.
Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S,
Porter, J, R. Robinson, Ian
Rocher,A. C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P. D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair,). McC.
Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, O. E. J. Thomson, D. S.
Tucker, C. W. White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.

PAIRS

CampbeU,G. Keating, P. J.
Scott, J. L. Young,M.J.

Drummond,P. H. McMahon, Sir William
Nixon,D.J. Viner,R,I.

Question so resolved in the negative.

Motion (by Mr Bourchier) put:

That the question be now put:

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Mr G, O'H. Giles)

Ayes

63

Noes

40

Majority

23

Adermann, A. E. Baume, M.E.

AYES

JHayrmdea,nJ,.MA..w.

AYES
Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman,A.G. Cameron, Ewen Cameron. Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. O. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie. J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W. C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck. B. J. Groom.R. 1. Hall,Steele Harris,G.McD. Hicks,N. J. Hodges,]. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W. Hunt,R.J.D.

Jull,D.F.
Katter,R.C.
Killcn,D.J. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R.
MacKenzie, A. J.
McLean. R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar, P. C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A, S,
Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sain.o;;bury, M. E.
Shack,P.D. Shipton,R. F. Sinclair, I. McC.
Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J.
Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D.
Wilson, L B. C.

NOES
Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Brown,John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham. B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Jacohi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, BaTry Jones, Charles
Kelly,R. J. Kent,L.
Kerin,J.C. McLeay,Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P.
Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. O. D.
Theophanous, A. C. Wallis,L.G.
West,S.J. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William
Nixon,P.J. Viner, R. I.

Campbell,G. Keating, P. J. Scott,J.L.
Young,M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Question put:

That the amendments (Mr Sinclair's) be agreed to.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Mr G. O'H. Giles)

Ayes

63

Noes

40

Majority

23

Adermann, A. E,
Baume,M.E. Bimey,R.J.

AYES

Hyde,J.M.
Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F.

Broadcasting and Television Bill

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3261

AYES
Baurchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brawn,N.A. Bungey,M.H. Burr,M.A. Cadman,A.G. Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.I. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N. 1. Hodges, 1. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, 1. W. Hunt, R. 1. D.

Katter, R. C.
Killen,D.I. Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar,M.J.R.
MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh,D. T. Macphee, I. M.
Mi11ar, P. C.
Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, I. R.
Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, L Mce. Spender, 1. M.
Street, A. A. Tambling,G.E.J. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey, C. W. White,P.N.D.
Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N.
Brown,John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,l. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, 1. S. Duffy,M.I. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L.
Hawke, R. r. L.
Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Iacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A.
Iohnson, Los (Teller) lones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.I. Kent,L. Kerin,I.C. McLeay,Leo McMahon, Los Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, I. G. Scholes,G.G.D. Theophanous, A. C. Wallis, L. G. West,S. 1. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Nixon,P.I. Viner, R.I.

Campbell,G. Keating, P. J.
Scott,I.L. Young, M. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill, as amended, agreed to.

Bill reported with amendments; report-by leave-adopted.

Third Reading Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications)-I ask leave of the House to move the third reading forthwith. Leave not granted.

Suspension ofStanding Orders Motion (byMrSinclair) put:

That so much of Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the remaining stages being passed without delay.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

62

Noes

41

Majority
AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, I. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Burr, M. A. Cadman,A.G. Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Cbapman,H.G.P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly,D.M. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,I.D.M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer,P. D. Fife, W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. 1. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steel. Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.I. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.

21
Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,I.M. Jarman,A. W. Jull,D.F. KaUer,R.C. Killen, D. J. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKenar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock,A.S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock,P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. MoC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Beazley, K. C. Blcwett,N. Brown, John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M. J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,It.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding,A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E.

Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Los (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charle, Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. McLeay,Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Theophandus, A. C. Wallis,L.G. West,S.]. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Nixon,D.I. Vlner,R.I.

Campbell,G. Keating. P. J. Scctt,J.L. Young,M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill (on motion by Mr Sinclair) read a third time.

3262 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

BROADCASTING STATIONS LICENCE FEES AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 3 June, on motion by Mr Sinclair:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Sinclair) read a third time.
OVERSEAS TELECOMMUNICATIONS AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 3 June, on motion by Mr Sinclair:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.

general anti-tax avoidance section into the Income Tax Assessment Act. The Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill provides tax con-
cessions for investors in the film industry. Both are
extremely complex, particularly the former Bill,
and have a significant impact on the tax system. As such, the Government's handling of the Bills
deserves some condemnation. Both were introduced into the Parliament just one week ago,
providing insufficient time properly to master the intricacies of the legislation, let alone time for
informed-I emphasise 'informed'-public com-
ment on their wide ranging implications. The Government has had ample time to bring in these Bills and allow them to lie on the table for proper
consideration. Indeed, the new anti-avoidance section has been promised for over two years and the film concessions have been around since the
policy speech of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm
Fraser) in October of last year. Yet the Bills are left to the last days of this session of the Parlia-
ment and will now be pushed through without the consideration they deserve. This is fairly typical of the shoddy way in which this Government and the Prime Minister in particular disregard the Par-
liament and the people of Australia as a whole.

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Sinclair) read a third time.
Sitting suspended from 1.22 to :2.15 p.m.
INCOME TAX LAWS AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 19tH
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 27 May, on motion by MrHoward:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill and the Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill, as they are associated matters. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these two measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (2.16)-This debate encompasses two very important Bills dealing with aspects of taxation. The Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2) introduces a new

I propose to deal initially with the Income Tax
Laws Amendment Bill which, as I have indicated, presents a redrafted general anti-tax avoidance section to be inserted in the Act as a new Part IVA, sections 177A to 177G. This Part is to replace the now discredited section 260, which has been rendered almost totally inoperative by de-
cisions of the High Court of Australia. This legislation represents the most significant reform of
the Act for a considerable period, and the Opposition genuinely welcomes its introduction.
However, it is a measure which we have been waiting a long time to see. Section 260 has been
well and truly dead since the early 1970s. In 1975 the Asprey Taxation Review Committee recom-
mended that it be substantially redrafted, and the
Opposition has called for its amendment for at least four years. Given the massive explosion in
tax avoidance which this Government has faced
since it assumed office, one would have thought that the Government would have given top pri-
ority to reworking section 260. Instead, the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has been content to
fiddle while thousands of millions of dollars have
passed into tax avoiders' pockets. In 1978 he was considering rewriting the section. In late 1979 a
preliminary draft was completed, which the
Treasurer expected to present to Parliament during 1980. This draft disappeared during 1980,
except for vague promises by the Treasurer that it
was receiving urgent attention and the incredible

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3263

revelation by a Queen's Counsel, Mr Hulme, 1980 than in 1978, clearly shows that the Govern-

whom the Government had engaged to examine ment's policy to date of legislating against specific

the draft section, that such a single tax avoidance schemes as they are discovered has not worked

law was neither desirable nor likely to be and has continually left the Taxation Com-

effective.

misioner floundering at least one step behind the

Now, at last, we have a totally rewritten section before Parliament; but, given the apparent lack of urgency this task has been afforded by the Government, and the major defects in the Bill about which I will say more shortly, it is pertinent to ask, whether in fact the Treasurer really has his heart in this exercise. Is he really concerned to end the tax avoidance abuses which have been rapidly increasing the tax burden on the bulk of honest taxpayers? Is he really trying to curb the legalistic and inappropriate interpretations of tax laws by the courts and, most importantly, does he now intend to take further legislative action to end tax avoidance by wealthy Government supporters

tax avoider. Clearly a new approach is necessary and has been necessary for some years. A strengthened general anti-avoidance section is one
ApaursttroaflitahnatLnaebworaPpaprrtoya'cshv.ieSwu,chshaouseldctiboen~sinedthtoe
support the selective use of fully retrospective legislation against the highly artificial, contrived schemes, such as the Curran share trading
scheme, which resulted in massive revenue losses. In addition, the Australian Labor Party would ~ove specific amendments within the existing sections to close off the tax avoidance potential of trusts, foreign tax havens, superannuation funds and the like.

utilising such vehicles as trusts, foreign tax havens and internal superannuation funds? This will certainly test the Treasurer's credibility on tax avoidance.

The existing section 260 has had a rather diverse origin. New Zealand, whilst not the first
c?l:mtry to enact a general anti-avoidance proVISIon, has had various provisions in force since

He has every reason to act-and to act quickly. Just two weeks ago, in answer to a question on notice from me, the Treasurer revealed the staggering extent of tax avoidance in the community. During the latest financial years for which figures are available, 1977-78 and 1978-79, total claims for deductions under tax avoidance schemes against which the Government had acted totalled $2,760m. Assuming a tax rate of 50 per cent and that the deductions could be fully absorbed this translates into a loss of tax revenue of 'over
$1,350m, which is a staggering amount. These are only schemes against which the Government has acted. Given the flurry of activity within the tax avoidance industry in recent years-the number of identified tax avoiders was 20 times higher in 1979-80 than in 1975-76-these schemes probably represent merely the tip of the iceberg and total losses would be much higher. Certainly the Commissioner of Taxation is contesting these deductions but it is being done under existing legislation which the Government has considered to be

1878. This section, which since 1900 has been cast in a form remarkably similar to Australia's present section 260, has been given a much wider operation by the New Zealand courts than its equivalent in Australia. Consequently, the New Zealand tax authorities have not had to battle both the tax avoiders and hostile courts to the same degree as the Taxation Commissioner has had to do here. The first of such types of provisions appeared in Australia in 1895 in the form of section 44 of the income tax law in Victoria and section 63 of the New South Wales Land and Income Tax Act, both exhibiting some similarities to the early New Zealand provisions. In 1910 the first tax avoidance provision was introduced into Commonwealth legislation by section 63 of the ~and Assessment Act. The wording of that section was translated into section 53 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1915 and was almost identical with the words used in the existing section 260. In 1936, section 260 as it now stands was introduced into the Act.

ineffective and which the courts with their hitherto sympathetic attitudes to tax avoidance are unlikely to uphold. Consequently a quite conservative estimate would put the total losses due to tax avoidance at over $1,OOOm a yearequivalent to between $4 and $5 a week extra tax for every wage and salary earner in the country who is paying his or her fair share oftax.

Since that time the courts have progressively read down the section until they created the dead letter which stands in the Act today. The first warning note came in a House of Lords decision in
the Duke of Westminister case in 1936. In deciding for the tax avoider in the case, the House of L.ords held that a court was not entitled to go be-
hmd the actual transaction in front of it to base its

The continued growth in revenue losses due to decision on the substance or intent of the arrange-

tax avoidance, indicated by the fact that tax outment. In a much quoted passage Lord Tomlin

standing due to avoidance was 5 times higher in said:

3264 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

Every man is entitled if he can to order his affairs so that the tax attaching is less than it would otherwise be.
That passage, beloved by the tax avoiders, became the basis for the later destruction of section 260 and continuing battle between the Taxation Commissioner and the courts.
The next decision of note was that by the Privy Council in 1958 in Newton's case. This decision confirmed that section 260 was not concerned with the motives of individuals but with the effect of the arrangement itself. More important still was Lord Denning's judgment where he said that in order to bring an arrangement within section 260 it was necessary to predicate that the scheme 'was implemented in that particular way to avoid tax' and that if it were capable of explanation 'by reference to ordinary business or family dealing, without necessarily being labelled as a means to avoid tax, then the arrangement does not come within the section'. By strongly asserting that avoidance must be the sole or main purpose, not one of several purposes, this judgment laid the foundations for the rash of avoidance schemes which, while purporting to some form of business or family motive, were little more than highly artificial tax dodging devices.
The fate of section 260 was almost sealed by this stage. This was acknowledged by Justice Kitto in the High Court's decision on Newton when he said with remarkable clarity over 20 years ago that 'section 260 is a difficult provision, inherited from earlier legislation, and long overdue for reform by someone who will take the trouble to analyse his ideas and define his intentions with precision before putting pen to paper'.
A series of other notable court decisions followed. Keighery's case established what has become known as the 'choice principle'. This states that if a taxpayer creates a situation by entering a transaction which attracts tax benefits specifically provided by other sections of the Act, the validity of the transaction is not affected by section 260 merely because the taxpayer deliberately set out to gain that tax advantage. Thus a taxpayer can engage in the most outrageous artificial paper scheme, such as the Curran scheme, with no motive other than tax avoidance and be safe from section 260 because he has been able to scrape in under some other section of the Act not intended for that purpose. Cridland's case in 1977 took this principle to its illogical conclusion by ruling that, although a transaction was not explicable by ordinary dealing, it was still valid because the taxpayer had managed to remain covered by another section of the Act.

By this series of decisions the courts have thus neutered potentially one of the most effective weapons in the Tax Commissioner's armoury, forcing him to rely on the unsatisfactory case-bycase approach. Thankfully, though, this attitude is not held by all members of the court. Mr Justice Murphy in recent years has been a strong critic of the court's approach to tax legislation, especially its excessively literal interpretations of legislation and its failure to take into account the intentions of Parliament when deciding cases before it.
We hope that with the new composition of the bench, the court will review its attitude, especially on tax cases, and will be more inclined to acknowledge the revenue raising, equity and economic objectives of taxation laws on which decisions have to be made. Certainly the amendment introduced into the Senate last week to the Acts Interpretation Act will help the court in such a change of attitude. This amendment is potentially far reaching and is long overdue. By requiring the court to 'promote the purpose or object underlying the Act', this will help to achieve the Government's taxation objectives. The Government must make sure that it acts quickly to reinforce this provision by making further amendments allowing courts to consult other documents such as explanatory memoranda to ascertain the objectives of legislation. It is not, however, enough to rely on these changes. Every effort must be made to ensure that the new general anti-avoidance section can withstand whatever barrage the courts may choose to direct against it.
The Government's draft section 177 has no resemblance to the existing section 260 and it is obvious that an attempt has been made to overcome the defects of that section. When I refer to draft section 177, I mean the one that is now before us in the Bill. Obviously the Government has tried to establish a section much less broad than section 260, with detailed definitions of tax benefit, dividend strips and schemes to which the part applies. In addition, the Commissioner is given wide powers to reconstruct a tax liability-powers which he did not have under the old section. The element of retrospectivity contained in the section-in that losses generated before 27 May this year will not be available for carry forward to future years-is certainly to be applauded.
The Opposition welcomes the rather belated in-- troduction of this section and will support this element of the Government's avoidance strategy. However, we do not believe that the section can be fully effective in its present form. The tests for the operation of the section are too narrow and excessively restrict the Commissioner's discretion.

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3265

They may catch the most extreme and outrageous the Part applies to, contains the phrase that,

schemes but, in our opinion, avoidance arrangehaving regard to a number of matters, 'it would be

ments devised with any sophistication will still concluded that' the person entered the scheme to

have an excellent chance of escaping the Tax obtain a tax benefit. The discretion to reach that

Commissioner's net. If the language and powers conclusion is left to the courts, not the Com-

contained in the new Part IVA are not clear and missioner. It seems that the Government would

comprehensive, it is most likely that it will meet have us believe that the courts, which have white-

exactly the same fate as section 260 before it. Folanted previous anti-avoidance provisions, will

lowing consultations with some of the country's now do the job of constructively controlling tax

leading tax lawyers, the Opposition has identified avoidance. Frankly, although we think there is

what it regards as the major defects in the Bill and more hope for optimism than in the past, I do not

has accordingly drawn up a series of amendments have that degree of faith in the courts, and it

designed to streamline and strengthen its operseems to me and to the Opposition that this leaves

ations. I will deal with those amendments in more a potentially enormous loophole. Of course, this

detail during the Committee stage. But I will now was the loophole referred to publicly recently by

indicate our broad disagreements with the Bill and Mr Frankel, Q.c., who described this loophole as

our strategy for overcoming them.

the fatal flaw in the legislation. Accordingly, we

Firstly, the Opposition proposes to insert an objects clause at the beginning of the section setting out what the section intends to achieve. This follows logically from the proposed amendments

propose to vest the Commissioner with the power to determine that a tax benefit has been obtained and that the scheme comes within the operation of the section.

to the Acts Interpretation Act and it is difficult to Before there are cries of alarm from honourable see why the Government, after introducing this members opposite and others with a vested

amendment, decided not to have such a clause. It interest in tax avoidance about the uncertainty should provide clear guidance to those judges who attached to such discretions, let me point out a

look only to the words of the statute itself to disnumber of relevant points. Firstly,- the Com-

cern Parliament's intention. This, of course, is not missioner's discretion is not final. Any taxpayer a nove11egislative technique and is evident in the feeling wronged by a decision has the right of re-

Freedom of Information Bill, which is now before course to the courts or boards ofreview which are the Parliament, and Victoria's Liquor Control empowered to determine whether or not the

Act.

Commissioner has reasonably exercised his dis-

Another Opposition amendment concerns the cretion. Secondly, the Asprey Committee

threshhold conditions defining the schemes regarded the vesting of appropriate discretion in

caught by the new provision. It sees that as being the Commissioner as preferable to lengthy and

unduly restrictive in its present form and as invitcomplex provisions 'which can themselves be

ing a narrow legalistic interpretation. We will proinfected with the vice of uncertainty'. Finally,

pose a considerably wider definition of the wide discretion already exists in certain sections of

schemes to which the provisions apply, involving the Act, such as section 99 dealing with trusts and

broad definitions of 'scheme' and 'tax benefit' and section 103 dealing with public companies, and

the introduction of the concept of 'tax avoidance these discretions do not seem to have been

purpose' allowing the motives and intent behind a unreasonably exercised. The Opposition does not

scheme to be taken into account. In addition the regard reasonably used discretions with the same

requirement that tax avoidance be the dominant fear as do tax avoiders and we see them as essen-

purpose of a transaction is to be changed to pretial to an effective anti-avoidance provision.

vent the restrictive interpretations developed since Newton's case, to which I have already referred.

Finally, we propose to delete two provisions which leave the section wide open to the application of the choice principle which I mentioned

In our view it is sufficient that avoidance is one earlier. We propose to insert a sub-section

of a number of purposes, provided that it is not specifically directed against that principle. This

merely an incidental purpose. Again precedents and other amendments proposed by the Oppo-

exist in the Trade Practices Act and in New sition, if adopted, would ensure that Part IVA

Zealand's anti-avoidance provision. A major dewould become an effective weapon against tax

fect in the legislation, despite claims to the conavoidance. By proposing these measures we are

trary from its critics, is that the key provisions vest not engaging in scoring party political points.

wide discretions in the courts rather than in the Rather, we are trying to improve the legislation in

Tax Commissioner. Thus section 177D, the centhe national interest, especially.in the interests of

tral provision which determines which schemes the vast majority of taxpayers who have in the

3266 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

past and will in the future, unless this legislation is very successful, face increased taxes because of the successful activities of tax dodgers.
The activities of tax avoiders leads me to a consideration of the second Bill in this cognate de bate, the Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill, which provides two major tax concessions to the Australian film industry. It is ironic that in the same debate as that in which the Government has introduced a measure which it hopes will abolish tax avoidance it is also providing concessions which give an open invitation to tax avoidance. Basically, the Bill provides concessions on two levels. Firstly, it provides a 150 per cent deduction for capital investment in acquiring copyright in an Australian film and an exemption from income tax for earnings from a film for an amount to 50 per cent of the initial capital invested. These con cessions will replace those already in existence in Division I OB of the Income Tax Act which pro vides for investment in films to be written off in full over two years. Under the legislation the Min ister for Home Affairs must certify with regard to a number of factors that the film is an Australian feature film, documentary or mini-series tele vision drama. In addition, there is a long list of safeguards attempting to prevent smart operators from exploiting the provisions to make a quick dollar.

State or Federal, through the various film commissions.
The question is not one of support for the film industry but rather the most appropriate means of support. For a number of compelling reasons, which I will outline in a moment, the Labor Party cannot accept the measures proposed by this Bill and opposes their implementation. We believe that they are entirely inappropriate and will do more harm than good in the development of an Australian film culture. These concessions, as the Treasurer is fond of pointing out, are extremely generous. In fact they are more generous than concessions available to any other industry. We regard this latest measure as being outrageously generous. From the embarrassment shown by the Treasurer in recent days I am sure that he regards them in much the same way-any responsible Treasurer would. The Treasurer, however, has plainly been forced to carry the can for the Prime Minister's penchant for blatant electioneering. These concessions represent little more than outright pork-barrelling. The Prime Minister himself has admitted that these concessions were con ceived in a television studio make-up chair before the last election. What a way to make policy! The Government's recent acrobatics clea_rly show the after effects of policy-making on the run.

I stress very strongly that the Opposition en thusiastically supports Australia's film industry. Australia's film renaissance over the last decade has been achieved largely with generous government help, which was considerably boosted under various Labor governments. The Whitlam Labor Government established the Australian Film Commission in 1975 with an initial budget of $6.5m. This figure has not been matched in real terms by successive Liberal-National Country Party governments. The Australian Film Commision funding this year is 40 per cent less in real terms than it was in 1975-76. It would need to be $4m higher in the current year if it were to be of the same real value as in 1975-76. The first two State film corporations were established by Labor governments in South Australia in 1973 and New South Wales in 1976. These have also played a major role in film development in Australia. There is no question that the local film industry deserves government support as a means of foster ing a distinctive local film culture with its in terpretations of Australia and the rest of the world. Largely due to Labor governments, Fed eral and State, it has had considerable support. In the 1970s, during which the industry achieved international recognition, 60 per cent of the investment in the industry came from government,

The concessions as first announced were to provide a 150 per cent write-off in the year of expenditure. The Treasurer, however, was quickly forced to reconsider the proposals as the cost escalated from the guesstimate of $2m at the time of the election to $10m, the figure given by the Treasurer in Question Time, to $20m and, finally, to a level which the Treasurer has not yet disclosed but, it seems to the Opposition, will cer tainly be higher than $20m. I note that the Treasurer in his second reading speech gave us no castings. I think it is highly inappropriate for tax concessions to be introduced by governments with no cost being given. The Treasurer had a duty in his second reading speech to give such a costing. As he did not do so he promised in answer to a question from the honourable member for Prospect on, I think, 28 May to give such a cost ing. He has not yet done so. Although he may do so later in this debate it will be at least after the conclusion of the second reading. That seems to be a highly inappropriate time to give a costing. It should be given at the outset when the Government introduces the legislation.
From what the Treasurer told us in his second reading speech it is clear that about $1OOm of tax losses-perhaps not all in one year-are lined up

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3267

from the 170 films to which the Treasurer referred, with investment involving $130m. In addition, the Treasurer has admitted that under the immediate write-off proposals the safeguards contained in the Bill could not guarantee that it will not be exploited by tax avoiders. So the timing of the write-off provisions was changed to the year in which the film was finished and used for producing assessable income. This is not a major change for people genuinely interested in investing in films but it was quite a blow for those people looking to make a quick tax donar. Now, however, the Prime Minister has bowed to pressure from the industry and stepped in again. The Treasurer has been forced to make a second humiliating change in the space of one week so that money invested between the date of the initial annoucement and the introduction of the Bill will be eligible for an immediate write-off as originally proposed. What an incredible back down! What happened to all the concern about excessive costs and tax avoidance expressed by the Treasurer in his second reading speech. He has mentioned neither. We still do not know how much the latest tax conessions will cost.
The latest change is little more than a sop to the tax avoiders who got in quick for a write-off before 30 June this year. The highest income earners with large amounts to invest stand to gain the most from these concessions. I have prepared, and seek leave to incorporate in Hansard, a table which shows what a generous tax shelter this scheme provides.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-
RETURNS TO INVESTOR FROM FILM TAX CONCESSIONS
($100,000 investment by an investor paying tax at 60c in the $)

Cash

Tax

After tax

$
100,000 outlay .. return

$ Total loss
90,000 saving

$ -10,000

100,000 loss
100,000 outlay 10,000 return

90,000 total saving 10 per cent return
90,000 saving

-10,000
-10,000 + 10,000

90,000 loss
100,000 outlay 30,000 return

90,000 saving 30 per cent return
90,000 saving

-10,000 +30,000

70,000 loss

90,000 saving

+20,000

Cash

Tax

Aftertax

$
100,000 outlay 50,000 return

$ 50 per cent return
90,000 saving

$
-10,000 +50,000

50,000 loss
100,000 outlay 100,000 return

90,000 saving
Break even
90,000 saving 30,000 payment

+40,000
-10,000 +70,000

Break even

60,000 total tax saving

+60,000

Mr WILLIS--J thank the House. The table looks at the investment of $100,000 by a wealthy investor paying tax at the top marginal rate of 60 cents in the dollar. If the total amount of investment is lost with no return whatsoever, the investor loses only $10,000 or 10 per cent, which shows just how little risk is involved. If the investment makes a return of only $10,000, with the substantial tax savings involved the investor breaks even, which is not bad for an actual money loss pre-tax of $90,000. Any return above 10 per cent results in significant after-tax returns to the investor. Even a 50 per cent return on his original investment which actually means a $50,000 loss, pre-tax leaves the investor $40,000 ahead after tax. It is little wonder that these measures provide such an incentive for tax avoidance.
It is obvious that tax avoidance money is flowing into the industry. As Tsaid, the Treasurer in his second reading speech said that 170 films have applied for certification so far under the scheme. That is not bad at all considering that less than 10 films were made in Australia last year. It is possible to wonder at the standard of films which are likely to be produced from this sort of money rush. Very generous tax concessions in Canada have created an industry producing almost entirely imitation American movies. We do not want the same thing to happen in Australia where some extremely high class films have been produced. It would be tragic to see Australia's film revival destroyed by an influx of smart money men, interested only in quantity and speed of production rather than in turning out quality films. One can imagine the motives of the Packers, the Harry M. Millers, the Murdochs and the host of stockbrokers, accountants and finance men who are moving into the industry.
The pressure on film making facilities of this influx of capital will be enormous. The local industry has only a limited capacity to produce films. It is inevitable that production costs will soar. Already the budget of an average film has

3268 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

risen from about $200,000 five years ago to around $lm today. These costs must go higher with these concessions forcing many worthwhile productions out of the market. Large parts of the budgets are likely to be taken up in commissions paid to brokers, who arrange investments, and costs for ancillary services will rise accordingly. Advertising costs have risen by over 30 per cent during the last year. The general picture therefore is one of an industry facing substantial upheaval due to the promise of an ill-thought-out tax concession conceived in the heat of an election with no consideration given to the real needs of the industry.
Therefore, the Opposition regards these concessions as inappropriate to the need to establish a viable, high-quality film industry in Australia. Further assistance may well be required by the industry due to the severe reduction in real funding of the Australian Film Commission, and perhaps some of the State commissions. In the Opposition's view, extending already generous tax concessions is not the best way to give that needed assistance. That assistance would be much better given in the open controlled and fully accountable form of increased government funding of the Australian Film Commission. The tax concessions proposed in the legislation are inappropriate because they are an open invitation to tax avoid-- ance. They involve the expenditure of a considerable and uncontrolled amount of potential tax revenue at a time when many important government programs are being cut back or abolished. They are not in the best interests of the Australian film industry but represent in fact nothing more than an ill-considered pet project of the Prime Minister which may do something for his ego but nothing for the nation.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (2.46)-1 do not intend to deal at length with the points raised by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) because I assume that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) will give a very detailed and effective reply to them. It strikes me as curious that the honourable member for Gellibrand is suggesting that this legislation should not be proceeded with now. I wonder when he thinks it should be proceeded with. Does the honourable member expect it to lie on the table of the House until we resume in August, after the end of the financial year? I think he ought to make the Opposition's intentions pretty clear rather than having a generally broad and fairly unsound objection to the fact that this legislation will be passed now, before the end of the financial year. I think it is absolutely vital for Australian taxpayers to know exactly where they stand and to have the legislation on

the books by the time they are in fact required to arrange their affairs, which is by 30 June, the end of the financial year. For the honourable member to suggest that that could be covered by retrospective legislation- -of course that is is his usual approach---seems to me to be an attempt to force an unpleasant situation of retrospective legislation, which this side of the House certainly objects to, on the Australian people.
I will also raise very quickly the point made by the honourable member for Gellibrand concerning film concessions. I think everyone in the film industry should remember these words: 'The Labor Party believes that the film concessions are outrageously generous'. I imagine that when members of the film industry complain as they have in recent days-about the nature of the present concessions they would recognise what this alternative would be. The alternative of a Labor government would presumably be to withdraw these concessions which it regards as outrageously generous. That puts in some sort of context the objections made by people such as Phillip Adams, Robert Huber and others who have made very strong representations to the Government and alleged that the Government has reneged on a commitment. They have said that this is an exercise that dishonours those stated'principles to aid the film industry. That was alleged in a letter to me from Mr Huber. I say to those people that they run the very real risk of falling for a form of blackmail by financiers providing money for the film industry because the financiers are very keen indeed to maintain the widest possible loopholes in the legislation so that they can use the legislation for tax dodging purposes.
The blackmail that I believe these financiers are endeavouring to use in relation to the film industry is that they are telling producers of Australian films that under our legislation they will withdraw their funding of Australian film projects. That is arrant nonsense. By making that threat to the film producers, the financiers are encouraging them to write hysterical letters to members of parliament, to appear on television programs saying things that are absolutely and totally untrue in an endeavour to force an opening up of the legislation that would allow a massive tax grant to suit the financiers and not the producers. I stress to the producers of Australian films that because the other legislation we are debating cognately seeks a replacement of section 260 and because of all the anti-tax dodging legislation introduced by the Act, the new Acts Interpretation Act and so on, it seems to me there will be very few areas indeed
where people who are seeking to minimise their tax can legally do so. The Australian film industry

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3269

is one such legal opportunity. The Australian film high quality-it is evident to me that they will

producers in fact will be embarrassed with money have the opportunity to produce the films of their

rather than by a shortage of it. So to have this sort choice. Certainly there will be no shortage of

of nonsense from the film industry complaining money, only as a result of the specific endeavours

about what the Government has done is in fact of this Government in providing the industry with

particularly offensive in the circumstances of the what I believe is a very generous tax assistance.

claim by the Labor Party that the benefits are outrageously generous.

Very briefly I will deal with the question of the replacement of section 260. In particular I want

I stress that the suggestion made by the honourto complain very strongly and stress my objection

able member for Gellibrand that the legislation to the Labor Party's amendment to the legislation

will lead to a flood of quickies-iIi film termswhich has been brought in after months of

and will work to the disadvantage of the prodetailed study and consideration. I concede that

duction of decent long term Australian films is arsome of the advice that the Government received

rant and self-evident nonsense. The reality is that in this matter-some of it fortuitous, some of it

there is no film that has ever been made in gratuitous-has not all been terribly useful. Cer-

Australia where the lumping of the major costs of tainly it seems to me that if one were to look not

that film production has exceeded 21 months. only at the advice before the event but some of the

There is not one. There is a long lead time, I conadvice after the event that seems to come from

cede that point, which is involved in the prepMelbourne one would take the view that that city

aration of script and other arrangements but seems to have a specific capacity to contain

which involves a very small amount of money. It people who seek to preserve almost unlimited

is the lumping of the actual expenditure which is rates of tax dodging in this nation.

of main interest to the contributors and financiers I particularly, however, refer to the Labor

of these films. The reason I stress 21 months as the Party's suggestion that a discretion be vested

time which will suit the investor and in which the specifically in the Commissioner of Taxation and lumping of the payments will take place is this: the taxation boards of review to decide whether a The financial investment made, for example, on 1 tax benefit has been obtained and whether, having

July can proceed until the end of that financial regard to wide ranging criteria, the tax avoidance

year and then can continue until the following purpose was present. This purpose need not be

March when provisional tax is paid in order to the dominant purpose but must not be merely an allow tax concession to take place when that proincidental purpose. I suggest that that is an indi-

visional tax is paid in March. Investors have a cation of a lack of appreciation of commercial re-

21-month capacity in terms of the lumping of ality. This Labor proposal would put at risk the

major expenditure.

normal activities of business. I think it reflects the

I suggest that indications both from the industry and from the Opposition that there will be a major disadvantage to people to produce better films is nonsense particularly when the statement is seen in this context: A flood of money will come into the film area. As I have said it is one of the few legal areas in which people can invest. This flood of money will then provide the producers of Australian films with a greater opportunity of

Labor Party's lack of concern about the reality of business activity to suggest such a proposal. This is not aimed at preventing blatant tax avoidance. It talks of a tax avoidance purpose being present. The purpose could be incidental even though the Labor Party says that it must not merely be an incidental purpose. How on earth does one distinguish between whether it is incidental and whether it is a little more than incidental?

choice than ever before in the investors they When the Labor Party states that it believes

would like. The producers of decent Australian that the most blatant schemes can best be dealt

films who are concerned with quality will have a with by specific retrospective legislation, leaving

better opportunity now to shop around for invesmore ambiguous arrangements to be picked up by

tors instead of the situation being the other way broad discretionary provisions, I think it is very

around. I suggest there will be every opportunity important that we should consider exactly what

for a concentration of the Australian film industhe Labor Party is about. It wants to make illegal

try's attention on decent, long term and impressand impose penalties on things that were, in fact,

ive Australian films. To suggest otherwise is to legal at the time that they were done. I believe

suggest that the integrity of those capable people that this is a basically immoral proposition. I am

in the Australian film industry is something that is very surprised indeed that the Labor Party would

in question. In view of the relatively scarce remaintain it. I hope that this House will recognise

sources in terms of real ability in the film industry the immorality of that proposal. I totally com-

in this country-but, my goodness, we have a very mend these Bills to the House. I believe that in

3270 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

both cases the Government has, in fact, made a great step forward, particularly in its endeavours to prevent tax avoidance and also, of course, in its efforts to provide much needed assistance to the Australian film industry.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (2.57)-This is the shonkiest piece of legislation that the Government has introduced since this morning. The Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill ran pretty close. I want to concentrate to some extent on the situation of the tax incentives in the film industry. It seems to me that there are five major heads of objection to the legislation as brought in by the Treasurer (Mr Howard).
First, the legislation offers financial incentives for the production oflarge numbers oflow quality films which may well be produced in the interests of speculators and tax minimisers without any interest in the long term survival of the industry. Second, the legislation is likely to act as a disincentive to the production of high quality films by forcing them to compete with tax avoidance films in securing the services of writers, producers, technicians and performers. Third, it will introduce destabilising factors into the economies not only of the film industry but also of related industries, particularly advertising, costs of which have risen sharply as the result of announcements made in 1980 by then then Minister for Home Affairs, the Hon. Robert Ellicott, now translated to the bench, and the Prime Minister, then as now unhappily the Right Hon. J. M. Fraser, proposing major incentives for film financing-incentives which have been changed several times since then. The unfortunate Treasurer has had to adopt more positions than in the Kama Sutra in order to adapt himself to these changes. He had done it with his characteristic flexibility. Fourth, the legislation is aimed at extending tax incentives to films made pursuant to co-production agreements with foreign companies which will also increase pressure on available film resources and skilled personnel in Australia. Fifth, it will provide an enormous concealed subsidy to the television industry.
Because time is limited this afternoon I want to concentrate heavily on the fourth matter; that is, the extending of tax incentives to films made pursuant to co-production agreements. I would not like to regard myself as a narrow Australian chauvinist or nationalist, certainly not so far as the film industry is concerned. In my history of 10 years or so associated with film financing, as my friend the honourable member for Wentworth (Mr Coleman) would be the first to concede, I certainly wanted to establish a strong national filrp. industry. But we cannot cut ourselves off frofIl the rest of the world and say that the rest of

the world can go one way and we will go in another. I point out to the Treasurer the dangers of allowing our industry to be sucked too far into co-production of films. There are some real horror stories in the past. I suppose that Spain is the most notorious example, when there was an enormous generation of co-production activity. American film companies were coming in and producing very expensive films such as El Cid and many others. Then there was a change of mood and the tide receded. Instead of a healthy Spanish film industry being left behind-after all there had been a lot of work opportunities for television technicians, cameramen, lighting men and so on-in fact, there was just the wreck of an industry. In the long term such activity did not strengthen Spain's industry; it weakened it. I just draw the attention of the House to this: Division lOBA of the Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act states:
"124zAA. (I) In this Division, unless the contrary intention appears-
'Australian film' means a film that(a) has been made wholly or substantially in Australia
or in an external Territory and has a significant Australian content; or (b) has been made in pursuance of an agreement or arrangement entered into between the Government of Australia or an authority of the Government of Australia and the Government of another country or an authority of the Government of another country;
That is what an Australian film is. An Australian film is a film that is made in Australia and has a significant Australian content or is a :5.lm that is made pursuant to a co-production. In other words, we go through one door and find a strict definiton of what an Australian film is; we go through another door and it can be anything in the world. It does not have to be an Australian film as defined in the legislation. I will not have time to read the whole of proposed section 124AD. I ask leave of the House to have it incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
"124zAD. Where, in considering for the purposes of section 124zAB or 124zAC whether a film is, or when completed will be, a qualifying Australian film, the Minister is required by virtue of paragraph (a) of the definition of'Australian film' in sub-section 124zAA (1) to determine whether the film has, or the proposed film when completed will have, a significant Australian content, the Minister shall, in determining whether the film has, or the proposed film will have, a significant Australian content, have regard to--
(a) the subject matter of the film or proposed film; (b) the place or places where the film was, or the proposed
film will be, made; (c) the nationalities and places of residence-
(i) the persons who took parI, or who will take part, in the making of the film or proposed film

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3271

(including authors, composers, actors, scriptwriters, editors, producers, directors and technicians);
(ii) the persons who are, or who will be, the beneficial owners of shares in any company concerned in the making of the film or proposed film; and
(iii) the persons who are, or who will be, the beneficial owners of the copyright in the film or proposed film;
(d) the source from which moneys that were used in the making of the film were, or that are to be used in the making of the proposed film will be, derived;
(e) the details of the production expenditure incurred in respect of the film or of the budgeted production expenditure to be incurred in respect of the proposed film; and
(f) any other matters that the Minister considers to be relevant.
Mr BARRY JONES-I call this proposed section, with some immodesty, the Jones definition. It is, in fact, a definition that I drafted years ago for the Australian Film Development Corporation. It shows. that there is appreciation in the Treasury for fine drafting. It is the best thing in the Bill. The tragedy is that all those wonderful qualifying factors that would determine whether a film is Australian are simply invalidated by the alternative qualification. In other words, if we make a film under a co-production arrangement then it does not really matter. Supposing Sir Run Run Shaw, the proprietor and the entrepreneur of Shaw Movietown, asks the Hong Kong Government to talk to the Australian Government, a coproduction agreement is reached and he then comes to Australia to produce 30 tit and bum films. Such films will be covered and any Australian investors will be covered without any difficulty at all to the extent of 150 per cent of the tits or bums. What has that got to do with an Australian film industry, even if some Australian raw material is used?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-1 remind the honourable member that he should bear in mind the language he is using and hope it has a relevance to Standing Orders.
Mr BARRY JONES-Absolutely. It is totally and on all fours, or even on all eights, relevant to Standing Orders. I think that is a very serious situation. The Opposition has taken the view that it is useless tinkering with such a dreadful Bill and that we have to oppose it outright. It is the Government's problem and the Government has to wear it, but I put it to the Minister that the first thing he ought to do is get rid of section 124ZAA(b), because that is an outrage. To open the floodgates not even to Australian rubbish-that is bad enough-but to foreign rubbish as well and to give it the advantage of a tax concession is outrageous. I believe the honourable member for Macarthur

and the honourable member for Wentworth, if I spoke to them privately, would say exactly the same thing as J am saying.
Mr Baume-There is the certification from the Department.
Mr BARRY JONES-Yes, but nevertheless--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Perhaps the private conversations could be kept until later.
Mr BARRY JONES-Very well. J do fear that tax avoidance films will simply become a new genre. I noted the point made by the honourable member for Macarthur that it was comparatively unusual-I think he gave the impression that it was almost unknown-for a period of more than 21 months to elapse between the genesis of a film--
Mr Baume-The lumping of the main expenditure.
Mr BARRY JONES-The lumping of the main expenditure, yes, that is probably right. However the troubling thing is that we need to consider the expenditure that might be described as pre-conceptual; in other words, the expenditure that is undertaken before finding a camera crew and actually getting the thing running. I can recall from my days in the Australian Film Development Corporation that from the time when we first began to read the scripts for Breaker Morant to the time when Breaker M Drant was produced would have been more of the order of six or seven years. I left the AFDC in 1975, so it would probably have been about 1974 when we were first dealing with Breaker Morant. If we exclude that kind of expenditure where there is long preplanning, I think it would be a tremendous mistake. The same thing applies with a film such as Kangaroo. I suspect that it will be a long time before Kangaroo actually appears, but it will be a worthwhile film, and I would hate to think that there was a diversion of resources away from films such as Kangaroo to more films in the style of Tony Ginnane's Harlequin. That would be a deplorable thing, and yet I think it is very likely to happen. I do not believe we will have anything like the 170 films that have been suggested. However, as I said in 1978 in a speech in this place on the same subject, I think we could be in very real trouble if we get something like 50 or 60 films a year. Perhaps 25 to 30 feature films a year is probably about tops, and if we go higher than that we are going to have an awful lot of junk produced. That would be deplorable.
Twanted to say a lot more on this subject, and I know that the Deputy Government Whip (Mr

3272 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

Hodges) is very eager for me to go on. I am not sure whether he is waiting to pounce. It is absolutely tragic, and if the film industry is going to develop as we want it to, we have to get out of the rut we have been in. We have to get away from the nostalgia films. We have to be much more adventurous, and the area will therefore be much more risky. I fear that we will have people getting into the business for the wrong reasons. Every accountant and his brother-in-law will have a film project they want to put up. That sort of thing will have a very destablising effect on the industry and some of the industries related to it. I was told the other day by the head of an international advertising agency that in the last 90 days there has been an increase of 30 per cent in the costs of film commercials-a 30 per cent increase in 90 days--- and they attribute that increase almost entirely to this wretched piece of legislation.
Mr PORTER (Barker) (3.1O)-The Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2) is an attempt to restore a more fair and equitable tax system in Australia. Over the last decade we have seen a gradual increase in the number of people undertaking tax avoidance schemes. The increase in the tax avoidance industry in recent years and the amount of tax forgone has been to the detriment of other taxpayers. The large increase in tax avoidance has come to a head only recently, and we need to understand the reasons for this before we can properly address ourselves to correcting the situation. Section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act is the section which was inserted in 1936 in order to make void arrangements which have the purpose or effect of altering the incidence of any income tax or relieving any person from liability to pay any income tax or make any return. The section was tested in the courts, and the decision in Newton's case in 1958, to which the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) has already referred, was considered to be the high water mark for a powerful interpretation of section 260 and not, as the honourtible member for Gellibrand suggested, the beginning of the end.
Newton's case involved a complex arrangement consisting of a series of transactions. The arrangement was designed as a scheme of dividend stripping in order to cut down liability for the payment of tax. The Privy Council found that the section applied. The court considered that, to bring the arrangement within section 260, it was necessary to be able to predicate by looking at the overt acts of the scheme, that it was implemented in that way to avoid tax. On the other hand, if the transactions were explicable by reference to ordinary business or family dealing, then section 260 did

not apply. Lord Denning did not, as the honourable member for Gellibrand thought, herald the beginning of the end of section 260 by deciding that the transaction did not have to have the sole purpose of tax avoidance. In fact, he strengthened section 260 by including agreements in which tax avoidance was only one of the purposes.
As people became aware of the more restrictive meaning given subsequently to section 260, when it was interpreted more and more narrowly, so they started to enter into more blatant tax avoidance schemes, and that has become particularly evident in the lastfew years. Initially the Government was forced into reacting to the initiatives of the tax avoiders in order to protect the revenue and the responsible taxpayers who had been disadvantaged. To put a figure on the extent of avoidance, the average Australian taxpayer could have received an increase of about $125 in the spouse rebate or about $150 in the tax-free threshold but for the activities of the tax avoidance industry over the last year. The Budget shows that the Government will lose $300m this year due to tax avoidance. Last year the shortfall was$280m.
Dr Edwards-They are probablyunderestimates.
Mr PORTER-They may be. The Government is acutely aware that those who are avoiding tax are forcing a greater taxation burden on those in the pay-as-you-earn system, together with those on low incomes and those who accept their taxation responsibilities. Until the introduction of this latest set of Bills, since 1977 some 24legislative measures have been taken by the Government against tax avoidance arrangements. The Government has taken a number of initiatives in this area. It has developed a system of identifying and reacting promptly to particular avoidance schemes. It has adopted the procedure of announcing that the legislation will be effective as from the date of announcement and it has eliminated the possibility of carrying forward losses. It has not adopted the Labor Party policy of retrospectivity. Let me quote Aspreyon that point. He said:
There is a well-established, fundamental and sound principle that legislation, especially fiscal legislation, should not have a retrospective operation. That which was lawfully done should not, after the completion of the act by which it is done, be made unlawful and subject to penalty. There is a strong presumption against retrospectivity because it manifestly shocks one's sense of justice.
The Government is acting on transfer pricing and other avoidance arrangements conducted through international transactions. The Government has also made it a criminal offence to prevent the collection of taxation. The Government has also

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3273

appointed-and the Treasurer (Mr Howard) regularly consults with-the Taxation Advisory Committee which is made up of private sector practitioners who I believe are experienced and indeed respected in the taxation field. The action that has been taken, especially in enacting legislation which is operative from the date of announcement, has dealt with some of the avoidance arrangements. However, long, detailed and complex legislation clearly creates further opportunities for avoidance. The continuing need to legislate in this way does create problems which may well not have occurred if the approach of the House of Lords had been adopted in Australia. Recently the House of Lords struck down an artificial tax avoidance scheme. In a robust and practical approach the House of Lords found that the income tax legislation was created to operate 'in the real world, not that of make believe'. The decision is reported to recognise specifically the development of new and sophisticated legal devices in the income tax field. The House of Lords declared:
While the techniques of tax avoidance progressed and were technically improved, the courts were not obliged to stand still.
Such inability must result either in loss of tax, to the prejudice of other taxpayers, or to parliamentary congestion or (most likely) both.
I suggest that many would agree that that is just what has happened in Australia. The Government, therefore, has had to legislate today in an attempt to revitalise the section 260 concept. It has been impossible to complete this task quickly. I congratulate the Treasurer for not only bringing this legislation before the House but also for the consultation which has occurred in order to endeavour to ensure that this Bill achieves its aim without prejudicing normal business and family arrangements. The opinion of private counsel has been sought on this matter. The Treasurer has also consulted with the Taxation Advisory Committee. I believe the Bill has its approval. In looking at the new provisions it is important to bear in mind two views which have been expressed in relation to the current section 260. Asprey has suggested that if any arrangement has or was calculated to result in the type of tax advantage specified in section 260 then the Commissioner of Taxation:
. . . should have the right to disregard it - -
That is, the arrrangement-
for taxation purposes, unless the arrangement was an ordinary business transaction creating rights or obligations that would normally be created between business people dealing at arm's length in a transaction of the nature in question and effected by means normally employed in such a transaction, or was

made in the ordinary course of making or changing an investment, or was a bona fide arrangement of a person's or a family's affairs and the Commissioner was satisfied that the arrangement was not entered into solely or primarily for the purposes of obtaining the tax advantage or that one of its main objectives was to obtain the tax advantage. If the Commissioner did disregard the transaction, he should be empowered to assess any person deriving income under or consequent upon the arrangement to income tax at a deterrent rate.
I also refer to Lord Denning's judgment in Newton's case in which he said:
In order to bring an arrangement within the section, you must be able to predicate-by looking at the overt acts by which it was implemented-that it was implemented in that particular way so as to avoid tax. If you cannot so predicate, but have to acknowledge that the transactions are capable of explanation by reference to ordinary business or family dealing, without necessarily being labelled as a means to avoid tax, then the arrangement does not come within the section.
Bearing those two important statements in mind I refer to the Bill. The new provisions are designed to apply where, on an objective view of the particular arrangement and its surrounding circumstances, it would be concluded that the arrangement was entered into for the sole or dominant purpose of obtaining a tax deduction or having an amount left out of assessable income. That test for application of the new provisions is intended to have the effect that arrangements of a normal business or family kind, including those of a tax planning nature, will be beyond the scope of Part IVA of the Act.
It will be necessary, if Part IVA is to apply, that a taxpayer has obtained a tax benefit. A tax benefit will have been obtained by a taxpayer in connection with a scheme, if after applying the other provisions of the principal Act to the taxpayer, either an amount is not included in an assessable income of the taxpayer that might reasonably be expected to be included if the scheme had not been entered into, or a deduction is allowable to the taxpayer the whole or a part of which might reasonably be expected not to have been allowable if the scheme had not been entered into.
A tax benefit will not arise for examination under Part IVA where a reduction in tax liability follows from the mere making of a declaration, election or selection, the giving of a notice or the exercising of an option expressly provided for by the principal Act. Nor is the deduction available for investment in income equalisation deposits to be within the purview of Part IVA of the Act. Unfortunately, I do not have time in this debate to discuss more fully the details of this legislation. However, I strongly support the Bill which aims to ensure equity between taxpayers whilst not inhibiting normal business, commercial and familyarrangements.

3274 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (3.22)--Firstly I wish to register my protest at the scandalous way in which this legislation is being rushed through the Parliament. Only a few minutes have been given in which each speaker may address the House. However, having registered that protest-I will not take up too much time this afternoon--I would like to make a few points in relation to the tax exemption provisions regarding the film industry. There is chaos within the industry. This Government has got itself into a fix because of the amendments that have come forward---
Mr Howard-Which industry?
Mr CHARLES-The film industry. This Government has got itself into a fix because of an ill-th?ught out concession and promise given at the tIme of last year's Federal election. The tax avoidance industry has skyrocketed within the film industry. Tax avoidance is raging. I will retu~n to that in a minute. As a result of this legislation more films will be made in Australia. Will we be making films of a higher quality? I would suggest not. A sidelight was referred to earlier in relation to television station proprietors. Of course, they will open their own companies-if they have not got them already. Whilst they are perfectly within their rights to do so, I do not believe the original intent of the legislation was to give these tremendous tax concessions to such multi-million dollar organisations. A 150 per cent tax concession with a 50 per cent tax exemption on receipts-that is not on profits; it is on receipts-is indeed a generous concession but it brings up a whole lot of questions, such as whether we should be trying to help the film industry through the tax system. I think that is the basic question. I would think not. It does not really help the film industry in the long term. It will not help the genuine producers, directors and writers. As the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) said in his very good address to this chamber a little earlier, it was the Labor Government which established the Australian Film Commission in 1975 and it is this Government that in this year, in real terms is granting 40 per cent less than the last contribution of funds by the Labor Government in 1975. This Government cannot really say it has a commitment to the film industry when the Australian Film Commission is being choked of funds, as are of course many other corporations funded by this Government.
Let us consider a couple of those points. The taxation avoidance industry is sky-rocketing.
Why? Because of the tremendous tax concessions granted. When the Treasurer (Mr Howard)

introduced the Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill last week we saw the amount of money that was withdrawn from films. Six films were pulled off the shelf straight away. Whilst I concede that all that money might not have been tax money, a majority of it must have been tax money. Why would it have been withdrawn if it were not? It had to be. If I were a genuine investor in the film industry I would keep my money in a film. J would want to see a good quality film made and see the results from that investment, hopefully in the form of profits through the box office. As a result of this legislation, as the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) said, more low quality films will be made. If 100 films are made a year that does not necessarily mean that they will be good films. As the honourable member for Lalor said, it will probably mean that it will be a bad thing. I would rather see 10 good quality films out of 20 films than 40 or 50 films with only half a dozen of them considered to be any good. Quality of production and the whole film industry must be considered. We have to plan for the next 20 years, not just for the next 20 months.
The Australian Labor Party has always been committed to the film industry. We will be committed again when we win government in 1983. We will attain government, make no mistake about that. One area that the Government has not addressed itself to is the monopoly of distribution of films. That is very important. If I were a producer and made a film that cost $1 m I would need to gross around $Sm at the box office before I received any profit. Why? Because the majority of this money would go to the distributors. They have a monopoly. It is one area that we should be looking at in order to help the industry as a whole make good quality films so that we will have a culture in the art and film industry which we can be proud of but which we do not have at this time. We will not have this by making ad hoc decisions and promises that are all right one day but which fall to pieces the next.
I will conclude on two points. The honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume), in fact, took Phillip Adams out of context. I think Phillip Adams wanis a good film industry. I do not think the honourable member was right. When a government does make a promise it should adhere to it. I am glad that it has done that at least in the short term. Throughout this I am not quite sure where the Treasurer stands. I am reminded of a film made about 10 years called The Producers.
Mr Howard-A very good movie.

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3275

Mr CHARLES-It was a good film. I am not sure whether the Treasurer is the Gene Wilder character which was that of a nifty little tax accountant who fiddled the books or whether he was the larger than life producer who was played by Zero Mostel and who ran around getting the worst scripts, the worst directors and the worst cast to make the worst possible play so that the whole thing would be a total flop; he and his partner would rip off the investors. It worked out that they had not sold 100 per cent of the play but that they had sold 25,000 per cent of the play. As their scheme came unstuck, this scheme I believe has come unstuck. The Government has been put in an embarrassing situation. I am glad that in the short term it has attempted to help the genuine people in the industry. As this Government will be in office for at least another two years, unfortunately, I ask it to look at more productive ways of genuinely helping the film industry so that we can plan for the next 20 or 30 years and not just for the short term, as this legislation does. I think the whole area of the tax system to help investors, especially in the film industry, is not ideal. We should be looking at monopoly of distribution and at funding the film industry through the Australian Film Commission so that we can help a good and viable Australian art and film industry.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (3.30)- The purpose of the Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2) is to replace the function of section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act with the new Part IVA. This has become necessary because of the weakening of that section largely as a result of decisions of the High Court of Australia. The amendments are directed only against tax avoidance arrangements which are blatant, artificial or contrived. There are also special provisions to deal with dividend stripping schemes of tax avoidance. The taxpayer to whom the new Part applies will be liable under statute to pay an amount of additional tax equal to double the amount sought to be avoided. There are a number of very important deficiencies in this Bill. I hope I may have an opportunity to talk about one of them during the Committee stage. In the first place the effectiveness of the Bill will depend upon the effectiveness of the amendments to the Acts Interpretation Act which was introduced into the Senate last week. That will require the courts to give weight to the purpose of an Act instead of to its literal wording. I am concerned that in the light of the Acts Interpretation Act amendment there is not in this Bill a specific purpose or objectives clause.
Secondly, I am concerned that the Bill deals only with blatant, artificial or contrived schemes

for avoiding tax. I am concerned that it does not take under its umbrella the more ambiguous schemes. I am particularly concerned that those schemes on the margin will probably avoid being struck down by this legislation because of the general penalty provisions. It is possible that, as a result of penalties of the kind proposed being attached to them, the courts may be sympathetic to those grey areas. I believe, as a result, the tax manipulators will become more sophisticated and will find it possible to get around the provisions of the section. I hope that that is not so, but I am concerned that it could well be so. The Australian Labor Party's answer, of course, not only to the ambiguous areas' of tax avoidance schemes but also to the more blatant is the retrospective provisions. I will say more about that later because we are supported by people in the community who cannot possibly be considered supporters of the Labor Party. The retrospective provisions would kill off overnight the blatant areas of tax avoidance. In addition, these amendments of the original section 260 could pick up the more ambiguous schemes. Mr Irving Frankel, QC., who has participated, particularly over the last 12 months, in the tax debate, has made reference to a number of very significant deficiencies in the legislation. Of course, the most flamboyant of the tax avoiders, Peter Clyne, is claiming that he has schemes already arranged to get around the new provisions.
This Government's approach to tax changes generally has not been a very creditable or a very successful one. That applies not only to the Government's approach to tax avoidance schemes but also to its approach to tax questions generally. The Sydney Morning Herald editorial of 7 May this year states:
To date, the clear direction of the Government's various tax changes has been to lighten the burden on high incomeearners and increase it on low income-earners.
The present estimate, which is well documented, for the cost of tax avoidance to the Commonwealth Treasury is at least $3,000m every year. The share of income tax paid by ordinary wage and salary earners has increased from 67 per cent in the mid-1960s to over 80 per cent today. Quite clearly, ordinary wage and salary earners are being required, through the taxation system, to make up the amount that other people are avoiding. If it were possible to eliminate tax avoidance it would be possible at the same time to reduce the tax burden on ordinary taxpayers to the extent of 15 percent.
The present Income Tax Assessment Act consists of almost 1,000 pages. Since the start of 1980, 200 pages have been added to it. It has become a

3276 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

complex, inconsistent and a fairly easily avoided Act. During 1979 and 1980 the Act was amended 18 times, and related legislation was amended on 15 occasions. Of course, additional tax legislation has been introduced during the last few weeks of this parliamentary session.
Clearly the Act has been misused by the Government. Not only has it been used as a means to provide assistance to industry-the Opposition would not quibble with all those types of arrangements-but also the Act has been used to honour electoral bribes that have been made by the Government parties. The fact that the Act has become more unweildy and more complex has made it necessary for the Government to legislate in relation to particular schemes in an attempt to overcome tax avoidance. This legislation has attempted to close the loopholes but, in the process of so doing, it has introduced greater complexity, greater confusion and, at the same time, has provided further avenues for tax avoidance.
We have claimed, and we will continue to claim, that if any genuine effort is to be made to overcome the tax avoidance industry then retrospectivity is the means by which it would be overcome overnight. The honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter) referred to the Asprey comment in relation to retrospectivity offending our sense of justice. I think it is a strange and convoluted sense of justice which would find offence in retrospective legislation to overcome a system which, at the present time, is ripping off the Commonwealth Treasury and the rest of the Australian taxpayers to the extent of at least $3,000m. By way of contrast I mention pensioners who are earning allowable income. That income is subject to tax anyway, but as soon as they exceed the allowable income provision they are taxed at the highest marginal rate for any taxpayer in Australia. For every additional $2 they earn, the Department of Social Security takes away $1. So they are Left with $1 out of $2. As they have gone into the 32c in the dollar tax bracket, the Treasurer takes another 32c out of that remaining dollar. This means that under this Government pensioners are being taxed $1.32 or 66c in the dollar, which is in excess of the maximum rate paid by anyone else in Australia, even if he is earning $100,000 or more a year. The ordinary pensioner in Australia who moves into the tax bracket is the highest marginally taxed person in Australia. People such as the honourable member for Barker should not come into this place and talk about a sense of justice.
Quite clearly, the taxation industry has declared war on this Government. It has declared

war on the Australian Treasury and on the Australian taxpayer. I believe that the only way to kill tax evasion is by the use of retrospective legislation. If that is the means by which it can be killed, retrospective legislation should be adopted. I am not alone in saying that. The Sydney Morning Herald again in its editorial on 28 May 1981 stated:
If Part IVA does not work--
That is the Part we are now considering-
then only retrospective legislation is left.
This Treasurer (Mr Howard) and the former Treasurer of this Government have to accept responsibility for the situation which has developed. There were 861 identified participants in tax avoidance in 1975-76. In the last year for which figures are available that figure had grown to 17,233-an increase of 2,000 per cent during the five years of this Government. For every person who participated-or who was identified as participating-in tax avoidance schemes in 1975-76, there are now 20 people identified as participating. Again this Treasurer and the fellow who preceded him have to accept responsibility. All the legislation that has been coming before this Parliament has been designed to overcome tax avoidance schemes. The tax avoiders have got around it and the Government has had to introduce further amending legislation to overcome new schemes. A letter written to the Financial Review by the editor of the Australian Taxation Review states:
The proposed new provisions provide a furlher example of Mr Howard's ineptness. During the past few years he has introduced literally hundreds of new pages of lax legislation. It has generally been badly drafted--
It has had to be brought back to this House and amended again-
and it is clear from his statemen ls that he has simply not understood its precise elfeels.
Thus, for example, on two occasions Mr Howard has introduced legislation dealing with trust-stripping, and on both occasions it has been deficient in obvious respects: And many similar cases made may be cited.
The letter continues:
Certainly his performance in regard to taxation has been inept and inadequate, and there is much to be said for the view that it is desirable that he be replaced by someone who is more competent . . .
Whilever the tax avoidance industry accelerates and snowballs to the extent that it has under this Government and under this Treasurer I endorse the sentiments of that letter.
Some references have been made to the use of tax concession arrangements for tax avoidance. The fact that the largest number of films

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3277

produced in anyone year is about 20 and that durthe days when the Whitlam Labor Government

ing the last 12 months applications have been set up the Australian Film Commission and the

made for provisional certificates for another 170 Wran and Dunstan governments set up the New

indicates that the tax avoiders are into this area as South Wales and South Australian film com-

well. I have very serious doubts about whether the missions. They were generally well received but

legislation was introduced to benefit the film inthey had their critics who said it was morally

dustry. It will not benefit the film industry. It is wrong for governments to become involved in the

the most disruptive type of scheme that could be free market area and to provide funds for what

introduced. All the smart-Alick speculators are was fundamentally a risk venture for the film

now coming into the film industry. If this Governindustry.

ment closes off the tax dodges these people will all get out again after they have disrupted the industry.

Money was put up and ploughed into films and we justified it-I believe quite rightly-on the grounds that it created a new industry, it con-

The shadow Treasurer, the honourable tributed something to Australians' knowledge of

member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis), has already Australia, it helped to create an Australian cul-

indicated the way in which the scheme was ture, it publicised Australia abroad and it played

devised. It was suggested to the Prime Minister an important role for Australian artists, writers

(Mr Malcolm Fraser) while he was sitting in a and so on. It was attacked not just by the Govern-

chair getting his face made up by a make-up girl ment but by people throughout the media. I can

for a television appearance. We have been given recall characters such as Mr Singleton saying it

to understand that there were two reasons why was outrageous for government to spend a couple

the legislation was so poorly drafted. Firstly, the of million dollars to promote an Australian film

girl was so daunted by the task of making the industry.

Prime Minister photogenic that she could not really explain whl!-t she was wanting him to do. Secondly, because the Prime Minister was so excited at the prospect of being made photogenic he really did not understand what she said. If honourable members want further evidence of the extent to which tax avoiders are getting into this area I will quote, in conclusion, an advertisement in the Financial Review of 6 May this year. It states:

Originally the Government promised in this legislation $2m. We are now looking at an amount of somewhere between-we do not know the exact figure-$100m and $200m. This expenditure is justified on the grounds that it is helping free enterprise. It is a straight gift to the industry and to those people who are seeking to avoid tax. As I said before, it is a bizarre situation. I was about to say that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) is not in the House, but I now see he is; he is hard to

AUSTRALIAN FILM
INDUSTRY Are you in the 60 p.c. or
46 p.c. tax bracket? Ifyou are then

notice at times. In any other field of human endeavour, be it in a private company or a government organisation if a person submitted a budget for $2m and an error was made of between $98m to $198m, the person responsible would be either

phone Vince Perry on 5604006.
(Perry-Grego Trust)
I am surprised the Government benches have not been vacated by those people who undoubtedly would like to take advantage of the provisions offered.

sacked or shoved into gaol. I cannot recall in history any Treasurer or
government making such an incredible error. The amazing thing about it is that nobody seems to mind. We have listened to the Treasurer and the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) regale this country for the last 5+ years about the need for

Mr COHEN (Robertson) (3.45)-The income small government. We have seen the razor gang

tax legislation with which the House is dealing report in which every silly nit picking little thing

today-I speak with particular reference to those one could imagine has been cut out to save a few

sections dealing with the film industry-is one of dollars. Suddenly, with just a little slip of the

the most bizarre pieces of legislation I have seen in tongue, there is a bit of a mistake, a bit of a miscal-

the whole period I have been a member of this culation. It is only $198m; say it quickly and it

House. When these measures were announced by does not sound like much. The Treasurer must be

the then Minister for Home Affairs, Mr Ellicott, awfully embarrassed. I do not know whether he is

following a rather snap judgment just before the the person responsible, although I suspect he is. I

last election, a figure of $2m was mentioned as do not know what we can do about the other fel-

being the likely cost to the taxpayer to support an low; he is now in the Federal Court of Australia.

Australian film industry. My mind goes back to He made a little error of $198m and now he is

3278 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

promoted to the Federal Court. If he had made an error of $500m he could have been king of Australia. It is incredible that in this day when we have been harangued by a conservative government about saving money--we have been told we cannot afford increases in pensions or family allowances and that the Government cannot provide funds for aged persons' homes and welfare housing~-it can make a little error of a couple of hundred million dollars; nothing serious.
The Australian Labor Party has a total commitment to the Australian film industry. We think it has done a magnificent job. When we provided funds and invested in selected industries certainly errors were made in some areas and we selected the wrong ones in which to invest. Nevertheless, it assisted and encouraged the film industry by providing funds. I pay tribute to previous Liberal Prime Ministers, including Sir John Gorton, who established the Australian Film and Television School, and the magnificent work done by the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) and Phillip Adams. As I said before, we have a total commitment to the film industry. It has done a magnificant job for the country.
We have now reached the point where the films coming out of Australia-such as Breaker Morant, The Getting of Wisdom, My Brilliant Career, Caddie, Picnic at Hanging Rock and others-are among the best in the world. There is no question about that. Breaker Morant has received a best supporting actor award and has now opened in New York to very big houses. The Australian film industry is now recognised around the world. It has come of age and it needs continuing support. However, it does not need to attract all the hustlers, the shysters, the crooks and the spivs, the get rich quick tax avoiders who come in and produce 150 or 200 films and lower the general quality of the films made. Nothing in this legislation says it has to be a good film, or even an attempt at making a good film. Quick, slick pornographic films can attract these benefits. Let us forget about the pornographic films; films of any quality, no matter whether it is good or bad, can attract these concessions. It is the worst thing that can happen to the industry. Normally we produce 20, 30 or 40 films a year. Now we look like producing 170 films. The industry cannot stand that sort of pressure. It does not have the back-up, the technicians, the actors and actresses, the producers or the directors to make that quantity of films.
Mr Bradfield-What is the definition of a good film?

Mr COHEN-That is a very good question. There is subjective judgment in that. It is similar to asking what is the definition of good art. I think we have progressed from the past system where someone had to make a judgment as to what was a good film. We have to rely on people; sometimes they might be right and sometimes they might be wrong. We have produced good quality films in the last few years. The fact is that at the moment, with this system, we have no guarantee that we will get quality films. We are likely to get poor quality films. I am sure the honourable member who made the interjection agrees with me. The Opposition commends the Government for the principle of wanting to help the Australian film industry. All governments in the past decade, Labor and Liberal, have had the same objective. That is to be admired. However, legislation such as this will not help in the long run and, as I said, it will provide the opportunity for enormous tax avoidance by all sorts of people who are not interested in the industry but who are interested in saving a lot of money. Legislation such as this is a disgrace. We have to add to that the fact that we do not know how much it will cost. It could be $50m, $100m or $200m. It is the most bizarre piece of legislation I have seen; it is a most extraordinary series of errors made by this Government. Somebody should have his head ort the chopping block over it.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.54)-in reply-I would like to make a brief reply to the contributions to the debate on the Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2) and the Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill. I commence my remarks by expressing my thanks to a number of groups that have contributed over the past two years towards the putting together of what has become colloquially called the new section 260, which, after all, is the principal measure in front of us today. I would first like to thank the officers in the Policy and Legislation Division of the Australian Taxation Office who have worked so many hours on the very intricate task and have devoted their very considerable skills to that effort over the past two years. I thank them unreservedly for the work they have done consistent with the other pressures upon them during that period. I thank also the members of the Government taxation committee, chaired by the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume), who also during that period have given very valuable advice and comment on approaches to a possible rewriting of section 260. Finally I would like to thank the Taxation Advisory Committee which was established by the Government about

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3279

18 months ago. The Committee provides an extremely valuable source of private sector advice to the Government on the forming of taxation legislation. They have all played a very valuable role in contributing towards the legislation now before the House.
I do not suppose a piece of legislation has been more carefully thought about, more carefully prepared or more carefully put together than has this piece of legislation. So any suggestion that this legislation has been prepared in haste or prepared in an ill-conceived manner is quite without foundation. That is not to say there cannot be legitimately different points of view as to the effect of the legislation. I am not going to certify or guarantee to the House that this legislation is going to be as effective as I hope all of us believe it will be. But I can assure the House that on the basis of the advice that the Government sought-it is very well credentialled advice which has come from some of the finest taxation lawyers in the country and people who have worked in this area for a very long time-this Bill represents an appropriate way of achieving the Government's objectives of obtaining an effective anti-avoidance section but a section which does not at the same time get in the way of ordinary or normal family and commercial dealings. That from the very outset has been the Government's objective in this area. Whilst the ultimate fate of this legislation, like any other law passed by this Parliament, will ultimately be litigated in the courts of this country-I would not wish it otherwise-this Bill represents, after a period of two years of very intensive work, the product of people who have formed that view. I believe that in presenting this Bill to the Parliament the Government is presenting a piece of legislation which aspires in a very objective fashion to the two purposes which I have just described.
I have had a look at the Opposition's amendment. Let me say that I welcome the extent of support that the Opposition is giving to this legislation. We may differ in our views as to whether this will be effective; we may differ as to whether one should adopt the approach of retrospection so far as tax avoidance legislation is concerned; but I think at least we have a bipartisan concern to reduce and eliminate if possible the level of tax avoidance in our community. I acknowledge that. I would hope to that extent at least there can be a bipartisan expression by this Parliament of our contempt for the selfishness of those in the community who believe in the principle that tax is for other people and not for them. I believe that this legislation is the most important blow yet struck

by this Government against those in the community who would seek to evade their responsibility as citizens, and who probably constitute a significant section of the community which is busy pointing out to the Government that other sections of the community are abusing privileges and the like.
Unfortunately, the Government cannot accept that the Opposition's amendment meets the criteria that I have explained. I believe that the Opposition's amendment would endanger normal family and business dealings. I believe that an amendment which says that tax avoidance must not necessarily be a sole or dominant purpose runs the risk of getting in the way of a number of normal family and business dealings in which tax minimisation, whilst not the dominant or sole purpose, is a purpose. These dealings therefore run the danger of falling foul of the type of amendment moved by the Opposition. I also think the amendment moved by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) would have the effect of reintroducing the choice principle into the interpretation of the law which, as he explained in his speech, is one of the reasons why section 260 in the Act at present has fallen to the ground.
Could I just briefly move to the legislation dealing with incentives to the Australian film industry. J indicated on 28 May in response to a question from the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) that during this debate I would provide the best estimate of the cost of this incentive on a full year basis that was available to me. Let me repeat to the House that the estimate which was used during the election campaign in relation to this promise was supplied to the Government by the Australian Film Commission. The estimate was under $5m. The estimate used by the Government during the election campaign was based. on that information. I have indicated to the House that something of the order of 200 films have been presented for certification. The Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) has certified about 53 of those films. The total budgets of those films certified are about $45m. I think it is common ground that the Australian film industry does not have the capacity to complete anything like 170 or 200 films in a year as I think the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) mentioned. I think there is a view that about 30 films a year in present circumstances is probably the appropriate figure.
One can assume that an average budget for a film is about $1.5m and that the overwhelming majority of people who invest and take advantage of this concession are reducing their tax at the marginal rate of 60c in the dollar. On the basis of

3280 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

30 films with average budgets of$I.5m, with a 150 per cent write-off, and that sort of tax rate involved, we are looking at a cost of something in the order of $40m a year. I do not accept the figure of $200m, or anything like it, used by the honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen). I do not think that was a very carefully thought out figure. It was a colourful figure used for the purposes of the honourable member's contribution to the debate. But it is not a figure that I believe is sustainable in all the circumstances. Therefore, in accordance with the undertaking that I gave to the honourable member for Prospect, on the basis that I have outlined that is the best properly based estimate that the Government can provide on the information available to it. I repeat that on the basis of 30 films a year at an average budget of $1.5m, making the allowance that everybody investing in it is on a marginal rate of 60c in the dollar-that is probably a bit of an exaggeration-the cost would be something of the order of $40m a year.
Mr Robert Brown-What about the profits in all that?
Mr HOWARD-I am trying to give that a comprehensive response. The honourable member should not get too excited. This estimate is made on the basis of 150 per cent. The question of the cost to revenue of the non-taxability of the 50 per cent is harder to calculate. I think the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert Brown) and others would agree that it is harder to calculate and to some extent one has to make a fairly random allowance for that.
The profit record of films in Australia over the years has been very uneven. Not a large number of them have made big profits. So we ought not start running away with figures of $50m or $100m in that area. It is very difficult to make anything other than a random addition to the figure of about $40m. That is the advice I can give to the House. I might say that revenue estimates in areas of new incentives are, of course, difficult to make with the same degree of precision as revenue estimates which can be properly based on historical experience. This is a new concession. I have said-I do not run away from the fact-that it is a very generous concession. I remind the House that we are dealing with a high risk industry. I believe there is a consensus on both sides of the House that we should try to assist it. We disagree as to the way that assistance should be provided, but at least there is agreement on its provision. I simply return to my earlier remarks. I believe the proposed replacement for section 260 is certainly the most important general amendment to the tax law introduced by this Government over the past

three years. We believe it will be effective. It remains to be seen how it will be interpreted. I welcome the support given to it, qualified though it is, by the Opposition. We cannot accept the amendment to be moved by the Opposition, for the reasons I have explained, but I welcome very much the support that has been given.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
The Bill.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (4.8)-by leave-I move:
(1) Clause 7, pages 2 and 3, omit proposed section 177A, substitute the following section:
Object and interpretation of Part " '177A. (1) The object of this Part is to ensure a fair
sharing of the tax burden and to promote the revenueraising, economic and redistributive functions of this Act by preventing or counteracting tax avoidance, and accordingly the provisions of this Part shall be deemed to be remedial and shall be given such large, liberal and purposive construction as will best ensure the attainment of the object of this Part.
'(2) In this Part, unless the contrary intention appears: "liability" includes a potential or prospective liability; "scheme" includes(a) any agreement, arrangement, understanding, promise or undertaking, whether express or implied and whether or not enforceable, or intended to be enforceable, by legal proceedings; and (b) any plan, proposal, action, omission, course of action or course of conduct,
and without limiting the generality of the foregoing includes-
(c) any act omission transaction or other step preliminary to or forming part of a scheme; and
(d) a unilateral arrangement, plan, proposal, action, omission, course of action or course of conduct; and
"taxpayer" includes a taxpayer in the capacity of a trustee. '(3) The definiton of "taxpayer" in sub-section (2) shall not be taken to affect in any way the interpretation of that expression where it is used in this Act other than this Part. '(4) A reference in this Part to a person acting or omitting to act in relation to a scheme shall be read as including a reference to a person acting or omitting to act in relation to a scheme together with another person or other persons. '(5) A reference in this Part to a person acting or omitting to act in relation to a scheme or part of a scheme for a particular purpose shall be read as including a reference to a person acting or omitting to act in relation to a scheme or part of a scheme for two or more purposes if(a) such purposes included or include that purpose; and (b) that purpose was not or is not merely an incidental
purpose' ".
(2) Clause 1, page 3, proposed section 177n, omit sub-
sections (3) and (4).
(3) Clause 7, pages 3-5, omit proposed section l77c, substitute the following section:
Tax benefits " '177c. A reference in this Part to the obtaining by a tax-
payer of a tax benefit in relation to a scheme shall be read as

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3281

a reference to a taxpayer being liable but for the operation of this Parl-
(a) to pay less income tax in respect of a year of income than he would have been liable, or might reasonably have been expected by the Commissioner to be liable, to pay in respect of that year of income but for the scheme; or
(b) to pay any income tax in respect of a year of income which is a later year of income than the year of income in respect of which he would have been liable,
or might reasonably have been expected py the
Commissioner to be liable, to pay that income tax but for the scheme.".
(4) Clause 7, page 5, omit proposed section 177D, substitute the following section:
Schemes to which Part applies " '177D. (I) This Part applies to any scheme in relation
to which a person acts or omits to act or has acted or omitted to act after 27 May 1981 (other than a scheme in relation to which a person acted or omitted to act before that date), whether in Australia or outside Australia or partly in Australia and partly outside Australia, where-
(a) the Commissioner is satisfied that a taxpayer (in this section referred to as "the relevant taxpayer")-
(i) has obtained a tax benefit in relation to the scheme;
(ii) would but for section 177F obtain a tax benefit in relation to the scheme; or
(iii) might resonably be expected to obtain in the future a tax benefit in relation to the scheme; and
(b) the Commissioner is satisfied that a person who acted or omitted to act in relation to the scheme or any part of the scheme did so for the purpose of tax avoidance, whether or not the first mentioned person obtains any tax benefit in connection with the scheme and whether or not any person affected by the scheme is a party thereto.
'(2) In determining whether a person acted or omitted to act in relation to a scheme or part of a scheme for the purpose of tax avoidance the Commissioner may have regard to anyone or more of the following-
(a) the manner in which the scheme was entered into or carried out;
(b) the form and substance of the scheme;
(c) the time at which the scheme was entered into and the length of the period during which the scheme was carried out;
(d) the result in relation to the operation of this Act that, but for this Part, would be achieved by the scheme;
(e) any change in the financial position of the relevant taxpayer that has resulted, will result, or may reasonably be expected to result, from the scheme;
(f) any change in the financial position of any person who has, or has had, any connection (whether of a business, family or other nature) with the relevant taxpayer, heing a change that has resulted, will result, or may reasonably be expected to result, from the scheme;
(g) any other consequence for the relevant taxpayer, or for any person referred to in paragraph (f), of the scheme having been entered into or carried out;
(h) the nature of any connection (whether of a business, family or other nature) between the relevant taxpayer and any person referred to in paragraph (f);
Ul the extent (if any) to which the relevant taxpayer
used or committed his own funds in the scheme;
(k) whether the scheme created or failed to create rights or obligations which normally would not or

would, as the case may be, be created between persons dealing with each other at arm's length; and (I) any other relevant matter. '(3) A reference in this Part to a person acting or omitting to act in relation to a scheme for the purpose of tax avoidance shall be read as a reference to a person acting or omitting to act in relation to a scheme or part of a scheme for the purpose of(a) directly or indirectly altering the incidence of any income tax; (b) directly or indirectly relieving any person from liability to income tax; or . (c) directly or indirectly avoiding, reducing or postponing any liability to income tax, and references in this sub-section to the incidence of income tax or to a liability to income tax shall be read as including references to income tax which might reasonably have been expected to be incident upon any person but for the scheme or income tax to which any person might reasonably have been expected to be liable but for the scheme, as the case maybe. '(4) The Commissioner may be satisfied that a person acted or omitted to act in relation to a scheme for the purpose of tax avoidance notwithstanding that the scheme or any part of the scheme or any tax benefit obtained in relation to the scheme was or might be contemplated by another provision or other provisions of this Act.' ".
(5) Clause 7, page 7, proposed section 177F, omit proposed sub-section (I) and (2), substitute the following sub-sections:
"( I) Whenever this Part applies and notwithstanding any other provision of this Act other than this Part, the Commissioner may at any time in relation to the year or years of income in which the tax benefit is obtained, or in relation to any other year of income-
(a) treat the scheme or any part of the scheme as void for the purposes of this Act; and
(b) adjust the taxable income or liability to income tax of any person affected by the scheme to the extent necessary to counteract the tax benefit obtained in relation to the scheme or to any lesser extent.
"(2) Where pursuant to sub-section (I) any income is included in the taxable income of any person or any adjustment is made to the liability of any person to income tax, then for the purposes of this Act such income shall be deemed to have been derived by virtue of this section by that person and by no other person or such adjustmen t shall be deemed to have been made by virtue of this section to the liability of that person and of no other person, as the case maybe.".
These amendments to clause 7 of the Bill are serious amendments. They have been carefully thought out by the Opposition. They have not been put together for the sake of making a show of producing amendments. They have been worked on substantially hy us with help from lawyers involved in the tax area. We believe they remedy some deficiencies in the Bill. We believe that there are deficiencies and they concern us. We want this provision to be as effective as possible. We move the amendments in a spirit of co-operation and hope that the Government will give them serious consideration. Already, of course, the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has indicated in his remarks in reply to the second reading debate that he has no intention of accepting them. We regret this. We
believe they remedy some important deficiencies.

3282 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

These amendments do three things: Firstly, they introduce an objects clause into Part IVA, inserted by clause 7 of the Bill. Secondly, they alter that part of the Bill which refers to the dominant purpose of an arrangement being tax avoidance. We believe that to be unduly restrictive, and it is likely to allow many schemes to escape through the net. Thirdly, we widen the Commissioner's discretion which exists in the Bill in respect of the reconstruction phase but does not exist in respect of determining schemes which are caught by the legislation. That we believe to be a fundamental flaw in the legislation. The first amendment is addressed to proposed new section I77A of the Bill. It inserts an objects clause. As I said, such a clause is important in anti-avoidance legislation. What we have seen in the past in respect of section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act, as I explained in my speech on the second reading, is well known to all members. Section 260 has been written down by judicial interpretation over the years, especially by literal interpretation of the law. It is important therefore, particularly given the change which the Government has just initiated in respect of the Acts Interpretation Act requiring courts to have regard to the objects of legislation, that we now insert an objects clause into this Part. If we want the provision to be really successful we must take account of the fact that the judges are likely to look only at the words which appear before them. J believe that an objects clause in this Part will enhance the prospect of the section being interpreted in the way in which this Parliament wants it to be interpreted, that is, as a section which is there to prevent tax avoidance. Proposed new section 177A, the objects clause, reads:
(l) The object of this Part is to ensure a fair sharing of the tax burden and to promote the revenue-raising, economic and redistributive functions of this Act by preventing or counteracting tax avoidance, and accordingly the provisions of this Part shall be deemed to be remedial and shall be given such large, liberal and purposive construction as will best ensure theattainment of the object of this Part.
I believe that our intention is quite clear in that wording. I am sure that there would be no misunderstanding on the part of the judiciary in interpreting this section of the Income Tax Assessment Act if such an objects clause were inserted. They would be much less likely to write it down by literal interpretation of the rest of the section than if such an objects clause appeared in the legislation. I am, to say the least, somewhat disappointed that this clause is dismissed by the Treaurer as not being terribly important. I believe that he will come to regret that at some future date when various interpretations do not meet with his desires.

The rest of proposed new section 177A includes a definition of liability which is needed because of our definition of the purpose of tax avoidance, which comes in later. It comes straight from the New Zealand general anti-avoidance provision, section 99 of the Land and Income Tax Act, which section is being given a much wider interpretation by the courts than is section 260 of Australia's Income Tax Assessment Act. Changes are made to the definition of a scheme to avoid tax in this and in later amendments to ensure a wider definition of the threshold conditions defining the schemes caught by the net. Our basic approach is to cast the net as widely as possible with discretion in the Commissioner, of course, vetted by the boards of review and the courts, not to apply the operative provisions to, for example, bona fide family or commercial transactions. Only in this way is it possible, in our view, to prevent legalistic interpertations from aborting this section. The elements of this wider threshold are broader definitions of 'scheme', 'tax benefits', persons who obtain tax benefits-any taxpayer--and the purpose of tax avoidance, with no requirement for a dominant purpose.
Proposed new section 177A (5) relates to the area of dominant purpose. We see the present provision as being unnecessarily restrictive and needing to be changed to overcome the long lasting benefits of earlier court decisions such as that taken in Newton's case which was referred to by me and by other members in thc second reading debate. We propose in the legislation, instead of referring to sole or dominant purpose, to provide that the purpose shall not have been or be merely an incidental purpose. The honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) in the second reading debate attacked that proposal as being an outrageous one which would destroy the legislation by allowing it to apply much more widely than was desirable. In fact, similar provisions already exist in the Act in anti-tax avoidance section 82KH (lA) which relates to the carrying forward of losses under tax avoidance schemes. That section states:
. . . no regard shall be had to a purpose that is a merely incidental purpose.
We believe that that is a provision for which there is already a precedent in the Income Tax Assessment Act. A similar provision is contained in New Zealand's anti-avoidance section. I believe that this would be a very desirable change, one which would mean that many schemes which would otherwise be likely to escape through the net would be far less likely to do so.
The third amendment relates to proposed section 177c in regard to tax benefits. The real effect

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3283

is that we are putting in a general test for paying less income tax rather than the test for tax benefit included in the legislation, which we regard as
likely to be ineffective. By deleting the Govcm" ment's definition of tax benefit we believe we are preventing attack by the courts on the basis of the antecedent transaction doctrine. Under section I77c (1) the Commissioner, to uphold the de- .cision, would have to show that an amount would, or might, reasonably have been expected to have been included in assessable income. But the taxpayer may have changed his conduct in order to enter into a completely new transaction to avoid tax; thus there is no amount which could reasonably have been expected to have been included in assessable income so no tax benefit has been obtained and Part IV (A) would not apply. The determination whether a tax benefit has been obtained would again be left to the courts in that situation. What Labor prefers is to allow the Commissioner to determine this fact subject to the boards or the courts.
The most important Opposition amendment is amendment No.4. It seeks to insert the schemes to which the Part applies. What we do here is to close the fatal flaw referred to by Mr Frankel, QC., recently in public, because we believe the way the Bill is written leaves the discretion in the hands of the courts. The courts can interpret that, as we have seen in so many instances in the past, in a way which is extremely narrow. We believe that that power of interpretation should be given to the Commissioner. There is again provision for that in other sections such as section 99 and section 103, of the Act. This was recommended by the Asprey Taxation Review Committee report. Similar discretions are contained in South African anti-avoidance legislation, which has been much more effective than our section 260.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (4.18)-1 feel bound to support the amendments as they strengthen section 260 and section 136 of the Income Tax Assessment Act and I hope that in the long term they will strengthen section 26AAA. It is with pleasure that I support my colleague the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) in his constructive initiatives insofar as the amendments are concerend. Whatever weapons are brought to bear, the fire power needed to block the massive tax avoidance that is going on still lies with the High Court of Australia. Although I welcome the proposed new section 15AA we unquestionably
have to attack the Act itself. The Act must be strengthened. It is a pity that we have to engage in

such an important debate at this late hour. The situation is crazy. I hoped that we could continue with the debate next Tuesday and perhaps give the legislation a little more constructive thought. The recommendations put forward by the honourable member for Gellibrand are constructive and ought to be considered and adopted by the Government.
I remember an honourable member not long ago asking the Treasurer (Mr Howard) whether in fact we ought to look at passing legislation for the Australian courts to alter the canons of construction and interpretation of our tax laws so they could be applied in accordance with the intentions of the Parliament. I well recall the Treasurer's reply. He said:
I would only comment that the role of the courts in interpreting laws of this country is long established and that powerful reasons would need to exist hefore the role that they have traditionally played could in any way he qualified or interfered with.
At least we moved the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) to alter the Acts Interpretation Act. At least we got that far. [ think if Government members were to sit down and analyse the problems they would see that the problems lie not in the Act but in the interpretation of the Act in the High Court. The Government ought to settle down and do its homework in the Attorney General's office so that it can make an attack on the last front it needs to conquer to give the Act strength. An object provision must be put in the Act.
I suppose that one could constructively state that the tax Act is structured to achieve two basic purposes: Firstly, to raise revenue; secondly, to encourage and provide incentive to business, commerce, trade, industry and agriculture. Regrettably, as the Aet is structured at the moment, the burden falls on wage and salary earners. As I understand the tax Act, the onus is on the taxpayer to show that the levcl of tax imposed is too high. The High Court of Australia has always applied the rule the other way round. It interprets the taxation statute as a criminal statute. The tax Bill concerning crimes was a long overdue attempt to diversify the weaponry against tax avoidance. About 2t years ago, in a debate in the House, I said:
Some tax evasion schemes are so blatant and unreal that they constitute obviously a fraud on the revenue. I feel it is about time that some thought was given to taking action against the nefarious characters who sell their schemes on the grounds that they are conspiring to defraud the revenue. Possibly, action of this type could be taken under the Crimes Act.
The Treasurer has gone part of the way. Let us apply our minds constructively to that area. The

3284 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

recent escalation in tax evasion can be traced undoubtedly to interpretations by the High Court. If one really wanted to point to the genesis for events in recent days one would clearly highlight the Slutzkin case. The Slutzkin case differed little from earlier cases, such as the Newton, Bell, Hancock and Mayfield cases. The High Court of the day had no difficulty in those days in deciding, despite the facade which the taxpayers had erected around their transactions, that they were in fact engaged in a dividend stripping scheme and they were caught by section 260 of the Act. There is no doubt about that.
Regrettably, the current High Court apparently takes the view that tax dodging is a virtue. It seems to be completely in conflict with the New Zealand jurisdiction, the United Kingdom jurisdiction and, indeed, the United States jurisdiction. In effect, the High Court's jurisdiction on tax cases stands out pn its own in any English speaking jurisdiction. I think that the Minister ought to look at the Wilberforce assessment case. I have made reference to this in the House. He should look at some United States cases of recent days. In no way would they support the facade that has been built around the High Court judgments of recent years.
I come to the question raised by the honourable member for Gellibrand. Unquestionably, the analysis of Mr Justice Murphy in the Westraders case has now become a fact. The case of W. T. Ramsay Ltd v. Inland Revenue Commissioners was a capital gains tax but, unquestionably, the lords in that case threw it out. As my memory serves me, that litigant rested his case entirely on the Barwick literal interpretation in the Westraders case. It was thrown out barrel, bath water and plug, and so it should have been. We have reached the stage, I regret to say, when the High Court in Australia protects the property of the wealthy and not the liberty of the individuaL Its attitude is one of contempt for the laws passed by this Parliament. We have an obligation to overcome that attitude. If my memory serves me rightly, Mr Justice Murphy in the Westraders case said:
Progress towards a free society will not be advanced by attributing to Parliament meanings which no one believes it intended so that income tax becomes optional for the rich while remaining compulsory for most income earners. If strict literalism continues to prevail the legislature may have no practical alternative but to vest tax officials with more and more discretion. This may well lead to tax laws capable, if unchecked, of greater pressure.
That is profound, it is prophetic and, regrettably, it is true. I suggest to the Minister that in the intervening period between now and Tuesday he sincerely ask his officers, together with those in the

Attorney-General's Department, to look at the constructive measures put forward by the honourable member for Gellibrand. Unless and until we have made amendments constructively to two Acts what we have to do is to put an object clause in the provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act. When the Government has done that I really think we will have gone a long way to strengthening section 260 and section 136 of the Act.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong Treasurer) (4.27)-As the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) properly pointed out, this is a debate of very considerable consequence. It is not the intention of the Government to seek passage of this legislation this afternoon. The debate can be resumed for what I think will be a relatively brief but nonetheless valuable additional period on Tuesday.
Progress reported.
House adjourned at 4.29 p.m.
NOTICE
The following notice was given:
Mr Sinclair to move:
That the orders of the day, government business, for the resumption of the debate on the motions to take note of the following papers, be discharged:
Commonwealth Functions~ Review-Ministerial statement.
Health care services~Ministerial statement. Health insurance rebate and tax indexation-- Ministerial statement. Great Barrier Reef Marine Park (Capricornia Section) Regulations~Paper and Ministerial statement. Defence-Joint Australian/United States facilitiesMinisterial statement and papers. North West Cape Naval Communication Station agreement-Ministerial statement. Trans-Tasman travel arrangement-Ministerial statement. Foreign policy-Ministerial statement. Defence force-Operational capacity-Ministerial statement. Science and Technology statement 1980-81-Paperand Ministerial statement. Taxation~Ministerial statement and papers. Public Works Committee-43rd General ReportGovernment response~Ministerial statement. Defence matters-Ministerial statement. Qantas Airways Limited-Annual Report 1979-80. Trans Australia Airlines-Annual Report 1979-80. Ansett Transport Industries-Financial statement. Trans-Tasman Shipping~Report.
Australian Water Resources Council-Minutes of meeting-Paper.

Requestfor Detailed Information

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3285

REQUESTS FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Parliamentary Departments
Dr Everingham to ask Mr Speaker:
(1) How many positions will be lost from the staff ceilings of each Parliamentary Department as a result of the Review of Commonwealth Functions.
(2) What are the designations and numbers of each position to be lost.
(3) What effects on the Departments will the loss of these positions have.
(4) What effect on (a) the appropriation of each Parliamentary Department and (b) the administrative and operational votes of each Department will result from implementation of the decision to reduce certain appropriations by 3 per cent in 1981-82.
Department of the Parliamentary Library
Mr Howe to ask Mr Speaker:
(1) Who were the members of the Working Party on the Code of Conduct referred to in the Annual Report of the Department of the Parliamentary Library for 1980, and what was the reason for the inclusion of each member.
(2) Has the Working Party reported on the draft Code; if so, (a) to whom was the report presented, (b) did the report reflect the view of all members of the Working Party; if not, (i) which members dissented, (ii) on what matters did the members dissent and (iii) why did the members dissent and

(c) what action has been taken or is proposed to be taken on the report of the Working Party.
(3) Will he table the report of the Working Party.
Department of the Parliamentary Library
Mrs Child to ask Mr Speaker:
(I) How many positions of Special Duties Research Officer, referred to in Appendix 1 of the Annual Report of the Department of the Parliamentary Library for 1980 existed as at (a) 1 July in each year since 1974 and (b) 1 June 1981.
(2) What are the levels of each position.
(3) Who occupied each position as at (a) 1 July in each year since 1974 and (b) 1 June 1981.
(4) What are the functions of each position presently on the Department's establishment.
Department of the Parliamentary Library
Mr Barry Jones to ask Mr Speaker:
(1) Does the 1980 Annual Report of the Department of the Parliamentary Library state (a) that the Department had a staff ceiling of 139 full-time staff and a ceiling of 149 including part-time staff and (b) that 54 staff ceased duty in the Department during 1980.
(2) If so, how many of the 54 staff who ceased duty were (a) full-time and (b) part-time.
(3) What was the Department's (a) full-time and (b) part-time staff ceiling in each year since 1974.
(4) How many (a) full-time and (b) part-time staff ceased duty in the Department in each year since 1974.

3286 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Insulin Syringes: Charge to Pensioner Diabetics
(Question No. 514)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
Does he intend (a) placing insulin syringes on the list of appliances available free of charge through the pub:ic hospital system and (b) making insulin syringes available free of charge to pensioner diabetics.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) The Commonwealth Government does not have a role in the operation and administration of State public hospitals. It attempts, at a national level, to encourage the adoption by the States of policies aimed at reducing inequities or differences in entitlement for residents of the various States. In the final analysis, the States have the primary role in establishing what is to be provided at various hospitals and the terms and conditions on which they are provided. This has been reinforced by the Government's decisions on the Jamison Inquiry report.
Since the introduction of the original hospital cost-sharing agreements in 1975 the Commonwealth has worked towards achieving uniformity between the States and in their lists of medical and surgical aids and appliances provided through public hospitals.
The States have been aware that the Commonwealth would give consideration within cost-sharing arrangements to any proposal to extend the range of aids and appliances available through their public hospital systems provided that any resulting additional expenditure is within the agreed hospital costsharing budget and the general conditions applicable to the budget.
From information I have available Western Australia is the only State that currently provides syringes free of charge through its public hospital system.
(b) The Government is sympathetic to the needs of all diabetics and is mindful of the costs to the patient in the management of diabetes. However, the current Budgetary situation has necessitated continuation of the policy of tight restraint in public expenditure. In view of this the Government cannot commit itself to additional programs, such as assistance with the cost of insulin syringes, needles and other equipment. Given the arrangements to apply from 1 September 1981 whereby States receive an identifiable amount in general tax sharing revenue for health purposes, States may see assistance for diabetics as being of high priority and appropriate for funding.
I understand that some diabetic associations provide insulin syringes and needles to insulin-dependent diabetics at a concessional rate. I would suggest that any diabetic experiencing difficulty in meeting the cost of diabetic equipment make inquiries to ascertain if such sources of supply are available nearby.
Vietnam Veterans: Suicide
(Question No. 645)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 26 February 1981:

Have any Vietnam veterans committed suicide while (a) in Repatriation Hospitals or (b) under outpatient care provided by the Department of Veterans' Affairs as at 25 February 1981; if so, (i) how many suicides have there been and (ii) when did they occur.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(a) Yes.
(i) There have been two suicides by Vietnam veterans who were being treated in Repatriation Hospitals; one while in hospital and one by a patient who absconded from a hospital;
(ii) These suicides occurred in 1979.
(b) As far as is known, no Vietnam veterans have committed suicide while under outpatient care provided by the Department of Veterans' Affairs.
Qantas Strike
(Question No. 755)
Mr Hodges asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that passengers stranded overseas because of the recent Qantas strike suffered financial hardship from meeting accommodation and other living expenses.
(2) Is it a fact that Qantas passengers returning to Australian ports other than those originally specified are required to pay additional domestic air fares.
(3) Is he able to say whether this is the practice of most other international air carriers.
(4) If this is not the practice adopted by most other international air carriers, will he open up discussions with Qantas with a view to changing its policy.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am aware that some passengers who were stranded overseas because of disruption to Qantas services by industrial disputes during February and March, and who did not have insurance cover suffered financial hardship from meeting accommodation and other living expenses.
Qantas to minimise this hardship
(a) resumed operations as soon as possible using volunteer staff labour. The major limiting factors were in the refusal by employees of the oil companies in Australia to provide fuel to Qantas aircraft and the New Zealand Federation of Labour's sympathetic black ban on handling Qantas aircraft
(b) arranged alternative flights for passengers where possible
(c) absorbed the Australian domestic sector cost when flights on which passengers were originally booked operated, but originated or terminated at points other than as scheduled
(d) provided approximately 2,500 bed nights and meals at Qantas expense
(e) advanced money or paid hotel bills, subject to repayment, to passengers without funds.

Answers to Questions

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3287

(2) Qantas have advised that passengers travelling on first, business and full economy fares, returning to ports other than those originally specified, were not required to pay the additional domestic fares to their destinations. Passengers using advance purchase and other special fares whose flights were cancelled and who elected to travel on an alternative flight to points other than those originally specified, were required to pay the domestic air fares. However passengers buying advance purchase tickets are always strongly advised to purchase insurance to cover unforeseen circumstances such as those experienced during the recent industrial dispute.
(3) Qantas have advised that most other international carriers adopted similar policies.
(4) Not applicable. See answer to (3) above.
Health Insurance
(Question No. 885)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(1) How many persons were covered by health insurance in (a) Medibank Standard, (b) Medibank Private and (c) other private health funds as at 31 December 1980.
(2) How many pensioners were in possession of a health benefits card as at 31 December 1980.
(3) How many persons have been classified by doctors as disadvantaged in terms of health care as at 31 December 1980.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) See the table below. It is not my practice to disclose individual health insurance fund memberships in advance of a general statement including all or nearly all the health insurers at one time, e.g. the section 76A report (National Health Act) or statistics on hospital Reinsurance Trust Fund activities. Therefore, the total of the coverages only is set out.
(2) I am advised by my colleague, the Minister for Social Se<;urity, that it is estimated that at 31 December 1980 some 1,580,000 social security pensioners were in receipt of a Pensioner Health Benefits (PHB) card. This figure does not include an estimated 384,000 dependants of such pensioners.
(3) Information on the number of persons who have been classified by doctors as disadvantaged in terms of health care as at 31 December 1980, is not available. Information is available on the number of persons who received services on which a medical benefit was paid at the disadvantaged rate in the latter part of 1980. From this information, it is estimated that the monthly average number of persons classified as disadvantaged by medical and optometrical practitioners was about 240,000 at the end of 1980. It is emphasised that this estimate relates to the monthly average number of persons who received services and not the number of persons who might have been classified as 'disadvantaged' had they sought a medical service.

Quarter ending 31 December 1980

Medical and hospital coverage*

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

Aust.

Medical-Total Basic (75 per cent and 100 percent (100 with and without deductibles)

Medibanlc standard MOtehdeirbparnikvaptreivfuantedasnd

+

+

3,122,887 2,218,870

+
905,909

+
839,656

+
676,624

+
263,727

Medibank standard Medibank private and Other private funds

Hospital-Total Basic (basic and optional-variation-to-basic)

+

+

+

+

+

3,205,173 2,430,866 951,872 786,115 660,712

+
228,795

+
8,027,673
+
8,263,533

* Membership of health insurance funds is based on the most recent information provided by those funds. + Medibank Standard ceased operating on 31 October 1978.

Telephone Interpreter Service
(Question No. 910)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(1) How many persons are presently employed by the Telephone Interpreter Service (TIS) in each (a) capital city, (b) regional centre and (c) other centre on a (i) permanent and (il) part-time basis.
(2) What is the average period of employment of the (a) permanent and (b) temporary employees of the service and what is their average hourly rates of pay.
(3) What are the criteria for selection for the (a) permanent and (b) temporary employees of the service.
(4) How many persons employed on a (a) permanent and (b) temporary basis are accredited by the National Arereditalion Authority for Translators and Interpreters and at what levels in each language.

(6) What sort of job security is offered by his Department for the temporary employees of the TIS.
(7) What type of workload and demand is there in every (a) city, (b) regional centre and (c) other centre, in every language and how many hours, on average, are worked by (a) permanent and (b) temporary employees of the TIS each week.
(8) How many persons in the TIS are required to work (a) shift work and (b) overtime, and what is the reason.
(9) How many caUs are received by the TIS between the hours of (a) 0800-1600, (b) 1600-2400 and (c) 0001-0800 in each (i) capital city, (ill regional centre and (iii) other centre.
(10) Are there any projects in phase of implementation to facilitate direct transfer of calls to the interpreter's home; if so, when will these projects be implemented.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) See Table A.

(5) What qualifications, expertise or experience is required

(b) and (c) TIS also operates in Wol\ongong, Newcastle,

from the employees of the TIS.

Geelong, Shepparton, Latrobe Valley, Whyalla, Burnie,

3288 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Launceston, and Albury-Wodonga. These extensions are connected to their nearest Capital City Service by automatic telephone switching equipment. No TIS staff are employed in these Centres.
(2) The average period of employment for permanent TIS staff (Australia wide) is 4.1 years.
The average period of employment for temporary TIS staff (Australia wide) is l.9years.
The hourly rates of pay for both permanent and temporary TIS staff are as follows:
Interpreter, Grade 1,$8.76 Interpreter, Grade 2, $10.12 Officer in Charge, Clerk, Class 6, $9.85 (Sydney/Melbourne) Officer in Charge, Clerk, Class 5,$9.01 (Other States).
(3) The criteria for selection for TIS permanent and temporary staffare the same:
(a) NAATI recognitionfaccreditation is required at Level II.
(b) Proficiency in English and in at least one of the TIS demand languages.
(c) A sound knowledge ofcommunity welfare resources.
(d) Sensitivity to the settlement needs and ethnic backgrounds ofmigrants.
(4) See Table B.
(5)-
(a) Third Division entry requirements or equivalent.
(b) Proficiency in English and at least one of the TIS demand languages.

(c) Accreditationfrecognition at NAATI level II or better.
Note: These requirements apply to all TIS interpreters.
(6) No job security is offered to temporary employees.
(7) (a), (b) and (c) See Tables C, D and E.
Permanent employees work 36 hours 45 minutes per week, temporary employees work 30 hours per week.
(8) All permanent and temporary TIS staffare required.
(I0) to work shift work. TIS has operated 24 hours a day 7 days week (3 shiftsof8 hours 7 a.m.-3p.m., 3 p.m.-11 p.m. and 11 p.m.-7 a.m.) in Sydney and Melbourne. All other centres have operated 16 hours a day 7 days a week (2 shifts of 8 hours 7 a.m.-3 p.m., 3 p.m.-II p.m.). Calls received between 11 p.m. and 7 a.m. are transferred to the home of an interpreter by automatic telephone switching equipment.
(9) (i) See Table F, (ii) and (iii) See Table G.

Table A CAPITAL CITIES

State

PermanentTemporary Part-time

staff

staff

staff

Sydney,NSW
Melbourne, Vic. Brisbane, Qld Adelaide, SA
Perth, WA Hobart, Tas.
Canberra, ACT
Darwin, NT

ll

4

nil

15

9

nil

5

2

nil

5

2

nil

8

nil

3

5

nil

nil

5

1

nil

1

nil

1

TableD NAATILEVEL

II

III

IV

v

Language

Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp Perm Temp

Chinese Croation French
German Greek .
Italian . Portuguese
Serbian . . Serbo-Croatian Spanish

1

1

1

1

3

2

2

1

1

2

All TIS staffhave been advised to seek NAATI accreditationfrecognition. However, only for those engaged since September 1979 has NAATI accreditationfrecognition been a condition of employment.

Languages
Afrikmms Ab()riginal D Albanian Arabie Armenian Bengali Bulgarian Burmese cambodian Chinese&D Czech Danish Dutch English Estonian Fijian Finnish Flemish French Gaelic German Greek Hebrew Hindi Hungarian Ieolaodie Indonesian Iranian Italian Japanese
Korean
Laotian Latvian Lebanese Lithuanian Macedonian Malay Maltese - Norwegian Polish Portuguese
Portug (Braz)

TableC JULY 19&O-JANUARY 1981
Centres-No. of Calls

Wolloc-

Sydney Newcastle

gong Melb()urne. Geeleng

Shepparron Latrobe .Brisbane Adelaide Whyalla

3

2

2

4

14

4

1,005

II 1,240

49

11

73

I

4

I

1

31

5S

26

35

6

243

599

2

76

58

981

11

23

1,654

402

212

19

370

2

299:

160

114

21

1l

30

2

37

43

5

I

51

86

30

1,552'

16

34

5,084

167

26

215

30

2

I

6

2

70

36

2

310

I

406

247

2

181

77

4

1

326

2

7

215

3

-1

303

190

3

2,553

31

31

4,174

10

176

1,402

23

5

19

6

2

29

2

27

13

4

493

21

480

46

176

160

I

1

3

82

45

24

9

35

22

23

10

4

2,340

10

62

4,470

62

38

468

1,646

17

155

120

I

74

14

178

37

2

17

6

208

16

221

60

75

24

j()

5

I

901

13

31l

2

27

35

5

I

13

2

1

433

4

81

386

42

47

46

27

1I

2

116

2

186

7

19

8

1

16

4

646

12

800

22

2

479

421

17

254

44

147

12

I

97

38

15

2

Perth Hohart

15

37

203

12

I

79

7

47

31

851

25

677

18

64

I

237

30

664

1,598

14

128

2

3

442

87

691

125

1,047

616

12

2

19

545

13

2

64

51

1.798

230

135

30

168

1

31

7

12

40

41

2

572

904

4

21

2.479

86

727

3

8

launceston
62
10

AlburyBurnie Caoherra Wodonga Darwin

47 2 6

2

16

339

4

3

20

35

254

419

2

2

96

3

106

246

5 129

16

2

434

89

2

27

152

2

14

6

123

9

147 70
2

14

3

4

135

5

28

311

36

23

13

29

9

1,133

13

22

41

47

2

18

2

37

7

Table C-continued JULY 1980-JANUARY 1981
Centres-No. of Calls

Languages
Portug (0 sa) Romanian Russian Samoan Serbian Slovene Spanish Argentinian Bolivian Colombian Ecuadorian Uruguyan Swedish Tagalog Tamil Thai Tongan Turkish Ukranian Urdu Vietnamese Croatian Other

WoUon-

Sydney Newcastle

gong Melbourne Geelong

11 286 428
2 3,032
18 3,136
723 389 143 67 528
26 7 I 27 12
2,600 31
1,651 292 176

17

498

13

743

20

3

I

19

74

3,403

202

13

9

86

4,558

21

7

7

15

4

23

2

9

134

4,642

56

34

2

9

369

5,767

11

1

8

490

24

2

4

324

18

Shepparton Latrobe Brisbane Adelaide WhyaIla

119

106

309

148

I

3

4

444

1,333

24

29

13

1,004

156

58

I

11

4

1

2

63

2

2

9

3

2

1

30

106

192

31

60

2,433

1,311

223

124

164

6

32

34

Perth Hobart

Launceston

557

87

21

12

1,510

180

2

2

817

92

36.

2

2 3

34 12

54

12

4

381

10

23

12

4,702

207

555

42

31

5

AlburyBurnie Canberra Wodonga
2 28 33

Darwin 2

918

17

21

2

562

15

41

4

20

65
7 2-

2

951

156

25

2 7
12
2

6

183

4

Total

27,240

179

1,101 42,201

743

121

133

8,243

8,232

431 21,713

3,494

94

54

5,577

251

2,220

'CODESACC-Accommodation. ALC-Alcoholism. CEN-Census. DOM-Domestic. DRU-Drug addiction. EDU-Education. EMP-Employment. FIN-Financial. GEN-General information. HOA-Hoax. IMM-
Immigration. LEG-Legal. MAR-Marital. MED-Medical. MUL-Multi-problem. POL-Police. PSY-Psychiatric. SOC-Social Security. MIG-Migrant Services. TEL-Telecom. TRA-Translation. OTH-Other.

w N \0 0
:;:c
tI:I
":;":Cc
tI:I
Vl
tI:I
Z
>><.>..--.:l.l
tI:I
Vl VI
-':e-:;<
(1)
\0 00
::t:..
'":::t
~
.~...
C
t;o:: ~ C-
'":::t

Afrikaans Aboriginal D
Albanian Arabic
Annenian Bengali Bulgarian Bunnese
Cambodian Chinese&D
Czech Danish Dutch English
Estonian Fijian Finnish Flemish French Gaelic German Greek Hebrew
Hindi Hungarian Icelandic Indonesian
Iranian italian
Japanese Korean Laotian
Latvian Lebanese Lithuanian
Macedonian Malay Maltese Norwegian Polish Portuguese
Poctug (Braz} Poctug (0 SA) Romanian Russian Samoan
Serbian Slovene

TableD July 1980-January 1981 Telephone Interpreter Service Statistics Table of Language by Problem

"ACC ALC CEN DOM DRU EDU EMP

2

45

18

2

5

1

3

195

7

23

42

I

2

I

I

1

1

44

2

24

19

4

2

I

6

79

64

3

2

1

13

22

I

107

18

233

161

77

153

5

6

5

6

132

132

2

2

25

53

27

12

28

42

16

1

11

39

74

129

7 167

222 220

7

3

4

2

57

4

97

155

1

23

10

1

6

II

65

3 100

2

293

192

4

4

11

22

2

8

10

28

2

1II

25

I

8

22

30

31

15

18

11

144

5

3

5

86

4

2 16

20

1

8

I

52

2

49

129

9

101

7

42

37

12

2Q

6

3

2

180

414

62

29

2

4

2

1

80

158

64

72

2

222

331

I

FIN
2 48 2
4
81 24
3 I 42
40
25
29 298
I 38
6
173 12 6 II
31
22 96 9
67 19
2 1 23 51 1 318 3

GEN 3 I 9
275 9 2 19 2
33 354 103
17 52 2,183
5 I 143 I 271 3
231 1,134
5 10 133 3 19 12 1,693 127 28 32 4 76 7 88 73 16 13 314 159
2

HOA
6 4 I 675
20 11 18
I 4
30 1
2

105

156

3

1,134

14

3

IMM 5
10 197
II I
24 3
132 568 127
2 16 1,226
5 22
57
97 560
3 20 138
1 37 12 397 18 20 82
I 76
I 73 112 19
3 289
58 4 3
143 74
4 415
I

LEG MAR I

13

3

200

31

5

MED
I 2 27 561
31

MUL
8 68

15

25

23

I

6

483

76

142

14 1,556

149

55

3

133

151

6

3

2

15

29

4

164

18

284

77

I

5

2

73

427

29

2

1

50

4

140

56

2

2

73

II

99

32

883 120 3,070

218

2

5

3

8

I

140

381

123

20

3

33

4

2

1

15

2

850

58 1,664

218

21

4

120

4

20

4 220

11

7

344

26

3

15

159

31

420

38

J3

36

2

210

28

484

91

18

68

19

34

4

104

5

6

I

9

277

17

789

193

157

11

488

68

2

7

5

6

1

42

4

209

107

158

3

420

55

2

2

1,402 133 2,426

472

16

4

3

POL PSY

7 46

I

2

2

5

72

4

28

3

2

I

74

16

25

29

3

144

79

3

6

37

20

6

3

132

43

12

2

12

2

7

29

8

1

33

10

2

lQ

6

I

89

11

34

21

3

62

8

31

23

193 88

SOC
1 15 131 2
25 3
41 233
67 2 10
109
44
33
43 805
I 1 132
6 2 588 3 16 33 I 53
60 226
14 2 273 68
81 125
636 3

MIG
14
19 19 57
1 24
2
14
8 47
I
84
I 1 89 3 3 18
19 I
14 2 I
124 10
50 10
78

TEL
4 2()4
9 2 7
5 116 16
11 763
2
14
154
107 1,772
2 6 57
10 3 2,513 85 13 2
133 1
153 3 11 I
190 42
2 2 85 163
1,124
3

TRA 14
5 182
20 31
1 170 422 71 316 284
2
63 3
426 2
935 591
15 15 217 2 52 33 849 36 19 16 3 22 13 116 82 8 19 1,346 202
9 1 223 86 6 503 11

OTH 2 3 10
430 9 3 20 3 93
559 184
13 25 3,851
1 58 2 197
I l7! 1,575
3 16 259 2 34 23 1,745
157 50 84
6 146
4 186 89 62
4 441 126
2 3 187 261 4 1,457 14

Total 26 7 126
2,593 83 10 236 52
1,031 4,671 1,653
133
496 10,129
19 11 1,031
9 1,583
10
2,021 12,063
47
99 2,083
8 266 127 11,658
646 444 831
43 1,344
79
1,738 966 320 69
5,125 1,584
38 28 1,624 1,811 24 11,188 75

:;:.:.,:.. "~'"
~
C
~ :;::
~
g*;::,:
"'"
V...l.
~ 0 ('l> 1.0 <:to
~
~ l'Ij '"tI
m~
CIl l'Ij
Z
.>.--l.-'<.I-l.jj
VI w tv 1.0

....,
'Nt:> N

Spanish Argentinian Bolivian Colombian Ecuadorian Uruguyan
Swedish Tagalog
Tamil Thai Tongan
Turkish Ukranian Urdu Vietnamese Croatian Other

~

~

~

t":!l

IZl
Zt":!l

Table D-continued July 1980-January 1981 Telephone Interpreter Service Statistics

~
~.<...:.
t":!l

Table of Language by .Problem

IZl

-Ace
224 29 11 2 I Il

ALe
6 1 1

CEN 2

DOM
110 13
5 1 4 10

DRU
3 2

2

177

12 75

2

3

377

2 13 42

9

15

I

17

1

2

EDU
377 20 12
6 2 12 2 3
5 I 165 I 2 671 22 9

EMP
423
40 11 7 5
14 8
4 I 6 I 187 2
1 681 45
13

FIN 318 56 28
9 1 49 2
4 1 193 3
248 38 2

GEN HOA

926

11

96

40

16

9

49

16

11

1

9

1

448

26

2

953

186

25 93

IMM 403 38 35 15 7 27
14 2 423 2 2 779 90 20

LEG MAR

811

64

63

6

34

4

9

10

38

4

1

3

4

6

5

678 78

39

I

430 42

267

41

14

5

MED
2,021 157 89 41 9 119 3 3 4 32 3
2,512
40 15 8,316
353 45

MUL 412 18 29
5 29
3 4
6 1 ISO 4 1 763 64 6

POL
156 II 4
1 4 5
2

PSY 45
2

1

8

2

128 45

10

4

258

29

17

11

4

I

SOC 240 17 19 4 6 15
383 21
I 1,110
100 7

MIG 99 10 2 3 2 1
33
192 8 3

TEL 1,034
53 21 21 4 64
8 2
7 3 1,048 13
135 164
9

TRA 532 30 I 3 3 5 87 3 1 46
186 5 1
1,145 268 23

OTH
2,359 128
56 14 I 85 9 3 2 15
3 1,313
16 5 1,624 164 379

Total
10,576 788
405 153 73 538 142 46
,10
166 21 8,237 190 30 17,824 1,869 661

.V..I.
-!:!
='('I>
't:> 00

Total

2,073

38

66 842

31 3,545

3,833 1,760 500

10.379 9.845

"CODES ACC-Ac<:ommodation. ALe-Alcoholism. CEN-Census. DOM-Domestic. DRU-Drug addiction. EDU-Educatlon. EMP-Employment. FIN-Financial GEN--General infonnation. HOA-Hoax. IMMImmigration. LEG-Legal MAR-Marital. MED-Medical. MUL--Multi-problem, POL-Poilee, PSY-Psychiatric, SOC-Social Security. MIG-Migrant Serviees, TEL-Telecom. TRA-Translation. OTH-Otber,

TableE JULY 1980-JANUARY 1981
Problem

Centre

-ACC ALC CEN DOM DRU EDU EMP FIN GEN HOA IMM LEG MAR MED MUL POL PSY SOC MIG TEL TRA OTH

Sydney NewcastIe
Wollongong Melbourne
Geelong Sbepparton Latrobe Brisbane Adelaide Why.I1a
Perth
Hobart Launceston Burnie Canberra Albury-Wodonga
Darwin

508

10

374

10

878

828

576 2900

175 1994 1949

273 6278

755

417

60

829

136 3100

417 4768

2

I

6

4

4

17

21

16

I

45

3

6

5

1

5

5

37

12

I

4

128

22

12

45

4

65

97

11 455

28

3

2

70

3

18

10

110

755

11

36 254

1377 1006 \037 1184

288 2504 1895

254 9443 1322

775

272 2232

252 6162

630 10506

1

2

I

2

18

4

9

8

5

30

65

7 227

33

8

18

34

7

32

10 222

1

3

2

4

2

2

2

5

II

II

17

6

33

1

9

8

5

33

32

1

2

6

I

12

6

39'

93

5

14

6

133

416

139 1773

79

391

400

10 2667

159

96

40

364

140

85 1134

94

130

4

11

253

135

144 1422

24

463

921

73 2741

78

62

41

874

15

267

302

269

9

I

324

2

4

57

19

1

6

138

44

5

77

74

33

5

8

36

20

37

326 1087 218 1979

40 607 1517

34

66

55 1007

251

139

88

I

31

9

I

7

23

I

4

324

290

161 1084

28

349

513

4

36

5

48

3

33

18

28

40

71

314

I

278

143

to 209

4

8

37 4596 846 312

24

300

102

7

5

5

3

35 1270 447

45

57

I

6

32 565

49

8

25

1

I

I

23

49 982 433 488 6336 1466

3

132

16

78

547

618

2

4

I-

28

I

5

4

13

10

70

57

104 205

390

1

2

2

6

9

15

3 200

9

4

223

100

VI
--:.s.:.:s.:..
()
\C) 00

TOTAL

2()73

38

66

842

31 J545 3944 2444 11880

908 6927 7683

767 28921 3833 1769

500 5836 1074 10379 9845 18731

:::0

tTl

'COdes ACC-A=mmodation. ALC-Alcoholism. CEN-Census. DOM-Domestic. DRU-Drug Addiction. EDU-Education, EMP-Employment. FIN-Financial GEN-General Information. HOA-Hoax. IMM-

~

Immigration. LEG-Legal. MAR-Martia\. MED--Medical. MUL-Multi-problem. POL-Police. PSY-Psychiatric. SOC-Social Security. M1G,,,-MigrantServices, TEL-Telecom. TRA-Translation. OTH-Other.

tTl
f:/)

tZTl

>-l

.~<t.T...l

f:/)

tw v
\C)
w

3294 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Answers to Questions

TableF CAPITAL CITIES (For period 1-7-80 to 31-1-81)

State

0800-1600 1600-2400 0001-0800

Sydney,NSW Melbourne, Vic. Brisbane, Qld Adelaide, SA Perth, WA Hobart, Tas. Canberra, ACT Darwin, NT

19,197 29,009 5,566 5,899 17,068 2,538 4,313 2,159

7,080 11,811 2,472 2,178 4,238
896 1,173
61

1,005 1,628
228 154
433 58 98 I

TableG REGIONAL AND OTHER CENTRES
(For period 1-7-80 to 31-1-81)

Regional Centres

0800-1600 1600-2400 0001~800

Wollongong, NSW Newcastle, NSW Geelong, Vic.
Shepparton, Vic. Latrobe Valley, Vic. Whyalla,SA Burnie, Tas.
Launceston, Tas. Albury/Wodonga, NSW

963

134

7

138

38

4

591

149

5

86

33

2

105

26

2

317

108

8

40

13

I

56

38

nil

194

53

4

Department of Health: Television Advertising
(Question No. 947)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(I) What sum was spent on television advertising by his Department and Instrumentalities under his control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Department of Health-$I94,691; Capital Territory Health Commission-$318.
The Health Insurance Commission operates as a commercial venture (Medibank Private) and would be placed at a disadvantage with its competitors if its advertising expenditure were disclosed.
(2)-

(1) How many officers were on the establishment of the Office of Road Safety at the time the initial compulsory transfer notices from Melbourne to Canberra were issued.
(2) How many positions were actually occupied in the Office establishment at the time of notice of transfer and were compulsory transfer notices from Melbourne to Canberra issued to all the occupants.
(3) How many (a) officers refused to comply with the compulsory transfer notice and (b) notices of redundancy were issued to these officers under the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act.
(4) What is the establishment as at I April 1981 of the Office of Road Safety and how many positions were unfilled by number and category at the time of preparation of the answer to this question.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) The approved establishment for the Office of Road Safety at the time compulsory transfer notices were issued to staff on 14 December 1979 was 81 positions.
(2) As at 14 December 1979, 58 positions had nominal occupants and notices of compulsory transfer were issued to each of the occupants.
(3) (a) 32 officers formally declined transfer. (b) 26 formal notices of redundancy were issued to officers of the Office of Road Safety on 4 February 1981 under Public Service Arbitrator's Determination No. 509 of 1977. No such notices were issued under the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act.
(4) The establishment of the OUice of Road Safety at 1 April 1981 was 82 positions. There were 31 positions unfilled at the time this answer was prepared, details of which are as follows:

Position category
Engineer, Class 4 Engineer, Class 3 Engineer, Class 2 Engineer, Class I Senior Technical Officer (Engineering), Grade I Journalist, Grade B Psychologist, Class 3 Psychologist, Class 2 Senior Research Officer, Grade 2 Director, Class 11 Director, Class 10 Clerk, Class 8 . Clerk, Class 2/3 Steno Secretary, Grade 1

Number unfilled
4 5 10 I 2 1 1 1 1 I 1 1 1 1

December 1979 January 1980

Total

31

Department ofHealth
Capital Territory Health Commission . . . . .

$ 24,351
6

$ 11,128
nil

Office of Road Safety: Transfer from Melbourne to Canberra
(Question No. 1088)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:

Underspending of Estimates: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1097)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) On what basis were the origina11980-81 appropriations made for Division (a) 490-Administrative, (b) 494-Bureau of Animal Health (including export inspection services-- meat) and (c) 495-Export inspection servicesother than meat.

Answers to Questions

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3295

(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Infor mation Paper, Statements of savings expected in annual ap propriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos. l and 2) 1980-81; if so, what are the reasons.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

the disadvantaged; and the tax rebate for basic insurance pre miums paid to registered funds.
These measures will substantially improve the attraction of registered funds vis-a-vis commercial insurance. In the cir cumstances it does not seem necessary to add to existing regu latory arrangements relating to commercial insurers so as to control their health insurance activities.

( l ) and (2) With regard to the original l 980-8 l appropri ations made for Division (a) 490-Administrative, (b) 494Bureau of Animal Health (including export inspection servicesmeat) and (c) 495-Export inspection services other than meat, I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Minister for Finance to question No. 1101,
Hansard of 13 May 1981, Page No. 2374.
Health Insurance
(Question No. 1159)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 8 Apri11981:
Further to his reply to question No. 714 (Hansard, 2 April
1981, page 1339), will he approach the Treasurer or the Min ister for Finance to seek amendments to the Insurance Act 1973 to exercise more control over the activities of companies in relation to health insurance.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In my response to the honourable member's question (No. 714) I stated that there were indications that the impact of commercial health insurers on the operations of the registered health funds was very small.
The new health insurance arrangements to operate from l September 1981 will provide significant incentives for persons to insure with registered health funds. The main measures are: The restriction of Commonwealth medical benefits to persons with at least basic medical cover with a registered fund; the proposed Commonwealth financial assistance for public hospitals under which the States will have an incentive to im pose charges for services other than for eligible pensioners and

Qantas Employees (Question No. 1175)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
( l ) Is it a fact that parents of married Qantas employees are
entitled to qualify for half fare on reserved seats to Europe.
(2) Is it also a fact that parents of married Qantas employees can send parcels to Europe at a quarter of the regular cost.
(3) What is the extent of the benefits made available to the relatives of Qantas employees.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( l ) Yes. Parents of married Qantas employees who have worked with the Company for more than five years, are en titled to one trip per year to Europe at 50 per cent of the nor mal economy fare. Confirmed seats are provided, however concessional fare passengers are subject to off-loading if the seats are required for full-fare passengers. In addition the employee must accompany the parents to or from their desti nation, unless they are travelling to visit the employee at home base or at an overseas post.
(2) No.
(3) The spouse and dependent children under 21 years of a Qantas employee are entitled to the same concessional travel benefits as the employee. These benefits are set out in Table 1. Table 2 sets out the concessional travel benefits available to other relatives.

Table 1

THE ENTITLEMENT OF ALL STAFF WHO HAVE COMPLETED 12 MONTHS' SERVICE AND WHO ARE STILL EMPLOYED WITH THE COMPANY
N.B. Single staff means self only and married staff means self, spouse and dependent children under 21 years All travel, except for long service free trips, to be undertaken in unrestricted periods

50% Firm

50% Subload

50% Firm

80% Subload

50%Firm and 80%subload dome stic NZandFiji

90% Long haul

90% Domestic
NZand Fiji

Long service
free trips

Employees with 1-2 years' service
Employees with 3-4 years' service
Employees with 5-6 years' service
Employees with 7-9 years' service

Unlimited
yes yes yes

Unlimited
yes

I tripp.a.

I tripp.a .

Employees with 10-14

years' service

yes

Employees with 15 years'

and over serives

yes

Unlimited

4tripsp.a. Unlimited

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

See note I

yes
See note l

yes

yes

see note 2

yes See note l

yes

yes

see note 3

3296 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Table 2
THE ENTITLEMENT OF NEAR RELATIVES OF STAFF WHO HAVE COMPLETED AT LEAST 5 YEARS' SERVICE. UNLESS OTHERWISE STATED, NEAR RELATIVES MUST BE ACCOMPANIED BY THE EMPLOYEE TO OR FROM THE POINT OF DESTINATION
N.B. Parents, brothers and sisters may be 'unaccompanied' should they be travelling to visit the employee at his home base or station

80% 50% Firm and

50%

Subload

80%subload

50%

Sub-

50%

long

domestic

Firm

load

Firm

haul

NZandFiji

90% Long haul

90%
NZand Fiji

100% Long
service free trips

Parents of single employees with 5-9 years' service

Unlimited

Unlimited

Parents of single employees with 10-14 years' service

Parents of single em-
ployees with 15 years' service or more

Parents of married employees with 5 years' service or more

Brothers and sisters of single employees with 5-9 years' service

Itripp.a.
yes yes yes yes yes

I tripp.-.
yes yes yes yes yes

Unlimited

1 tripp.a. Unlimited

yes see note 4

yes

yes

see note 4 see note 5

yes

yes

see note 4 see note 6

yes see note 4

yes

yes see note 5
yes see note 6

Brothers and sisters of single employees with 10 years' service or more
Non dependent children under 26

yes

yes

yes

yes

see note 5

yes

yes

yes

see note 4

yes see note 5

Notes:
1. Three trips per annum plus one high priority trip. 2. Free trip must be taken with one month's long service leave. 3. May be taken in sectors. 4. May be unaccompanied on these trips. 5. For use by one parent or one brother or one sister, or both parents if over 60 and retired. 6. Both parents may travel together irrespective of dependancy.

National Health: Duplicate Services
(Question No. 1183)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 8 April 1981 :
(l) Did he state in answer to question No. 597 (Hansard, 2 April 1981, pages 1327-8) that there was no duplication of his Department's naUonal health functions with services provided by the States.
(2) If so, is it a fact that the (a) assessment of nurse education requirements, and teaching, (b) research and advisory services in relation to child health and teaching, (c) research and advisory services in relation to the improvement of health and (d) prevention of disease are services provided by the States.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) No.

(a) There is no duplication of assessment of nurse education requirements and teaching. While the major responsibility rests with the States, my Department is required to advise the Commonwealth Department of Education on proposals for nursing courses in Colleges of Advanced Education.
In addition, a National Nursing Manpower Task Force, which reports to the Australian Health Ministers' Conference, has been created. My Department provides the secretariat for this. The Task Force will monitor future nursing manpower needs which in turn will have a direct bearing on nurse education.
(b) Teaching, research and advisory services in relation to child health are provided by the Institute of Child Health which has been performing the function of the Department of Child Health of the University of Sydney. The Institute will cease to be a Commonwealth body on 31 December 1981, after which the teaching of child health will be the responsibility of the University.
(c) The Commonwealth Institute of Health is the major source of academic research, teaching and advisory

Answers to Questions

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3297

services in relation to the improvement of health and prevention of disease.
(d) The New South Wales Health Commission and the Victorian Health Commission have specific health research units whose work is to collect data to maintain the State health system in each case; it is not directed to national problems. The other States have ad hoc research programmes for particular problems.
Recruitment through Private Employment Agencies: Department of Health
(Question No. 1299)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Three officers of the Health Insurance Commission were recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80 viz, two of steno-secretary in New South Wales at a cost of $587 each and one of steno-secretary in Tasmania at a cost of $800.
Industrial Action: Department of Transport
(Question No. 1376)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) How many officers or employees in his Department have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last 2 years.
(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.
(3) Were. any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.
(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken i>l respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) 1 April 1979 to 31 March 1980-1633; 1 April 1980 to 31 March 1981-1707.
(b) 1 April 1979 to 31 March 1980-69; 1 April 1980 to 31 March 1981-349.
(2) A total of 25447 manhours was involved in all the action mentioned in (1) above.
(3) No Commonwealth employees were paid for time lost by strike action during this period.
(4) No.
Industrial Action: Department of Health
(Question No. 1377)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(l) How many officers or employees in his Department have been:
(a) on strike and
(b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions,

in each of the last 2 years.
(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.
(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.
(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) 1979-427, 1980-526; (b) 1979-1, 1980nil. The figures quoted are an aggregate of the numbers of people on strike on various days during the year-they do not indicate for instance that, in 1979,427 individual officers were on strike. It is possible that an individual officer was on strike on more than one occasion during the year. A breakdown of the figures to ascertain a net total of strikers for the year is not readily available.
(2) 1979-1,450manhours, 1980-2,950manhours.
(3) No.
(4) As part of the Administrative and Clerical Officers Association's campaign against the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979, one officer in the Department's Adelaide Office refused to perform some of his duties. This officer was stood down without pay from 3.30 p.m. on 27 July 1979 to 12 noon on 2 August 1979.
Industrial Action: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 1379)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers or employees in his Department have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last 2 years.
(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.
(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.
(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) The number of Departmental staff who have been on strike during each of the past two years is:
1979-80-273 1980-81-379
(b) Three members engaged in go slowjwork to regulations in 1980-81.
(2) 5,557 manhours were involved in (1) above.
(3) Staff taking strike action were not paid salary for the period of their absence on strike.
(4) A staff member was not paid salary for 2 hours 21 minutes while engaged in a go slowjwork to regulation action. On another occasion, two staff members refused to work as directed, in support of a colleague against whom disciplinary action had been taken. They were stood down without pay. The relevant staff association took the case to arbitration. The Public Service Arbitrator's finding resulted in the disciplinary

3298 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Answers to Questions

action being rescinded and the three staff members being reimbursed their lost pay.

Air Travel in Australia: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1470)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What sum was paid by the Department of National Development and Energy, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by that Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Trans-Australia Airlines-$271,572 Ansett Airlines of Australia-$138,343.

Air Travel in Australia: Department of HeaUh

(Question No. 1481)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

What sum was paid by his Department, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.

Mr MacKeUar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Ansett Airlines Trans-Australia Airlines

$
192,987 364,746

East-West Airlines Bizjets MMA Air Tasmania Connair Other NT Carriers Kendell Airlines
Total

$ 1,351
762 14,163
796 744 726 35
576,310

Head Office, Department of Transport
(Question No. 1506)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice on 9 April 1981:
(I) Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) There are sections of the Central Office of my Department not located in Canberra, the staffing numbers of which are detailed in the attached schedule.
(2) Decisions to relocate units of Government employment to Canberra are taken by Government on the advice of the Location of Australian Government Employment Committee (LAGE), an Inter-Departmental Committee chaired by the Public Service Board. The advice tendered to Government by the LAGE Committee is based on submissions by the relevant Department, and consultations with interested bodies such as staff organisations. Government decisions to transfer units of my Department are as listed in the attached schedule with the expected date oftransfer also listed where appropriate.

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT Schedule ofMelbourne-based Positions

Establish-

mentasat

Division/branch/section

1.5.81 Expected transfer date (where applicable)

----~--~----------------------------------------

Air Safety Investigation Branch

36 December 1982

Public Relations Branch

5 3 Positions Mid 1982

Airways Operations DivisionCentral Training College (All Trainees, Instructors and Support Staff)

366 Not applicable

Coastal Services DivisionOmega Projects Section

8 Not applicable

Coastal Transport Branch

15 13 Positions from Melbourne to Brisbane by December 1981. 2 Positions Melbourne to Canberra by December 1981.

Finance & Commercial Division-- ADPBranch Commercial Branch

92 96

Mid 1982 and December 1984

Finance Branch

11 Mid 1982, December 1982, 1983 and 1984

Flying Operations & Airworthiness DivisionExecutive and Staff

4 Mid 1982

Airworthiness Branch

106 Mid 1982

Aviation Medicine Branch

19 Mid 1982

Flying Unit Branch

129 Not Applicable

General Aviation Branch

26 Mid 1982

Regular Public Transport Branch

29 Mid 1982

Answers to Questions

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3299

Division /branch /section
Ground Facilities DivisionAirways Engineering Planning Research & Development Branch . . . . . . . . . . . . Airways Engineering Works & Services Branch
Management Services DivisionAdministrative Services Branch Establishments & Systems Branch Industrial Branch Personnel Development Branch .
Marine Standards DivisionExecutive and Staff . . . . . Marine Crews & Services Branch Marine Survey Branch Nautical Advising Branch . Ship Structures Safety Branch
Grand Total:

Establishment as at
1.5.81

Expected transfer date (where applicable)

161 161
210 4528 47
3 42 17
4 5
1,692

December 1983 December 1983 Mid 1982, December 1982,1983 and 1984
Mid 1982

Head Office, Department of Health
(Question No. 1507)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1 ) Yes. The units concerned are:
National Biological Standards Laboratory:
(i) Administration Section, located in Queanbeyan-27 staff
(ii) Viral Products Section, located in Melbourne-29 staff
(iii) Australian Dental Standards Laboratory, located in Melbourne-I 3 staff.
There are, in addition, a number of outposted laboratories and institutes which report to Central Office in Canberra:
Australian Radiation Laboratory, located in Melbourne-97 staff
National Acoustic Laboratories, located in Sydney-I 13 staff
Commonwealth Institute of Health, located in Sydney-IOO staff
Institute of Child Health, located in Sydney-14 staff
Ultrasonic Institute, located in Sydney-l 9 staff.
(2) The three Sections of the National Biological Standards Laboratory are to be located in Canberra in 1984/85 following the construction of a central laboratory complex at Symonston, ACT Present plans are to relocate the Administration Section from Queanbeyan to Mawson, ACT for the intervening period-timing is dependent upon other accommodation moves of Commonwealth Departments in the Phillip, ACT area.
There are no plans to relocate any of the other laboratories and institutes in Canberra in the near future.

Recycling of Paper: Department of Health
(Question No. 1585)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Has any action been taken by his Department to re-cycle paper, if so, what action.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Department of Administrative Services is responsible for the disposal of waste paper from Commonwealth owned buildings and the cleaning arrangements of leased buildings including removal of waste. I understand that this Department has been able to make re-cycling arrangements for waste paper in all States and the ACT.
Tea Services: Department of Transport
(Question No. 1610)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many (a) full-time and (b) part-time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other officers of his Department. (2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his Department in 1979-80.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) (i) eighteen Oi) four
(b) (i) five (ii) five
(2) (a) $252,737.79 (b) $59,700 was paid to the Commonwealth Accomodation and Catering Services Ltd. for the provision of beverage services in a number of buildings. For further details of these charges I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Minister for Administrative Services to Question No. 1615.
Australian Airline Companies: Cost Recovery Program
(Question No. 1679)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

3300 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Answers to Questions

What payments have been made by (a) Qantas Airways Ltd, (b) Trans Australia Airlines and (c) Ansett Airlines of Australia, towards the cost recovery program through (i) fuel tax, (ii) airport landing charges and (iii) other charges or taxes in each of the last 3 financial years.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(i) The information requested in relation to the fuel excise paid for aviation fuelB used by Trans Australia Airlines and Ansett Airlines of Australia is not available from Commonwealth sources. Qantas Airways Ltd does not pay fuel excise in respect of the aviation fuels it up-lifts in Australia.
(ii) There are no specific airport landing charges at Commonwealth airports. Air navigation charges are imposed by the Commonwealth for the use by aircraft of aerodrome, airway facilities and services, meteorological services and search and rescue. The air navigation charges paid by the airlines mentioned are as follows:

Year

Qantas

TAA

AAA

1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

$ 17,426,331
16,718,898 21,270,832

$ 12,794,651
13,439,474
15,144,992

$ 12,210,545 14,941,516 14,928,576

(iii) No other taxes are levied by the Commonwealth on the airlines that contribute towards cost recovery. Other charges
comprise building and site rentals at aerodromes and recoveries of departmental charges such as electricity. Payments for these charges made by the airlines mentioned are as follows:

Year
1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

Qantas
$ 5,966,753 4,132,652 3,676,627

TAA
$ 3,835,618 4,132,699 5,430,054

AAA
$ 2,144,623 2,297,050 2,950,635

Export of Dogs from New Zealand to Australia
(Question No. 1691)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that dogs exported from New Zealand to Australia require a declaration that they have been in New Zealand for 6 months.
(2) If so, has he or his Department given consideration to exporters in New Zealand being required to produce their dog licence to prove that the dog has indeed been in New Zealand for at least 6 months; if not, will he do so.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Regulations covering the importation of dogs to Australia from New Zealand require a declaration by the owner that the dog has been in either New Zealand or Australia during the six months immediately preceding the date of shipment or since birth. A New Zealand Government veterinary surgeon is required to certify that he has no reason, after having made reasonable inquiries, to doubt the owner's declaration.
(2) I am advised that it would not be appropriate to require exporters of dogs from New Ze!tland to produce their dog licences as this would cause difficulties with dogs under six

months of age which are not required to be licensed and also with Australian dogs being re-imported.
Rat Guards
(Question No. 1703)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What resulted from the investigation into an improved rat guard for ships (Hansard, 3 November 1976, page 2262).
Mr MacKeUar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Evaluation of prototypes of the new design of rat guard was undertaken on the Sydney and Melbourne waterfronts.
The trials indicated some advantages over conventional metal-type rat guards but problems emerged which preclude its use in its present form. The main disadvantage was that the central hole in the guard was too large for many mooring lines, allowing the guard to be flat on its mooring line. This then presented no barrier to the progress of rodents up or down the line. The prototype was also found to be subject to damage during normal usage and more difficult to remove than conventional rat guards.
Export of Human Organs
(Question No. 170S)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Has the export of human organs been approved during the last 3 years; if so, in what circumstances.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes. My Department, under the Sixth Schedule of the Customs (Prohibited Exports) Regulations, regularly approves the export of human blood, blood products and histological samples for research or diagnostic purposes.
ACTION: Estimated Deficit
(Question No. 1767)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What is the estimated deficit incurred by ACTION for 1980-81 and for the full financial year following the bus fare increases effective from 19 January 1981.
(2) What increased receipts are anticipated from these fare increases in (a) 1980-81 and (b) a full financial year.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The estimated deficit incurred by ACTION for 1980-81 is $11.76m. The level of subsidy for 1981-82 has not yet been established.
(2) The anticipated receipts from the January 1981 fare increase are:
(a) 1980-81-$347,900
(b) In a full financial year-$835,000
Health and Welfare Centre at Weston Creek, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1772)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9April 1981:

Answers to Questions

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3301

What are the reasons for the 23rd Annual Report of the National Capital Development Commission showing the completed cost of erection of the Health and Welfare Centre at Weston Creek, ACT, as $.56m while the 1979-80 Annual Report of the Department of Housing and Construction shows the completed cost as $.54m.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by the National Capital Development Commission that the completed cost for the Health and Welfare Centre at Weston Creek, ACT, of $.54m as reported in the 1979-80 Annual Report of the Department of Housing and Construction refers only to the building contract.
The completed cost of $.56m as shown in the 23rd Annual Report of the National Capital Development Commission refers to the total project and, in addition to the building contract, includes separate works covering the provision of curtains, carpets, hotmix paving and linemarking.
Conversion of High School at Dickson, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1773)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What are the reasons for the 23rd Annual Report of the National Capital Development Commission showing the completed cost of Stage 1 of conversion of the high school at Dickson, Australian Capital Territory, to a College as- $1.973m while the 1979-80 Annual Report of the Department of Housing and Construction shows the completed cost as $1.94m.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by the National Capital Development Commission that the completed cost of $1.94m for Stage 1 of the conversion of the Dickson College as shown in the 1979-80 Annual Report of the Department of Housing and Construction refers to the building contract only.
The completed cost of $1.973m as shown in the 23rd Annual Report of the National Capital Development Commission refers to the total project and, in addition to the building contract, includes the cost of carpets and special treatment to floors.

Increase in outside contract work due to repairs to bus floors . . . . . . . .
Increase in cost and usage of fuel
Decrease in payment by the ACT Schools Authority as a result of the fare increase .
Decrease in depreciation, due to delays in bus deliveries . . . . . . . . . . .
Increase in revenue due to fare increases, increased patronage and extension of fare concessions to those on unemployment benefits . . . . . . . . . . .

$'000 68.0 470.7 30.0 (65.8)
(278.3)

1,452.3

Public Transport Concessions for Welfare Recipients
(Question No. 1793)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Was the payment to the Australian Capital Territory Transport Trust Account for public transport concessions for welfare recipients increased from $100,000 in 1978-79 to $350,000 in 1979-80; if so, on what basis was the figure increased.
(2) How many welfare recipients were eligible for concessions in each year.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Payment to the Australian Capital Territory Transport Trust Account for public transport concessions for welfare recipients increased from $100,000 in 1978-79 to $350,000 in 1979-80. The subsidy is calculated by mUltiplying the difference between the normal adult cash fare and the concessional fare by the estimated number of trips made by welfare recipients. The reasons for the increase were:
(a) Increases in adult cash fares totalling 25c per trip. As there was no increase to the concessional fares the difference between the two fare levels and thus the subsidy increased;
(b) Extension of the concession to recipient of unemployment and sickness benefits; and

Operational Subsidy for ACTION
(Question No. 1775)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(c) Increased patronage. (2) The estimated number of welfare recipients eligible for fare concessions were:
1978-79-12,400. 1979-80-18,200.

What are the precise causes of the difference between the estimated operational subsidy required for ACTION of $8.657m for 1979-80 given by his predecessor in his press release of 21 August 1979 and the actual subsidy required of $10. 109m.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The subsidy as announced in August 1979 varied from the amount actually required for the following reasons:

Advertising by Financial Institutions
(Question No. 1902)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What sections of the Trade Practices Act offer specific protection of the interests of borrowers in relation to misleading or bait advertising by financial institutions.

Payroll adjustments including increases arising from National Wage and work value cases and adjustments in shift and rneal alIbwances and margins for skill
Increase in price ofmaterials . . . . .

$'000
984.0 243.7

(2) If the Act does not offer this protection, will he seek to provide legislative backing to the recent Trade Practices Commission guidelines for advertising by financial institutions.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

3302 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(1) and (2) Part V, Division 1 of the Trade Practices Act contains a number of provisions designed to protect consumers from a wide range of unfair practices including misleading and bait advertising. Section 52 of the Act provides that a corporation shall not, in trade or commerce, engage in conduct that is misleading or deceptive or that is likely to mislead or deceive. Section 53 prohibits a corporation, in trade or commerce, from making false representations in relation to a number ofspecific matters. Section 56 expressly prohibits corporations, in trade or commerce, from engaging in bait advertising. These three sections apply to both trading and financial corporations and relate to the supply of a wide variety of goods and services including the supply of consumer financial services.
Aboriginal Health Service
(Question No. 1912)
Mr Hawke asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the pressure being applied by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs to the community-based Aboriginal health service at 136 Gertrude Street, Fitzroy, Vic., to take Health Program Grants in place of bulk billing.
(2) If so, can he give any assurance that bulk billing will continue, if desired by that Aboriginal health service.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I am aware of allegations to this effect. The facts of the situation are that the VAHS, along with 9 other eligible Aboriginal Medical Services, was offered a health program grant as an alternative to bulk billing in October 1978. The VAHS is the only eligible service which has not taken up the offer and continues to rely on bulk billing receipts with residual funding from DAA to fund its activities.
It is Government policy that Aboriginal organisations seeking funding support from DAA should also take advantage of other normally available programs.
Health program grants provide for the salaries and associated costs of staff involved in clinical activities on an annual basis and so the recipient organisation is assured of a regular source of funds compared with the bulk billing arrangements, income from which is subject to variations depending on the number ofpatients treated.
(2) It is not proposed to withdraw bulk billing arrangements for disadvantaged patients of the Service.
Alumina Refineries: Respiratory Disorders
(Question No. 1924)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 28 Apri11981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the article entitled 'Implications of Bauxite Mining in Water Catchments' by Bartholomaeus and Holt published in 'Public Health', dated July 1978.
(2) Have respiratory disorders been found to be increased downwind from alumina refineries.
(3) Do aluminium smelter workers suffer (a) reduced bronchial function, (b) reduced resistance to infection and (c) increased lung cancer according to studies conducted at Prince Henry Hospital, Sydney, NSW, which have been supported in the United States of America by the State Department of Social and Health Services and Kaiser Aluminium and Chemical Corporation, and in Canada.

(4) Is he able to say whether the maximum allowable concentration of fiuorides in pot-room air is one part per thousand million in Yugoslavia and 2.5 times greater than this figure in Australia and the United States of America.

(5) Have stringent health and environmental controls in the USA, Japan and elsewhere been recommended for Australia by the National Health and Medical Research Council.

(6) Has advice been sought from him by the authorities re-

sponsible for approving Environmental Impact Statements

and enforcing standards for aluminium smelting projects in

the last 5 years; if so, what advice.

i

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) My Department can find no such article in the July 1978 issue of the journal of the (UK) Society of Community Health 'Public Health'. Perhaps the honourable member would identify more precisely the article he mentions and I will examine it.

(2) No. The respiratory problems in children living near smelters in Iron Curtain countries occurred at higher concentrations of fiuoride than are permitted in Australia.

(3) (a) Studies conducted by the Respiratory Physiology Unit at Prince Henry Hospital have revealed the existence of an asthma-like illness which affects a small proportion of smelter workers.

(b) A reduced resistance to respiratory infection in alu-

minium smelter workers after prolonged exposure to gaseous

and particulate emissions is a possibility which is being

investigated.

.

(c) There is a possibility that workers exposed to particulate polycyclic organic matter may develop cancer of the lung. An excess incidence of this disease in aluminium smelter workers has yet to be demonstrated.

(4) No. A concentration offiuorides in pot-room air of one part per thousand million is a totally unrealistic figure. The threshold limit value for fiuoride recommended by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists and the National Health and Medical Research Council is 2.5 rng/m3 (asF).
(5) The health and environment controls recommended by the National Health and Medical Research Council and currently being applied by the aluminium smelting industry in Australia are equal to those found in the USA, Japan and elsewhere.

(6) No.

Aboriginal Housing Programs in Western Australia
(Question No. 1987)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:
(I) Do any Aboriginal organisations receive funds directly from the Department of Aboriginal Affairs for Aboriginal housing 'programs in Western Australia; if so, (a) which organisations, (b) what sums are received and (c) for what (i) type and (iI) number of housing units are the funds received.
(2) Do Aboriginal organisations in States other than Western Australia receive direct funding for Aboriginal housing programs.
Mr Viner: The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Answers to Questions

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3303

(1) Yes. The table below shows the organisations receiving grants in 1980-81, the estimated amount being provIded and the purposes of the grants:

Organisation
Balgo Hills Aboriginal Community Inc.
Guda Guda Community Inc., Wyndham Mirima Council Inc., Dingo Springs Ngoonjuwah Council, Hall's Creek
Oombulgurri Assocn, Inc., via Wyndham Warmun Community Inc., Turkey Creek Woolah Community Inc. Dunham River Beagle Bay Aboriginal Council Bidyadanga Aboriginal Community Inc., La Grange Lombardina Community Mowanjum Community Inc.
Pandanus Park Community Inc.
Irrungadji Group Assocn Inc., NUllagine Jigalong Community Inc. Mugarinya Community Assocn Inc., Yandeyarra
Station Strelley Housing Society
Ngangganawili Community Inc., Wiluna Wangkatja Tjiwataarn-martatji, Cosmo Newbery
Upurl Upurlila Ngurratja, Cundeelee Central Midlands Aboriginal Progress Association,
Moora . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(2) Yes.

Estimated grant
1980-81

Purpose

$ 245,000
15,000 16,500 86,000
100,000 180,00
16,500 174,000 194,000 133,000
178,100
23,000
31,500 92,000

Complete 4 houses; commence 3 houses. (Unit cost
$55,000) Construct 3 shelters (Unit cost $5,000). Erect 3 transitional dwellings; (Unit cost $5,500). Construct 2 houses (Unit cost $34,000); add
toilet/ablutions facilities and kitchen annexes to 8 houses. Construct 2 houses (Unit cost $60,000). Complete 13 and begin 6 Wiluna-style dwellings.
(Unit cost $15,000). Construct 3 transitional dwellings (Unit cost $5,500). Complete 4and begin 4 houses; (Unit cost $48,000). Complete 3 and begin 6 houses, (Unit cost $29,000).
Complete 2 and start 3 houses; upgrade houses (Unit cost $48,000).
Complete 4 houses (Unit cost $50,000) and 24 pen-
sioner units (Unit cost $8,500). Construct 2 'Wiluna-style' dwellings (Unit cost
$11,500). Construct 5 dwellings; (Unit cost $6,300).
Complete 2 and begin 4 houses; (Unit cost $25,000).

149,000 88,900 200,000 110,000 45,000

Complete 2 x 3 br. units (U nit cost $47,500) and 1 x 2
br. unit (Unit cost $42,000). Construct 3 dwellings; (Unit cost $22,500) and com-
plete houses commenced in the previous year. Complete 12 and begin 10 dwellings; (Unit cost
$14,000). 2 transportable units for project staff; (Unit cost
$55,000). 2 demountable units for project staff; (Unit cost
$22,500).

2,500 Servicing pensioner units

Moorabbin Airport, Victoria: Safety Precautions
(Question No. 2008)
Mrs Child asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 30 Apri11981:
(1) Has new safety equipment been installed or have new safety precautions been taken at Moorabbin Airport, Victoria, to handle emergency landings; ifso, what are they.
(2) If no new precautions have already been taken or new equipment installed, what new safety measures does he propose for the future, and when will they be instituted.
(3) When will training flights be banned from Moorabbin Airport.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) No new safety equipment has been installed at Moorabbin Airport and no changes have been made to the Aerodrome Emergency Producedures.
(2) The primary emergency equipment permanently located at Moorabbin Airport is my Department's Rescue and Fire Fighting unit. This unit is designed to cope with any general aviation emergency occurring on the Airport. A standing

committee, under the Chairmanship of my Department's Airport Director at Moorabbin and consisting of representatives from Victorian State Police, Ambulance Services, Metropolitan Fire Brigades, Country Fire Authority and local aircraft operators, convenes regularly to ensure co-ordination of all emergency services in differing emergency situations. The aerodrome Emergency Procedures are designed to respond to notified aircraft or aerodrome emergencies, bomb warnings, a crash alert or an actual crash. They are realistically exercised and reviewed each year.
(3) The joint Commonwealth/State Committee on Airports Planning in the Port Phillip District has defined Moorabbin Airport as a multipurpose light general aviation airport used mainly for training operations. There are no plans to change the nature of operations at Moorabbin.
Study by Commonwealth Institute of Health
(Question No. 2043)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:

3304 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Further to the Minister's answer to question No. 642 (Hansard, 29 April 1981, page 1772), why may it be necessary for the data on naval personnel to be considered separately from those in the main study being conducted by the Commonwealth Institute ofHealth.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I am advised that, due to the relatively small numbers of naval personnel involved, there is only a low probability that their addition to the main study would give additional information of significance to that study. It is, therefore, not proposed to undertake study of the naval group until the main study is well under way and a more precise study for the naval group can be defined. However, timing of the investigation of naval personnel within the period of the main study will not affect their rights under Repatriation legislation.
Treatment ofHeart Attack Patients
(Question No.1088)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) Are (a) sodium bicarbonate, (b) calcium chloride and (c) isuprel for injection listed for Emergency Doctors' Bag use.
(2) Are these drugs commonly used in the treatment of heart attack victims.
(3) What provision is made to ensure that pharmacists in the more remote areas of Australia are supplied with these drugs for the treatment of heart attack patients.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The three drugs mentioned are not available as pharmaceutical benefit emergency drug (doctors' bag) supplies.
(2) and (3) For consideration of the matters raised by the honourable member, I have referred the question to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee. This is the expert statutory committee which advises me in relation to the availability of items as pharmaceutical benefits. It will be some time before that advice is available to me.
Australian Capital Territory Construction Plans
(Question No.ll04)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) What construction plans for the next decade in Canberra were under consideration by the National Capital Development Commission at 30 April 1981.
(2) Which projects have now been (a) cancelled, (b) terminated indefinitely and (c) suspended until a final decision is made.
(3) Is the NCDC master plan for Canberra still in force. (4) Does the NCDC still have a role to play in the planning and management of the national capital; if so, what is this role. (5) Which NCDC functions are to be reduced as a result of the Review of Commonwealth Functions and how many employees will be affected. (6) Will Australian consultants be engaged to undertake the review of NCDC functions (Hansard, 30 Aprll1981, page 1840 and 1842) and when will this review take place.

Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Construction plans in Canberra were based on the provision of land and normal basic requirements for a popUlation expectC)d to increase to about 280,000 by 1990. Construction plans also included Commonwealth Office buildings to meet the projected requirements for growth and transfers.
(2) (a) The Institute of Criminology building is not to proceed.
(b) Projects which have been deferred areCanberra Law Courts National Library Extension Australian Federal Police Headquarters - Museum of Australia.
(c) Work has been suspended on the Russell Drive Offices and the National Biological Standards Laboratory.
(3) The policy plan for the metropolitan growth of Canberra has been under review by the National Capital Development Commission since 1978, reflecting factors such as revised rates of population growth, household formation changes, changes in life style and the need to implement energy conservation policies. The review will be completed during 1981.
(4) The Commission's functions under the National Capital Development Commission Act are to plan, develop and construct Canberra as the National Capital and Seat of Government. As announced by the Government, activities of the National Capital Development Commission are to be reviewed.
(S) The review offunctions has not started. (6) Australian consultants with international experience are being considered. The review is expected to be completed by Dccember 1981.
Participation in Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting: Department of Primary
Industry
(Question No.1168)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(I) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division and (c) 4th Division Officers in his Department are engaged (i) full time or (ii) part-time in administrative, policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.
(2) How many officers of his Department are expected to attend the meeting.
(3) What is the expected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries. overtime, accommodation, travel and other expenses.
(4) What other expenses does he expect his Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the meeting.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) 2 Second Division Officers, and (b) 2 Third Division Officers have been involved on a part-time basis.
(2) and (3) Delegation arrangements for the forthcoming CHOGM have not yet been finalised and consequently neither the number of officers to attend, nor the overheads involved in such attendance can be detailed at this stage.

Answers to Questions

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3305

(4) It is not anticipated that any expenses other than those referred to in part 3 of the honourable member's question will be incurred by my department as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the meeting.
Development of Perth Airport
(Question No. 2189)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(I) Has his Department accepted the Noise Exposure Forecast system of assessing noise impact as the best available measurement technique.
(2) If not, what is the reason.
(3) Did his Department in its public information campaign in relation to the development of Perth airport, use a simplistic decibel count system, related to only one aircraft, when outlining the noise implication of developing the airport; if so, why.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Not applicable.
(3) Yes. Analysis of the proposed development using the Noise Exposure Forecast (NEF) system indicated there would be no change in aircraft noise exposure from the proposed development of the new international terminal, new taxiway and the 300 metre runway extension. A simple decibel footprint depicting the taxying noise of the most predominant international aircraft type was displayed to indicate that the only change in noise conditions would be that resulting from aircraft taxying to the new terminal along the new taxiway. It was shown that this change was not significant beyond the airport boundaries.
Development of Perth Airport
(Question No. 2190)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that the Environmental Sub-group of the Commonwealth/State Committee's study of Western Australia's airport requirements has been presented detailed information showing that an additional 1697 houses near Perth Airport are likely to be alIected by aircraft noise by the year 2000 if the single runway is retained and 433 additional houses are likely to be alIected if a wide-spaced parallel runway is in operation.
(2) Does his Department claim in its public information leaflet on the development of Perth Airport that redevelopment of Perth Airport will not cause nearby residents any significant additional noise problems; if so, and if the information referred to in part (1) is correct, what is the reason for the Department's claim.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes. The proposed development as described in the public information leaflet is the construction of a new international terminal building and associated taxiways in the north-west of the airport, and a 300 metre extension on the southern end of the main runway. The information given concerning the number of houses potentially alIected in year 2000 in no way relates to the currently proposed development. Those figures relate to the forecast noise impact in the year 2000 for the existing runway system as compared with the

option of the wide-spaced parallel runway development and assume future potential residential development which may not occur. The quoting of the figures in the current redevelopment context is inaccurate and most misleading.
The current re-development of Perth Airport will not create any noticeable change in noise impact. Taxying movements of international aircraft closer to the airport's northern boundary will occur, but such movements will be at low engine power settings which do not create high noise levels.
Existing noise patterns caused by aircraft landing and taking off at the airport have an impact in some residential areas near the airport. These patterns will not be changed by the development as the runway usage balance will not alter.
Extension of the main runway to the south will permit the operation of Qantas' long range B747 aircraft at maximum weight. Qantas plans to refit their B747 aircraft on this route with new, more fuel efficient and quieter Rolls-Royce engines. As the refitted aircraft will be some five decibels lower in noise level on take-olI, the noise affects of the runway extension will be insignificant. If anything, a reduction in noise impact compared with the present situation will occur.
Development of Perth Airport
(Question No. 2191)
MI' Beazley asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that the Commonwealth/State Committee studying Western Australia's airport needs suggested that if the development of a parallel runway at Perth airport was to be abandoned on cost grounds, such action must be considered as a possible trade-off between environmental and aviation consideration and that from this cost comparison it could be seen that it would be more cost elIective to insulate houses and public buildings against noise intrusion than to construct a parallel runway.
(2) Will he consider the environmental trade 01I and proceed with the parallel runway; if not, will he consider the economic trade off and pay for insulation of noise affected houses and buildings.
(3) Will he withdraw his Department's opposition to the Canning Town Council's claim for $30,000 compensation for insulating its library.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) No. At present the Commonwealth Government has no statutory powers to provide for the payment of compensation for noise, or any other forms of 'injurious affection', arising from public works unless land on which buildings or houses are sltuated is wholly or partially acquired for the works. I understand that the Law Reform Commission has made recommendations on the question of compensation for 'injurious alIection' which, if accepted, would have a bearing on the operation of Commonwealth facilities such as airports. However, the Commission's report is yet to be fully considered by the Government.
(3) No; for the same reasons given in (2) above.
Noise Levels, Perth Airport
(Question No. 2196)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(1) Has the National Acoustics Laboratory conducted a survey of noise levels associated with Perth Airport.
(2) If so, has the survey been completed.

3306 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) If the survey has been completed, when will the findings be released.
(4) If the survey has not been completed when is it anticipated that it will conclude and does the Government intend to release the report of the survey; if so, when.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) No.
(3) Not applicable.
(4) It is expected that the report on the findings of the survey will be available by the end of 1981. The report will be released at that time.
Ace Shipping Line: Anti-trust Action
(Question No. 2206)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice on 12 May 198J:
What information is he able to provide on the implications for the Australian Shipping Commission of the United States of America anti-trust action against the company Ace Shipping Line.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Ace group of companies on 17 March 1981 filed a complaint in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, seeking, inter alia, treble damages against defendants on the basis of alleged anti-trust violations of sections I and 2 of the Sherman Act and tortious interference with contractual relations.
The defendants are Seaboard Shipping Company Ltd, Pacific Australia Direct Line (PAD), Associated Container Transportation (Australia) Ltd (ACTA), Farrell Lines Inc., and Hamburg Sud Amerikanische Dampf Schiffahrts Ges., Eggert and Amsinck. The Australian Shipping Commission, trading as the Australian National Line, is not a defendant but is a minority partner in PAD and in ACTA/ANL joint venture.
The defendants are required to answer or otherwise move in response to the complaint by IS June 1981.
As the plaintiff's statement of claim in the Ace action has only recently become available, it is too eady to comment on its possible implications for ANL. Interested Departments are currently examining details of the claim to determine what, if any, governmental action should he taken in the matter.
Export Inspection Charges
(Question No. 2271)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Prim !ry Industry, upon notice,on 14May 1981:
(1) What proportion of export inspection charges are now to be recovered (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1847).
(2) Why is the program to be phased in for different commodities over an 18 month period.
(3) On what basis was it determined that higher charges should first be imposed on exports of fish and dried fruit, then on livestock, dairy products, eggs and honey, and, in January 1983 on processed fruit and vegetables.
(4) What is the anticipated saving to the Commonwealth of this action.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) Full implementation of the Government's export inspection charging program, following the timetable announced by the Prime Minister to the Parliament on 30 April 1981, aims at ultimately recovering approximately half the total costs to the Commonwealth of its primary product export inspection activities. It is anticipated that approximately 29 per cent of such costs will be recovered by charges applicable in 1981-82. This reflects the rate of recovery for meat inspection where charges have been maintained at 1979 levels pending resolution of future export meat inspection arrangements.
(2) Charges for export inspection were introduced from 1 July 1979 aimed at recovering approximately 50% of the total costs of meat and grain inspection, and of the operation of the Australian Wool Measurement Standards Authority located in the Department of Primary Industry.
Extension of the program to additional industries has taken account of the inspection arrangements, inspection costs and economic circumstances of each industry. Introduction of fish and dried fruit inspection charges from I July 1981 reflects current generally profitable export returns for those industries. The proposed dates for the introduction of charging to dairy products, eggs and honey (1 July 1982), and fresh, canned and frozen fruit and vegetables (1 January 1983) are based on an assessment of current and projected future economic circumstances facing the dairy and fresh and canned fruits industries in particular, which comprise the major elements of inspection in those areas. The date proposed for the introduction of livestock inspection charges (l July 1982) reflects the need for discussions on recovery arrangements with State authorities, who carry out this inspection on the Commonwealth's behalf.
(3) See answer to (2).
(4) Estimated revenue from charging in 1981-82 is $18.5m.
Shipping Service To Darwin
(Question No. 2282)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(1) Can he give an assurance that Commonwealth assistance to the Australian National Line, to cover the forecast losses incurred by the Darwin Trader in 1981-82, will be forthcoming.
(2) What arrangements have been made between the Northern Territory Government and the Commonwealth Government to ensure the continued operation of the Australian National Line shipping service to Darwin in 1981-82 and subsequent years.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) The Northern Territory Government has requested Commonwealth Government support for the Australian National Line's Darwin Trader service until Darwin's new roll on/roll off berth is completed in September 1982. The request is under consideration. In the meantime, officials of the Australian National Line and the Northern Territory Government are examining options for continuing the service on a commercial basis.
Proposed National Highway: Newman to Port Hedland, Western Australia
(Question No. 2289)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:

Answers to Questions

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3307

(1) What is to be the route from Newman to Port Hedland, WA of the proposed national highway.
(2) What is the expected (a) commencement and (b) completion date of the project.
(3) Will the Western Australian Government have any say in selecting the proposed route; if so, can it alter the route at anytime.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The route is the subject of current investigations being undertaken in conjunction with Western Australia.
(2) Depending on the outcome of these investigations and progress made on other National Highway projects in Western Australia, it is expected that work on the Newman to Port Hedland section would (a) commence in 1982-83 and (b) be completed about 1988.
(3) The views of the Western Australian Government have, and are continuing to be taken, into account at every stage of the investigations to determine the most appropriate route. Under the roads legislation, the final decision on the route rests with the Commonwealth Minister for Transport and cannot be altered without my approval.
Costs of Consultants and Contracting Services
Mr Howard-On 12 May 1981 (Hansard, page 2226) the honourable member for Curtin asked me, as Minister representing the Minister for Finance, a question without notice concerning the method of preparing estimates for costs of consultants and contracting services,
The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Departments have not been instructed to change the basis of preparing estimates in respect of these costs. Indeed departments have submitted their draft 1981-82 estimates in the same basic appropriation format that existed in 1980-81 which includes a separate item of appropriation for consultants fees as required by the Finance Directions. The Directions define a 'consultancy service' as the obtaining of advice on policy, technical or professional subjects or the carrying out ofresearch projects and investigations.
The engagement of private sector contractors to perform a particular function is, however, different to the engagement of consultants. The costs of employing contractors are not normally shown as a separate item in the appropriations, but are charged to the relevant administrative or operatioIlal vote.
I should add that the Government has asked the Department of Finance to review the format of appropriations against the general objective of exploring ways to improve departmental efficiency, but having regard to the need for proper control over expenditure. This review, which has only just commenced, will involve consultation with relevant Parliamentary Committees before any firm decisions on chang~ are made by the Government.
Foreign Ownership of Austmlian Insurance Industry
(Question No. 415)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the 13th Annual Report of the Australian Insurance Association, which noted

that the Association has been stressing its grave concern over the vulnerability of the Australian-owned industry to foreign takeover due to its disproportionate numbers compared with overseas owned companies but that it has been unable to arouse comparable concern in government over the issue.
(2) Did the Association state that (a) control over such a
basic industry as insurance so as to encourage its development
from the national viewpoint is a world wide trend, both in developing and established world markets, (b) the Australian insurance market is presently structured to favour the growth and development of overseas owned companies, not Australian owned companies, (c) the first benefits of any country's general insurance market should be enjoyed by the locally owned industry but that this is not so in Australia, (d) the trend of increased foreign ownership of the insurance industry is expected to continue and (e) close study of the insurance market is overdue and now a matter of the highest priority; if so, are each of these statements endorsed by the Government.
(3) If the Government docs not endorse these statements, what is the reason.
(4) What action does the Government propose to reduce the likelihood of increased foreign ownership of the insurance industry in Australia.
(5) Is there an absence of meaningful statistics, preventing detailed analysis and effective reporting on long term implications of the industry's problems; if so, will he ensure that comprehensive industry statistics, such as those suggested in the Assocation's report, are kept so that objective studies of the industry's role in the economy are made possible.
(6)Ifhe will not ensure that these statistics are kept, What is the reason.
(7) Will he ask the Insurance Commissioner to publish aggregate gross premium incomes of all authorised companies;. if not, why not.
(8)) When will he promulgate sub-section 113(4) of the Insurance Act so that statistics on business placed outside the Australian market by intermediaries will become available.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I am aware of the comments made in the thirteenth Annual Report of the Australian Insurance Association on the question of foreign takeovers in the general (non-life) insurance industry in Australia.
(2), (3) and (4) The Australian Insurance Association made comments along such lines in its Report.
Freedom of entry into Australia was one of the reasons given by the Association for the growth and development which has been achieved by overseas-owned companies in the Australian general insurance industry. It should be noted, however, that many existing foreign-owIled insurers had established operations in Australia well prior to the establishment of the Government's foreign investment policy in this area. Such companies play an important role in providing insurance services in the Australian market. Nevertheless, these foreign-owned companies are now subject to the guidelines of the foreign investment policy, as are those which seek to en~er the Australian market.
These guidelines provide that all proposals by foreign
interests to establish a new insurance company are closely
examined. In view of the already extensive level of foreign ownership and control in the general insurance industry, proposals must show substantial net economic benefits to Australia to obtain approval or, where the net economic benefits are small, must involve an effective partnership between Australian interests and the foreign investor in the ownership and control of the company concerned. All proposals

3308 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Answers to Questions

to acquire or increase substantial interests in an existing insurance business are closely examined, regardless of the size of the company. Again, substantial economic benefits must be demonstrated, taking account of the implications of the proposal for the financial sector and for the level of Australian ownership.
Australian-owned insurance companies are not subject to these restrictions. Further, a general objective of the Government's foreign investment policy is to seek, as appropriate, Australian equity participation in any new insurance businesses established by foreign investors. The Government's policy aims to ensure that Australian interests have been given prior opportunity to invest in existing Australian insurers which are the subject of a foreign takeover. In this regard, the Government must be satisfied that alternative Australian investors are not available before approval would be granted to the takeover. The restrictions imposed on foreign investment in the insurance industry are designed to preserve as far as practicable the existing level of Australian ownership in the industry and, where it may be possible, to facilitate increases in Australian ownership.
At the same time the Government recognises that foreign investment has many benefits to offer Australia, including in the insurance area, and the aim of the Government's foreign investment policy is to encourage such investment on a basis that recognises the needs and aspirations of Australians.
(5) and (6) The statistical material on the general insurance industry published in the Annual Reports of the Insurance Commissioner and in the Commissioner's half-yearly bulletins entitled "Selected Statistics on the General Insurance Industry" should provide a reasonable foundation for detailed analysis of the problems of the industry.
(7) Aggregate gross premium figures in respect of business transacted by authorised insurers (Le. direct premiums and inward reinsurance premiums, less returned premiums and rebates) are published in respect of each class of insurance business in the half-yearly bulletins referred to above.

(8) In the course of preparing draft regulations and a prescribed form for collection of statistical information under the provisions of sub-section 113(4), it was found that implementation of these provisions would unavoidably involve complex procedures and would impose unduly detailed information requirements on intermediaries. Against this background, and the arrangements now operating under subsections 1J3(l) to (3) for exempted persons in certain circumstances to obtain written acknowledgements from insureds regarding placements with unauthorised insurers, it is proposed to reassess whether there is a sufficient need for requirements of the kind reflected in sub-section 113(4).
Autl'alian Labour Force Statistics
(Question No. 831)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
What was the (a) annualincrease, in absolute figures, of the Australian labour force, (b) cumulative total of persons in the Australian labour force and (c) estimated proportion in (i) absolute figures and (ii) as percentages, of persons in part-time employment in respect of (A) the annual increase and (B) the cumulative total foreachyearfrom 1961 to 1981.
Mr HowardThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Australian Statistician has provided the table shown below, which contains estimates of the Australian labour force and part-time employment in Australia since August 1966. He has advised that annual data on a comparable basis are not available prior to that date. Monthly estimates are available only from February 1978.

Labour force

Part-time employment

August 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980
December 1978 1979 1980

Total (1)
'000 4,902.5 5,019.8 5,136.8 5,261.9 5,473.8 5,608.4 5,753.9 5,888.7 5,996.1 6,119.7 6,190.5 6,354.7 6,365.3 6,415.3 6,639.0 6,538.7 6,646.8 6,821.5

Annual increase
(2)
'000
117.3
117.0 125.1 211.9 134.6 145.5 134.8 107.4 123.6 70.8 164.2 10.6 50.0 223.7
108.1 174.7

Total (3)
'000 475.1 509.7 530.8 572.7 569.7 576.1 621.4 690.1 727.4 794.4 860.9 900.9 951.5 957.3 1,022.0 940.5 971.5 1,021.1

Annual increase
(4)
'000
34.7 21.1 41.9 -3.0 6.4 45.3 68.7 37.3 67.0 66.5 40.0 50.6 5.8 64.7
31.0 49.6

(3) as percentage
of (I)
percent 9.7 10.2 10.3 10.9 10.4 10.3 10.8
11.7 12.1 13.0 13.9 14.2 14.9 14.9 15.4 14.4 14.6 15.0

(4) as percentage
of (2)
percent
29.6 18.1 33.4 -1.4 4.8 31.1 51.0 34.7 54.2 93.9 24.4 477.4 11.6 28.9
28.7 28.4

Note: The estimates are from the Population Surveys conducted by the Australian Bureau of Statistics and refer to civilians
aged 15 years and over. As the estimates are based on information collected from occupants of a sample of dwellings they are subject to sampling variability. For details of standard errors and definitions used see The Labour Force, Australia (6203.0).

Answers to Questions

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3309

Census: Multi-lingual Leaflet
(Question No. 971)
Mr Kent asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(l) Has the Australian Bureau of Statistics failed to include the Macedonian and Maltese languages, which are spoken by approximately 300,000 persons in Australia, in the multilingual leaflet that it has published to assist people to complete their census forms; if so, for what reason.
(2) Will he direct the Bureau to reprint the leaflets and rectify this omission, to ensure that both Macedonian and Maltese languages are included in a revised leaflet.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Macedonian and Maltese languages have not been included in the multi-lingual leaflet referred to.
The purpose of this leaflet, which will be carried by Census collectors when delivering Census forms, is to enable them to offer it at households where a difficulty in communicating clearly in English is encountered.
Because of the multiplicity of languages other than English spoken in Australia, it would be impracticable to incorporate all of them in a folder sufficiently compact to be appropriate for this purpose. Within this constraint the primary objective of the Australian Bureau of Statistics in producing the document was to afford ready assistance to those groups in the community, members of which were likely to comprise a significant number of households where no one was reasonably fluent in English.
The languages selected for incorporation in the leaflet were carefully chosen in consultation with agencies in a position to offer expert advice on the subject. An important factor influencing the choice was the recent arrival in Australia of substantial numbers of new immigrants who may have had insufficient time to learn English.
It should be emphasised that the leaflet concerned is only one of a number of ways in which census collectors will seek to communicate with ethnic communities. A wide range of e!;- planatory material in many languages, including Maltese and Macedonian, will be available for distribution where needed. There will be articles for ethnic publications and material suitable for inclusion in non-English language radio and television programs. Extensive paid advertising will appear in ethnic newspapers and magazines in June.
In addition, the ABS has accepted an offer from the Maltese Community Council of Victoria to undertake distribution of a separate Maltese version of the information in the leaflet, and will explore the possibility of making a similar arrangement for a Macedonian version of the document.
(2) In view of the strategy outlined above, and having regard to the active steps being taken by the ABS to inform ethnic groups about the Census and how and where people can

obtain assistance in completing the Census form, a reprinting of the leaflet is not considered to be necessary.
35-hour Working Week
(Question No.lOOS)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 1 April 1981 :
(1) Is the Bureau of Industry Economics preparing a report on the likely consequences of the introduction of a 35-hour working week.
(2) If so, (a) when does he envisage that the report will be completed, (b) how many 3rd Division research staff does the Bureau currently have engaged in the preparation of the report and (c) will he give an assurance that sufficient staff arc engaged on this project to ensure that the report is completed expeditiously and that its findings are drawn from, and relevant to, a wide range of Australian industries.
(3) If the Bureau is not preparing this report, what is the reason.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) The Bureau has under study a research project on the economic effects of shorter working hours.
(2) (a) The project is in the early stages of investigating appropriate methods of analysis, the feasibility of obtaining the required data from an adequate sample of industries and other aspects which are normally investigated prior to final commitment by the Bureau to proceed with a project.
(b) Three.
(c) The project is one of ten major research projects the Bureau is currently undertaking. Research staff with the appropriate skills are allocated to each project to ensure that the research is carried out expeditiously within the time constraints imposed by problems of data availability and analysis.
(3) Not applicable.
Appointments to Statutory Authorities Under the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1026)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
What are the (a) names, (b) dates and terms of appointment and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under his jurisdiction.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
My Department has provided the following information as at 31 March 1981.

Name Chairman
Prof. G. Blainey, A.O.

Date of

current

Date of

appointment expiry

Australia Council 13.7.77

30.6.81

Salary $
12,825

Deputy Chairman Mr N. Hasluck

1.7.77

30.6.81

4,300

3310 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Name

Date of

current

Date of

appointment expiry

General Manager Mr J. Cameron
General Members Mr R. W. L. Austin MrA.Berg Sir E. J. Bunting, K.B.E.
Artist Members Prof. R. D. Covell Mr G. Richards MsJ.Kott
Government Members Dr D. F. McMichael
Mr P. G. F. Henderson . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Plus: All the Chairmen of Australia Council Boards as listed below.

17.1.77 30.11.78 30.11.78 9.8.78 9.8.78 1.7.77 27.9.79 26.4.78 17.10.78

Chairman Mr J. Atkinson (Acting)

Aboriginal Arts Board 9.2.81

Members MsM.Duroux
Mrs W. Feifar-Nannup MrL. Nelson MsV.Power
Mr J. Stewart MrJ. Wunuwun

5.8.77 1.1. 77 6.3.80 5.8.77 7.7.78 7.7.78

Chairman Dr P. Botsman
Members MrK.Conway Mr E. Greenwood MrA.Hart MrP. Varma Mrs J. Campbell, M.B.E. MrF. Watters
Chairman MsC.Prest
Members Ms G. Cochrane Mr T. McCullough MsP.LaMotte MrE.Carr MrD.Green MrC.Andrew
Chairman Vacant
Members MsT.Astley Mr H. Gilchrisl. Mr T. Morphett MrA. Taylor MrM.Zifcak MsF.Zwicky MrC.Koch
Chairman Mr G. Jackson

Community Arts Board

Crafts Board

22.2.78 16.3.78 16.3.78 29.9.78 29.9.78 1.7.80 21.1.81

Literature Board

1.7.80 1.1.77 21.3.77 5.8.77 1.7.80 1.7.80 21.1.81

Music Board

4.5.78 16.4.80 19.10.77 1.7.78 1.1.77 1.7.78 14.7.80 26.7.77

Ex Officio 30.6.82 30.6.82 30.6.82 30.6.82 30.6.81 30.6.82 During the pleasure of the Governor-General
Until permanent appointment made 30.6.81 9.7.81 5.3.84 30.6.81 30.9.81 30.9.81
22.2.82 30.6.83 30.6.81 30.9.81 30.9.81 30.6.83 20.1.84 30.6.83 30.6.82 30.6.82 30.6.81 30.6.83 30.6.83 20.1.84
3.5.82 15.4.84 30.6.81 30.9.81 31.12.82 30.9.81 31.10.81
30.6.81

Salary $
t
2,900 2,900 2,900 2,900 2,900 2,900
t
5,725
'.'"".. '''"""
5,72S
-''"" '.".. -
5,725
- -.'.".
... ...
... ... ... ... ... ... ...
5,725

Answers to Questions
Name
Members Mr C. Alcorso MrM.Khouri Mr R. Meale, M.B.E. MrI. Neil Mr J. Sturman Prof. D. Tunley Ms B. Vergara
Chairman Mr B. Sweeney-
Members Mr A. Edwards Mr T. Lingwood MrG.Murphy MissC.Raye Mr D. Williamson Lady Joy Snedden MrM.Moore
Chairman Mrs A. Lewis
Members Mr J. Andrews MrA.Bishop Mr G. Grey-Smith MrJ.Holmes MrT.Bond Mr K. Reinhard
Chairman Mr K. F. Watts
Members Ms P. A. Lovell, M.B.E. Mr D. G. Block Mr D. B. L. Williams Mr H. F. Crawford Mr C. Tingwell
Chairman MrT.M.Jeffrey
Members Mr J. J. Morris MrR.Scott Ms W. Blacklock MrK.F.Watts
Elected by Convocation Mr A. Buckley Ms A. Deveson DrP.Edgar MrE.Thomas MrJ.Flaus
Staff Members Mr W. Hannigan Ms J. E. Brennan
Student Members MsJ.Grove Mr K. Steinberg
Director Mr A. S. Walton

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3311

Date of

current

Date of

appointment expiry

Theatre Board

5.8.77 5.8.77 1.7.78 5.8.77 1.7.78 1.7.80 1.7.80

Visual Arts Board

26.7.77
4.5.78 1.7.77 27.11.79 6.5.80 21.1.81 1.7.80 21.1.81

1.7.80
5.8.77 1.1.77 5.8.77 5.8.77 10.7.80 10.7.80
Australian Film Commission

5.5.80
24.5.80 24.5.78 24.5.79 25.10.79 11.6.80
Australian Film and Television School Council

29.7.79
5.5.78 30.11.78 5.5.78 29.7.79
13.12.79 13.12.79 13.12.79 13.12.79 13.12.79
26.5.80 13.12.80
13.12.80 13.12.80
6.3.80

30.6.81 30.6.81 30.6.82 30.6.81 30.6.82 30.6.83 30.6.83
30.6.81
3.5.82 31.12.82 26.11.83 5.5.84 20.1.84 30.6.83 20.1.84
30.6.83
30.6.81 31.12.82 30.6.81 30.6.81 30.6.83 30.6.83
4.5.82
23.5.83 23.5.81 23.5.82 24.10.82 10.6.83
28.7.81
4.5.81 29.11.81 4.5.81 28.7.81
12.12.82 12.12.82 12.12.82 12.12.82 12.12.82
12.12.81 12.12.81
12.12.81 12.12.81
Ex Officio

Salary $
* * * * *
5,725
* * * * * *
5,725
* * * *
39,424
* * * * *
5,725
* * * * * * * **
tt t
t
t

3312 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Name

Date of

current

Date of

appointment expiry

Chairman MrD. Yencken
Members Prof. D. Mulvaney Mr V. Serventy .
Mr E. Sinclair, C.M.G., OBE., D.F.C. Ms M. Feilman . . . Mr R. Walker, A.M. Colonel A. S. Gehrmann

Australian Heritage Commission
23.7.78
9.7.79 9.7.79 10.7.78 10.7.78 30.8.78 10.10.79

Chairman Mr R. C. Crebbin
Deputy Chairman Mr J. O. Fairfax
Members MrM.Bail Miss P. N. Bell
Mr J. D. Davies Mr J. T. Gleeson, A.M. Prof. A. P. McCaughey Mr F. R. Williams, OBE. MrD.Wynn Dr D. G. McMichael Director Mr J. Mollison

Australian National Gallery Council
3.6.79
3.6.79
3.6.79 3.6.79 3.6.79 3.6.79 3.6.79 3.6.79 3.6.79 7.7.78
24.2.77

Council of the National Library of Australia

Chairman Mr K. B. Myer A.C., D.S.C.
Deputy Chairman tSenator G. S. Davidson .
Members Mr V. D. Burgmann, CBE.
The Hon. Mr Justice R. Else-Mitchell, C.M.G., QC. Rev. FrB. J. Fleming, SJ.
The Hon. A. J. Forbes, C.M.G., M.C. Dr D. J. McAuliffe Dr D. F. McMichael
DrR.G.Ward
Mr M. D. Cross, M.P.
Prof. J. P. Whyte Director-General
MrH.Bryan

23.3.79
19.8.80
17.5.78 16.2.78 23.3.79 2.6.79 27.11.79 4.8.79 17.5.78 4.12.80 26.2.81
28.7.80

Council of the Australian War Memorial

Lt. Gen. Sir T. Daly, K.B.E., C.B., D.s.O.

1.7.80

Members The Hon. Sir John Starke
Mr J. P. F. Dixon
Prof. B. H. Gandevia

1.7.80 1.7.80 1.7.80

Sir William Keys, OBE., M.C.

1.7.80

Mrs V. M. R. McComb, OBE. Mr J. N. Parker, A.F.C., D.F.M. Dr W. D. L. Ride . . . . . Mr M. J. Neil . . . . . . Mr J. M. Davenport, D.S.O., D.F.C., and Bar, G. M. Air Marshal N. P; McNamara, A.O., CBE., A.F.e. Lt. Gen. Sir D. B. Dunstan, e.B., CBE.

1.7.80 1.7.80 1.7.80 1.7.80 5.2.81 1.7.80 1.7.80

Vice-Admiral G. J. Willis, A.O. . . . . . .

1.7.80

22.7.81
8.7.82 8.7.81 9.7.81 9.7.81 29.8.81 9.10.82
2.6.82
2.6.82
31.12.81 31.12.81 31.12.81 2.6.82 2.6.82 2.6.82 31.12.81 30.6.81
Ex Officio
22.3.82
30.6.81
16.5.81 15.2.81 22.3.82 1.6.82 26.11.82 3.8.81 16.5.81 31.12.84 25.2.84
Ex Officio
30.6.81
30.6.81 30.6.81 30.6.81 30.6.81 30.6.81 30.6.81 30.6.81 30.6.81 4.2.84 Ex Officio Ex Officio Ex Officio

Salary
$
12,825
5,725 5,725 5,725 5,725 5,725 5,725
5,725
2,900
2,900 2,900 2,900 2,900 2,900 2,900 2,900
t
t
5,725
t
2,900
t
2,900 2,900 2,900
t t t
2,900
t
5,725
t
2,900 2,900 2,900 2,900 2,900 2,900 2,900 2,900
t t t

Answers to Questions

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3313

Name

Date of

current

Date of

appointment expiry

Salary

(i) Christmas Island The Hon. Rendle McNei!age Holten, C.M.G.
(ii) Cocos (Keeling) Islands Mr Charles Ivens Buffett, M.B.E.
(iii) Norfolk Island Vacant Deputy Administrator Mr Ian Hutchinson
(iv) Northern Territory Commodore E. E. Johnston, A.M., OBE.

Administrators

19.5.80

16.11.77

18.2.81 1.1.81

$

During the pleasure of the Governor-General
During the pleasure of the Governor-General

24,520 24,520

Unti! other' arrangementsmade
During the pleasure of the Governor-General

24,520 42,111

Chairman MrA.T.Dix
Members The Hon. Sir Peter Crisp Mr P. H. Pigott . . Prof. D. J. Mulvaney Mr W. Wulanybuma Lady Stephen Mr R. H. Smith . . Dr W. D. L. Ride
. Dr D. F. McMichael Prof. J. Zubrzycki

Interim Council of the Museum of Australia.
23.12.80
23.12.80 23.12.80 23.12.80 23.12.80 23.12.80 23.12.80 23.12.80 23.12.80 23.12.80

Office of the Supervising Scientist

Robert Mason Fry (Supervising Scientist for Alligator Rivers Region)

8.6.79

22.12.82 22.12.82 22.12.82 22.12.82 22.12.82 22.12.82 22.12.82 22.12.82 22.12.82 22.12.82
7.6.82

Nil
-*-* -*
t
*
44,304

Graeme George Kelleher, Chairman Sydney Schubert Joseph Thomas Baker

Great Barrier ReefMarine Park Authority
20.12.79 3.10.78 4.7.79

19.12.84 30.6.81 30.6.82

41,286 4,300 .4,300

Prof. J. D. Ovington Director

Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service

. . . . . . . . . ..

14.10.76

13.10.83

42,772

* Payment of daily sitting fee only, at a rate as determined by the Remuneration Tribunal. t No salary is payable in respect of appointments where the appointee is already in receipt of remuneration in respect of
*another public office held. (See section 7 (11) Remuneration Tribunals (Act 1973.) Re-elected by the Senate.  Elected by the House of Representatives.

U nderspending of Estimates: Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 1098)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 7 Apri11981:
(1) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division 670-Administrative.
(2) Has there been an underspending in this division by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos 1 and 2) 1980-8 I; if so, what is the reason.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1101 provided by me as Minister representing

the Minister for Finance on 13 May 1981 (Hansard, page 2374).
Departmental Air Travel: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 1145)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 7 Apri11981:
(1) How many travel warrants have been issued for his Departmental officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

3314 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(1) and (2) Because of its size and the diverse nature of its responsibilities, my Department does not maintain the information sought by the honourable member in a readily identifiable form.
I am not prepared to authorise my Department to commit the considerable resources that would be necessary to furnish the honourable member with the details she is seeking.

Recruitment through Private Agencies: Department ofHome Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1309)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No.

Female Officers and Employees: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 1336)
Mr Bungey asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many female officers and employees are employed in his Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) This information is published regularly in the Public Service Board's Annual Report to Parliament. The latest published figures are at p. 140 of the Board's 1980 Annual Report.
(2) Statistical data on the marital status ofmale and female officers is not collected for the Australian Public Service. This is consistent with both Government and Public Service Board policies on equal employment opportunity. The collection of statistics specifically on married women was discontinued in 1973.
(3) The attached table provides details of the appointment of women to the permanent staff of departments during 1979-80. The comment at (2) above also applies to the recording of marital status of women appointees or engagees.

APPOINTMENTS OF FEMALE OFFICERS BY DEPARTMENT, 1979-80

Department

Number

Aboriginal Affairs

74

Administrative Services

200

Aust. Electoral Office

18

Aust. Govt Publishing Service

29

Attorney-General's

208

Legal Aid

4

Office of Parity Counsel

Department

Number

Business and Consumer Affairs Industries Assistance Comm. Trade Practices Comm.
Capital Territory Defence Education
A.C.T. Schools Authority Curriculum Dev. Centre Schools Comrn. Tertiary Education Comm. Employment and Youth Affairs
Finance Aust. Govt Ret. Benefits Office Royal Australian Mint
Foreign Affairs Aust. Dev. Assistance Bureau
Health Capital Territory Health Comm.
Home Affairs Aust. Archives Aust. Film Comm. Aust. Heritage Comm. National Library
Housing and Construction Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Industrial Relations
Industrial Relations Bureau Industry and Commerce National Development and Energy
Bureau of Mineral Resources Postal and Telecommunications
Aust. B'casting Tribunal Special B'casting Service Primary Industry Bureau of Agric. Economics Prime Minister and Cabinet Auditor-General's Office Commonwealth Ombudsman Office of National Assessments Public Service Board
Productivity Patents, etc. Office
Science and the Environment Bureau ofMeteorology Great Barrier Reef MPA. Nat. Parks & W'life Service Off. of the Supervising Scientist
Social Security Special Trade Representative Trade and Resources Transport
Bureau of Transport Eeon.
Treasury Aust. Bureau of Statistics Aust. Taxation Office
Veterans' Affairs

233 23 12 136 948 102 24
2
343 74 31 8 72 24
401 81 27 13 4
46 151 160 25 10 14 56
6 64
5 16 69 I 38 27 I 1 87 151 32 45 28 5 2
873
66 211
4 33 180 1,212 579

Total

7,289

Note: the above figures exclude the number of engagements of temporary and exempt staff, details of which are not readily available separately for men and women. Information regarding the marital status of these appointees is not
collected.

Answers to Questions

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3315

Industrial Action: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1387)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers or employees in his Department have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions in each of the last 2 years.
(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.
(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.
(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that:
(1) (a) As shown in the table below-

Period

No. of Officers

----------------

May 1979-May 1980

70

June 1980-May 1981

304

(b) Nil. (2) 2587 manhours. (3) No. (4) See answer to (1) (b).

Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 1414)
Mr Dungey asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 8 Apri11981:
(1) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Department in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by his Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by his Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable mem'tT's question is as follows:
(1) to (4) With the exception mentioned below expenditure on official entertainment within Australia by all Departments is funded through the appropriations of my Department. In 1979-80 expenditure by all Departments totalled $104,148. It is not practicable to itemise this expenditure in the form requested because individual functions could be

attended by persons in more than one of the categories nominated. Expenditure on official entertainment is authorised by the departmental permanent head concerned.
Expenditure on official entertainment at a Commonwealth sponsored international conference in Australia is a charge against the conference budget and funded from the appropriation3 of the department concerned. No such expenditure was incurred by my Department in 1979-80.
Expenditure on official entertainment outside Australia incurred by my Department amounted to $341.39 in 1979-80.
Air Travel in Australia: Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 1473)
Mr Dungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
What sum was paid by his Department, or by departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The amounts paid by my Department to Ansett Airlines of Australia and Trans-Australia Airlines for travel within Australia during 1979-80 were $25,346.05 and $39,374.10 respectively.
Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Industry and Commerce
(Question No. 1520)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rental and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by his Department.
(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) None, (b) 128.
(2) $19,745.
Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Housing and Construction
(Question No. 1542)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by his Department.
(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) None, (b) 353.
(2) $35,981.

3316 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Recycling of Paper: Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 1577)
Mr Bungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Has any action been taken by his Department to re-cycle paper; ifso, what action.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
As arranged by the Department of Administrative Services, waste paper from the Department of the Treasury is collected by the Canberra Paper and Cardboard Recycling Co.
Drug Prosecutions
(QuestiouNo.1755)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Have any charges in relation to hard narcotic drugs laid by the Australian Federal Police, or its predecessor, during the last 3 years involved traffic or use ofdrugs derived from opium grown in Australia; ifso, what are the details.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police has advised that neither the Australian Federal Police nor its predecessor have preferred any charges which related to opium grown in t\ustralia.
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of the Capital Territory
(QuestiouNo.1888)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000, or about 20 per cent by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of his Department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes. (2) Personal telephone calls (STD and trunk) made by staff are controlled by (a) STD barring of all services unless permission to lift
this bar is given by the First Assistant Secretary, Management Services, (b) personal trunk calls can only be made through the switchboard operator if the Branch Head of the officer concerned gives his permission. If this permission is given the cost of the call is run back to the officer and he/she must pay the cost of the call to the Receiver of Public Moneys. The payment of these calls is followed up by Office Services. (3) Consideration has been given to the installation of monitoring devices which in the case of this Department

would mean a new switchboard. However, as trunk and STD calls are controlled, the cost Sllving on local calls would not be warranted in comparison with the cost of the new switchboard (approximately $100.000).
Proportion ofFull Time Employees Earning Less than Average Weekly Earnings
(Question No. 1974)
Mr Beazley asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
What is the actual or estimated proportion of wage and salary earners in full time employment receiving less than the average weekly earnings.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Australian Statistician has advised that the latest available figures on the distribution of earnings of wage and salary earners were obtained from a household sample survey conducted in August 1980. The average weekly earnings figure for all full time employees, as shown by the survey, was $233. Approximately 61 per cent of those employed received less than this. However, only 49 per cent of those aged 20 years and over received less than $233.
For the purposes of the survey, full time employees comprised those who worked 3S hours or more in the survey week and others who usually worked 3S hours or more. Because of the incidence of unpaid leave, industrial disputes, changing jobs or for other reasons, some of the latter may have been paid for less than a full week.
Australian Institute ofSport
(Question No. 1036)
Mr John Brown asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:
(1) How many sportsmen and women who were initially offered places at the Australian Institute of Sport declined those offers.
(2) How many of those who accepted offers have subsequently left the Institute.
(3) As a result of his discussions with the Director of the Institute, what steps has he taken to deal with the complaints made in March and April 1981 by officials at the Institute concerning the provision of facilities and training equipment to the Institute.
(4) What means of review exist to ensure that when a person attending the Institute has his or her scholarship cancelled or suspended, for whatever reason, that the person is not denied the rights of natural justice which are available to any student finding himself or herself in a similar position at any other tertil\fY institution in Australia.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Of a total of 190 persons who have been offered places, 40 have declined.
(2) 8. (3) An additional $176,000 has been allocated in 1980-81 for previously unforseen programs, taking the total allocatrion to $1.078m. A warm-up hall is to be constructed adjacent to the National Indoor Sports Centre at Bruce in time for the 1982 academic year. A Liaison Committee has been established comprising officials from the Departments of Home Affairs and Environment and Capital Territory, the National Capital Development Commission, the Canberra College of

Answers to Questions

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3317

Advanced Education and the Institute to meet on a regular basis to assist in the resolution of day-to-day problems relating to overlapping areas of concern. The Committee is presently examining the possibility of constructing a throwing area at Bruce for field games athletes at the Institute and has arranged for these athletes to use upgraded facilities at the Canberra College of Advanced Education, in the meantime.
(4) Any Institute student who has his or her scholarship cancelled or suspended has the same rights of natural justice available to him or her as any other Australian citizen through the courts. The Institute, which is a Company Limited by Guarantee, does not come under the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth Ombudsman who only has jurisdiction over Commonwealth Departments and a small number of prescribed authorities. For that reason, the Institute students cannot seek redress through the Ombudsman as students at other tertiary institutions can. However, the Institute has internal review procedures involving the close consideration of the student's case by the Executive Director, the student's coach and the Board of Management of the Institute, which are carried out before a scholarship is suspended or terminated.
Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 2119)
Mrs Kelly asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Will he provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Funcitons are implemented.

Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No.
(2) Not applicable.
(3) Not applicable.
(4) Not applicable.
MANDATA System: Department of Communications
(Question No. 2212)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(1) Has the MANDATA System been introduced in his Department and Government instrumentalities under his control; if so, what was the (a) cost of (i) the equipment, (ii) installation, (iii) site preparation, (iv) acquiring or renting sites and (v) other additional factors associated with the introduction of the system and (b) total cost of introducing the system.
(2) Were any reductions in the staff of personnel/ establishment units achieved as a result of introducing this system; if so, what (a) reductions in staff and (b) cost savings were achieved in each year since its introduction.
(3) What staff (a) saving or (b) increase is expected with the termination of the MANDATA System.
(4) What is the anticipated (a) extra cost or (b) saving resulting from the termination of the MANDATA System.

Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Prime Minister announced in Parliament on 30 April 1981 that the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwalth Functions are expected to lead to a total reduction in the number of Commonwealth Government employees of the order of 16,000 to 17,000 over a period of two years (Hansard, 30 April 1981, p. 1851). Precise details of the effect on individual department staffing levels have not yet been finally determined. The Prime Minister also tabled a schedule of decisions arising from the Review which outline the changes to departmental functions (Hansard, 30 April 1981, pp 1840-1851).

Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2), (3) and (4) The MANDATA System has not been introduced into any area of the Communications portfolio.
MANDATA System: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 2227)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Administative Services, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:

MANDATA System: Department of Industry and Commerce
(Question No. 2211)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(1) Has the MANDATA System been introduced in his Department and Government instrumentalities under his control; if so, what was the (a) cost of (i) the equipment, (ii) installation, (iii) site preparation, (iv) acquiring or renting sites and (v) other additional factors associated with the introduction of the system and (b) total cost of introducing the system.
(2) Were any reductions in the staff of personnel/establishment units achieved as a result of introducing this system; if so, what (a) reductions in staff and (b) cost savings were achieved in each year since its introduction.
(3) What staff (a) saving or (b) increase is expected with the termination of the MANDATA System.
(4) What is the anticipated (a) extra cost or (b) saving resulting from the termination of the MANDATA System.

(I) Has the MANDATA System been introduced in his Department and Government instrumentalities under his control; if so, what was the (a) cost of (i) the equipment, (ii) installation, (iii) site preparation, (iv) acquiring or renting sites and (v) other additionalfactors associated with the introduction of the system and (b) total cost of introducing the system.
(2) Were any reductions in the staff of personnel/ establishment units achieved as a result of introducing this system; if so, what (a) reductions in staff and (b) cost savings were achieved in each year since its introduction.
(3) What staff (a) saving or (b) increase is expected with the termination of the MANDATA System.
(4) What is the anticipated (a) extra cost or (b) saving resulting from the termination of the MANDATA System.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2), (3) and (4) Not applicable.

3318 REPRESENTATIVES 5 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Reviewof Commonwealth Functions
(Question No. 2249)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:
(I)' Has he received a letter, signed by me and addressed to him, dated I May 1981, wherein I registered a strong protest at the extremely limited number of the copies of the Review of Commonwealth Functions ministerial statement and attachments which were made available to the Parliament.
. (2) If so, when may I expect (a) a response to my letter and (b) the 30 copies of the statement which I asked him to provide to IIle.
(3) will the Government release the full report of the
Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions on which his ministerial statement was based; if so, when; if not, what is the reason.
(4) Does the withholding of the full report indicate a contempt for tbe Parliament by his Government.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. The number of copies provided to the Parliament was in accordance with standard practice.
(2) As I advised the honourable member in response to his request, additional copies of the Ministerial Statement on Review of Commonwealth Functions may be readily obtained from the Australian Government Publishing Service Bookshops.
(3) and (4) The Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions was a Cabinet Committee and the papers which were prepared for the Committee are Cabinet documents and are therefore not available for public release. Det!\ils of the changes determined by the Government and the reasons for them were given to the Parliament.
Government Clothing Factory
(Question No. 2325)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that the Government Clothing Factory at Coburg, Victoria, is recognised as being thoroughly efficient with (a) 30 per cent to 35 per cent of its work being secured by competitive tender, (b) highly productive, modern equipment blling used on production in addition to that for defence purposes, (c) a profit being made each year since 1911 except for 2 years, (d) orders outstanding running at $20m and (e) a current turnover of $14m !\lready being realised in 1980-81.
(2) Does the factory provide specialist services of value in the wider community including (a) the making of kilts and the provision of special hand embroidery items and (b) training programs for machinists making available skilled workers for industry generally.
(3) Are more than 700 persons employed in the factory, 80 per cent of whom are female migrants who are being provided with exceptional and commendable social service programs such as English classes for migrants; if so, is this employment being provided in the Coburg/Brunswick district where there are 6000 persons unemployed.
(4) Have'a number of inquiries been carried out into the operations of the factory including a legal and constitutional challenge in 1935 and the Allison-Brewster Committee in 1964 when there was a move to another site; if so, did all these inquiries 'come to the firm conclusion that the Government Clothing Factory should continue in operation.

(5) If the position is substantially as stated in parts (I) to (4) is there an overwhelming case for the factory to continue operations.
(6) Will the Government immediately reverse its decision arising from the recommendation of the Committee of Re~ view of Commonwealth Functions and end the regrettable and adverse uncertainty applying to the operations of the factory.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Government is aware of the efficiency of the Australian Government Clothing Factory. The factory has consistently achieved an operating surplus on a cash accounting basis, but it does not make provision for many expenses which would be incurred in private industry. The figures quoted by the honourable member are generally correct except that the amount of work obtained by competitive tender is only between 8 per cent and 10 per cent, and it should be noted that the highly productive modern equipment was provided for, and is used mainly on, defence work.
(2) The factory makes kilts for Service bands, and special embroidery items for the Services; however, little interest has been expressed by the wider community in such items, kilts in particular being available from other suppliers. Training programs are provided by the factory for its staff.
(3) Employment in the factory is approximately 730, and about 80 per cent are female migrants. English language classes have been held for the benefit of these employees. However, the Factory's employees are drawn from a much wider area than Coburg/Brunswick, only 30 per cent coming from that area.
(4) The inquiries referred to by the honourable member did take place, and in the context of the circumstances current at the times concerned recommended the continued operation of the factory.
(5) The Government has recognised the desirability of continued operation of this manufacturing facility, but in the private sector, and has confirmed this by its preparedness to consider entering into arrangements for continued placement of Government work in the factory for a period of 5 years.
(6) The decision announced by the Prime Minister in his statement on 30 April 1981 will not be reversed.
Exchange Rates
(Question No. 2341)
Dr Klugman asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a statement by the Commissioner of Taxation, Mr W. J. O'Reilly, reported in Australian Business of 21 May 1981, page 14, that most companies in the mining area have had Mr O'Reilly on at one time or another and that it is the same with the big manufacturing concerns and in money lending areas, particularly related to changes in the exchange rates.
(2) If so, is the report accurate.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) I have discussed this matter with the Commissioner who has advised me that the remark quoted, or something like it, was made in the context of a reply he gave to an inquiry by a journalist as to what type of taxpayer figures mainly in tax appeals going to the High Court for determination. As he recalls it, the Commissioner made the point that it is usually when large amounts of tax and important legal principles are involved that a case reaches the High Court. As

Answers to Questions

5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3319

a perusal of the law reports will show, there have over the years been many cases of this kind involving prominent companies engaged in mining, in manufacturing and in financing. Some of them have borne on the difficult question of the correct tax treatment of exchange gains and losses in particular circumstances.
Water Usage
(Question No. 2369)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 2 June 1981:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to an article by Sir Barton Pope published in The Australian of25 May 1981.
(2) If so, is it a fact, as suggested in the article, that sophisticated new sprinkler equipment is now available in Australia which would reduce the amount of water used in cotton growing by about half.
(3) If so, what steps will the Government take to promote the usage of this equipment in the cotton-growing areas of Australia, and will the Minister take up the matter with relevant State Governments.

(4) Has the impact of improvements in water usage been taken up by the River Murray Commission; if not, why not.
MI' Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) r have been informed that while new types of equip-
ment are available, field tests have not yet been undertaken in Australia to determine the extent of water savings from the use of this type of equipment on the particular soil types where cotton is grown.
(3) In the main, cotton is currently irrigated by water applied in furrows adjacent to plants. Whether this method should be changed in favour of water applied by sprinkler, is a desision that rests with the cotton-growers themselves, as appropriate, in consultation with advisers from the relevant State Department of Agriculture on agronomic and economic aspects of the change in irrigation methods.
(4) No. The River Murray Commission has no responsibility for irrigation methods.


