House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 121, 1981 Thursday, 26 March 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

26 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 949

Th ursday, 26 March 1 981
Mr SPEAKER CRt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1 0.30 a.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk--Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of children's services, which has been reduced by almost 40% in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 budget. And further, that annual budget allocations in the area of children's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free and Mr Mountford. Petitions received.
Determination No. 503 of 1980
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: the humble petition ofundersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That the Government's move in attempting to disallow Determination 503 of 1980 which was granted by the full bench of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission has (a) placed in jeopardy the future viability of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, (b) and has created a dangerous precedent for trade unions in general, by refusing to accept the umpire's decision
2. That the Government has acted in complicity with the Public Service Board in attempting to disallow Determination 503 of 1 980 and is thereby attempting to deny Government employees a fair hearing on matters related to redundancy and retrenchment;
your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will
(a) reject any moves to disallow Determination 503 of 1 980 and to exclude arbitral jurisdiction over any aspect of redun dancy redeployment, retrenchment and retirement;
(b) repeal existing powers to disallow arbitration determinations.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fry.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members oftheHouse of Representatives in Parliament Assembled: the humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.

2. That Moreton Island is included on the interim list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heri tage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the pro tection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed a further mining lease against the advice of conservationists.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Innes. Petition received.
Georges River
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth that the pollution problems caused by the proliferation of the Brazilian weed Salvinia molesta in the Georges River, NSW:
(a) poses a serious health riskto the community; (b) has caused severe damage to the environment; (c) poses a potential additional threat to the famous
Georges River oyster industry already affected by oil spills in Botany Bay.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Commonwealth will provide immediate financial assistance to the State and local government authorities combating the problem and ensure that all Commonwealth instrumentalities along the Georges River are nol contributing to the pollution problem.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson. Petition received.
Acquisition of Land in Botany Bay Region
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of certain citizens respectfully shows that:
(a) The continued despoilation of the natural environment of the Botany Bay region will result in the loss of a unique part of the National Estate.
(b) The oil spills from ships and from installations adjoin" ing Botany Bay have threatened the viability of the valuable export orientated oyster industry in the region.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Government supply the funds required to acquire additional land for parks :11 the region to augment the natural environment, and take action to minimise the incidence of oil spills in Botany Bay.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson. Petition received.
Immigration
To the honourable speaker and members of the Houseof Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens showeth that we protest at the many unwise decisions of our National Government which have resulted in discrimination against Australians in many ways.
That unwise immigration has introduced into Australiu crimes characteristic of certain races and which through an environmental impact is influencing the behaviour of some young Australians.

950 REPRESENTATTVES 26 March 1981

Petitions

That unwise immigration has led to the basing within Australia of a number of foreign terrorist groups and the Mafia, all of whom are causing the police and citizens grave concern.
That the Government act immediately on the advice of the people as expressed through many public opinion polls and bring to a halt the present huge intake of non Anglo-Saxon Celtic people, thereby retaining some portion of the fast diminishing goodwill and public confidence in that Australians have not given the government any mandate to pOpu late the country with people ofalien stock.
That the government give practical effect to the views so earnestly espoused by the recent Immigration Minister M r M . J. R. MacKellar (Hansard, 3 0 November 1972), ex immi gration Minister Sir Phillip Lynch (Page 16 Policy book Evol ution of a Policy), Ex Immigration Minister Forbes (Hansard 17 August 1972 and press statement 2 May 1972) and Ex Prime Minister Sir William McMahon (Press statement 4 May 1972), all ofwhich are itemised on attached sheet.
That the government dismiss Mr A. Grassby for his well known racial bias as indicated in Parliament at the time of his appointment.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House ofRep, resentatives, in Parliament assembled, should take action to have a national referendum on the subject ofimmigration.
And yourpetitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kerin. Petition received.
Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association
To the Honourable the Speaker of the House of Representa tives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association of Australia (DEBRAA) and their supporters respectfully shows that funds for medical research into Epidermolysis Bullosa are no longer being made available from the Federal Government to the medical research team at the University of New South Wales, enabling them to continue medical research into Epidermolysis Bullosa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that these signa tures contained on these forms will serve to make it known that we expect these funds to be forthcoming in the very near future.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lionel Bowen. Petition received.
Telephone Services
To the Honourable the Speaker of the House of Representa tives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Macquarie respect fully showeth:
That we consider the lack of service provided by Telecom Australia in Sydney's 047 telephone zone is not only inconvenient but is affecting families, business concerns and employment in the area.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government direct Telecom Australia to provide an adequate service to subscribers and users in the 047 telephone zone.
And your petitioners as in dutybound will ever pray.
by Mr Free.
Petition received.

Airline Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the presenr two airline domestic policyofthe Commonwealth Government.
That this policy has resulted in expensive airfares and poor service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visiting WA and vice versa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition and formulate an Airline Policyprovidingfor greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr McLean. Petition received.
DISALLOWED NOTICE OF MOTION Mr Groom proceeding to give a notice of motionMr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman wiII need to revise the wording of his notice of motion. He is putting forward facts rather than a proposition. I ask him to rephrase his notice of motion .
INSURANCE INTERMEDIARIES Notice of Motion
Mr JACOBI (Hawker)-I give notice of my intention to present at the next sitting a Bill for an Act relating to insurance intermediaries.
SPIRITS ACT 1906 Notice of Motion
Mr GILES (Wakefield)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shaH move:
That the amendment to Regulation 9B of the Spirits Regu lations, as contained in Statutory Rule 1 980, No. 384, made under the Spirits Act 1906 be disallowed.
35-HOUR WEEK Notice of Motion Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shaH move:
That, in view of the recent Altona 35-hour week decision of the Full Bench of the Arbitration Commission, this House is of the opinion that the manufacturers concerned are world leaders in the area of productivity and that the present high rates of tariff protection such as polypropylene at 45 per cent are no longer necessary.
MURDER INVESTIGATION Notice of Motion
Mr GROOM (Braddon) -I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shaH move:
( I ) That this House reminds the Commonwealth and New South Wales Governments and their Law Enforcement Agen cies that Donald McKay, a responsible and concerned citizen

Questions Without Notice

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 95 1

of Griffith, New South Wales, disappeared without trace on 15 July 1977 and was presumablymurdered.
(2) Expresses its grave concern that after nearly four years the murder ofDonald McKay has not yet been solved.
(3) Urges the Governments concerned to continue to pur sue the investigation of this atrocious crime with vigour and determination.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
POLAND Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I ask the Minister for Foreign Affairs: In view of the current complex and serious economic situation in Poland and the importance of the stability of that country for world peace, has he conducted a review of our bi lateral relationship with Poland to determine what measures can be taken to strengthen trade between Poland and Australia and thereby provide some tangible assistance to the Polish people? For example, will the Minister seriously consider resurrecting the possibility of a joint fishing venture with Polish trawlers and Australia's maritime resources? If such a review has not been conducted, will the Minister ensure that one is undertaken as a matter of urgency? Mr STREETI am sure that all members of this House feel for the Polish nation in the difficult situation in which it now finds itself. I have made clear in discussions with the Polish Ambassador this Government's firm view that the problems in Poland should be resolved by Poland. For the first time, the question of specific exten sion of credit terms for goods we trade with Poland has been raised with the Government, and we are looking at that now. The general answer to the first part of the honourable member's question is yes, we are reviewing the circumstances in which trade is conducted and we are very well aware of the acute economic problems facing Poland at this time. I am not aware of the possi bility of a joint fishing venture. I shall seek what ever information is available on that subject and inform the Deputy Leader of the Opposition accordingly.
NATIONAL SEMICONDUCTOR INCORPORATED
Mr CARLTON M --- y question is directed to the Minister for the Capital Territory. I refer to the proposal for a feasibility study to be con ducted by National Semiconductor Incorporated into the manufacture of microelectronic wafers in Canberra. Is it likely that any manufacturing pro cess resulting from this investigation will be able to produce goods in Australia without the necess ity for tariff protection?

Mr HODGMAN-I acknowledge the long standing interest of the honourable member in the field of electronics and microelectronics. The question gives me an opportunity to respond briefly on a proposal which is one of the most dy namic and exciting proposals to come Australia's way for many years. It will give this nation a microelectronics industry of its own and a transfer of technology which will be very substantial indeed. In direct response to the question asked by the honourable member as to whether any tariff or other assistance is being sought, the answer is no. The Commonwealth's commitment with respect to the feasibility study is the provision of land and buildings to a value of $ 1 9. 5m. That is it. No other assistance will be sought, nor has any been offered.
Before the honourable member for Port Adelaide gets completely carried away, might I outline in brief some of the advantages for this country if the feasibility study is in the affirmative. Firstly, it will give Australia access to technology transfer which will not only be significant but will also in turn lead to the establishment in this country, without any shadow of a doubt, of an ap plications industry with a capacity to employ in excess of 1 00,000 people at the end of the decade. It will provide employment directly for 1 ,200 to 1 ,500 people in the Australian Capital Territory. It will earn Australia export earnings of $70m per annum as of year one of operation and a return from income tax, as indicated by the company on Tuesday last, of $7m per annum. The land and buildings will remain the property of the Commonwealth of Australia. They will not be trans ferred to the company but will be leased.
The proposal has aroused such excitement that the question has been asked: Why is it being established in Canberra and not in some other part of Australia? In another place an honourable senator asked a somewhat queer question along those line.s only yesterday. First and foremost, the answer is that anybody who knows anything about the microelectronics industry will know that National Semiconductor Incorporated has been established in the Australian Capital Terri tory for the past 1 0 years and that it employs di rectly and indirectly between 1 50 and 200 people. The second reason is quite substantive; the Australian National University is the only university in Australia which has a unit involved in solid state technology. I say to those in the States that this development will mean not merely the establishment of a wafer fabrication plant in the Australian Capital Territory but also the establish ment of an applications industry which will be

952 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

available to all the States. The honourable Boeing aircraft, what actions and/or investi

member for Newcastle is endeavouring--

gations has the Government undertaken to ensure

Mr SPEAKER-I suggest that the Minister bring his answer to a conclusion.
Mr HODGMAN-I will indeed, Mr Speaker. Might I say to the honourable member for New castle that perhaps there are more votes in New castle than in the whole of Tasmania. An appli cations industry will be established in Tasmania, South Australia and Western Australia.
Mr Charles Jones-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. The Minister is attributing a statement to me which he knows is a damned lie. The statement made was to the effect that there are more people in Newcastle than in Tasmania.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no substance to the point of order. Furthermore, the honourable member for Newcastle will withdraw.

that the Australian public interest is fully pro tected against any contingency that may arise from investigations by the United States Senate and the Federal Bureau of Investigations into the circumstances of the United States of America Eximbank $600m loan to ATI for the purchase of its 2 1 new Boeing aircraft? I ask further: What specific binding assurances have been entered into by this Government in respect of the loan? When were they given? What consultations have taken place between the Australian Government and the United States Government on this matter?
Mr HUNT-Firstly, the Commonwealth Government has indicated to both Trans Australia Airlines and to Ansett Transport Indus tries Ltd that it will provide a guarantee for approved loans-the loans, of course, are

Mr Charles Jones-What did I say, sir? Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will withdraw. Mr Charles Jones-What do I have to withdraw?

approved by the Treasurer-for the purchase of wide-bodied, new generation aircraft that will be delivered to both TAA and Ansett between now and the end of 1 984. The loans that Ansett has arranged with a lending agency in the United States have been negotiated by the company. I

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will withdraw or I will deal with him.
Mr Charles Jones-In that case, seeing I want to ask a question today, I will withdraw.

have no doubt that the Treasury has been examin ing all the details associated with that loan. The legislation is not before the Parliament at the present time.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman may be lucky to get the call. Has the Minister finished?
Mr HODGMAN-I have nearly finished, Mr Speaker. It is amazing how the Australian Labor Party--

Mr Morris-It is your legislation. You are the responsible Minister.
Mr HUNT-I can assure the honourable member that the Government will take all the necessary precautions to ensure that the public interest is protected.

Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will resume the Mr Morris-What have you done so far?

answer to the question and ignore the interjections.

Mr HUNT-The honourable member is not the only person in the House who has a mortgage

Mr HODGMAN-I will, sir. In conclusion, I over a sense of responsibility.

say that this dynamic proposal should not be seen on its own but as the forerunner of an applications industry in this nation which within a decade will have an employment potential in excess of that of the steel industry; that is, 1 00,000 people. I hope that all Australians will welcome it as a great decision for Australia and hope that the feasibility study is successfully completed in the very near future.
ANSETT TRANSPORT INDUSTRIES: PURCHASE OF BOEING AIRCRAFT Mr MORRIS-My question is directed to the Minister for Transport. Having regard to the con tingent liability that will arise for Australia should a Government guarantee be provided to Ansett Transport Industries Ltd for its purchase of

AUSTRALIAN-NEW ZEALAND TRADE Mr BURR-My question is directed to the
Minister for Primary Industry. What discussions are presently taking place to achieve closer economic relations between Australia and New Zealand? Has it been proposed by either the Australian Government or New Zealand Government that there should be a greater inflow of New Zealand primary produce in exchange for more Australian manufactured goods into New Zealand? If so, which New Zealand primary products will increase on the Australian market? If not, what is the Australian Government doing to afford protection to Australian producers against heavily subsidised competition from New Zealand? If more New Zealand products are

Questions Without Notice

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 953

allowed into Australia, will it be a condition that they be sold at a price that refiects the Australian cost of production?
Mr NIXON-I can understand the honourable member's concern with the matters involved in , ne question. The facts of the maller are that over a period of months now there have been discussions in an attempt to achieve closer economic relations between Australia and New Zealand. The reasons for the proposal, of course, have been well stated over a period both by the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister. As to the detailed effect of the proposal on industries, the industries involved are subject to close study by officials of our Government and of the New Zealand Government. We have said that closer economic relations cannot lead to unfair trading practices existing on one side of the Tasman vis-a vis the other. The very points that emerge from the honourable member's question are the points of study being undertaken. Let me reassure the House that the point about unfairness is a point that is well in the Government's mind and is cen tral to the studies that are being made. No decisions will be taken that will lead to unfair trading practices. Further work is still to be done. The Government is not yet in a definitive position to make positive determinations on the issues.
TWO AIRLINES AGREEMENT Mr LES McMAHON-Has the attention of the Minister for Transport been drawn to the media reports of a letter it is alleged the Minister wrote to Sir Peter Abeles which states that, firstly, Mr Rupert Murdoch urged the Government to sell Trans-Australia Airlines; secondly, Ansett Transport I ndustries Ltd requested the introduction of automatic air fare increases; and, thirdly, Ansett requested that TAA should have a net profit target of 1 0 per cent of revenue before tax and be required to pay 50 per cent of after tax profit as dividends? If so, can the Minister say whether the reports are accurate? Further, will he table the correspondence between Ansett Airlines and his office relating to the negotiations of a two airline agreement? Will he explain why he sub sequently reversed his original decision to reject outright the Ansett proposals? Mr HUNTAn exchange of correspondence between Ministers and business principals occurs in many areas of government, but it is not the practice of Ministers to table letters exchanged with such private enterprise principals without their authorit- . I do not intend to break that prin ciple in this Parliament. If the recipient of the let ter referred to were happy to have the correspon dence, or any aspect of it, tabled, I would have no

objection whatsoever to that happening. I refute any suggestion that in negotiations with Ansett Airlines of Australia the Government has in any way met the 1 0 per cent profit target to which the honourable gentleman has referred.
OCCUPATIONAL SUPERANNUATION Mr CONNOLLY-Will the Treasurer advise the House of the progress that has been made by the task force which he established in July 1 979 to examine various aspects of occupational superan nuation? Does the Government support the extension of nationwide superannuation programs based on portability? Mr HOWARD-I can inform the honourable member that the work of that task force, which covers an extraordinarily complicated and difficult subject, has progressed a great deal. ] hope, after further discussions which I plan to have with the task force in the very near future, to be in a position to report to the Government on the area that the task force has covered in its work. The House will be aware that when the task force was established the Government indicated its rejection of the principal recommendations of the Hancock National Superannuation Committee of Inquiry and stated that the major reason for that decision was the implication in the princi pal recommendation that a 5 per cent tax levy should be imposed on personal incomes. We believed then, and still believe, that that would add unacceptablyto the taxation burden in Australia. The areas covered by the task force obviously include that mentioned by the honourable gentle man. There is no easy answer; it is one of a number of extraordinarily complex issues which arise in the whole superannuation area . I assure the honourable gentleman that whilst I am not now in a position to say what will come out of the task force report, I can say that its work is pro ceeding down the track, and I hope in the course of the year to be in a position to put appropriate recommendations to the Government.
TWO AIRLINES AGREEMENT Mr CAMPBELL-My question is addressed to the Minister for Transport. I ask: Why did he tell this House on 1 8 September last that, under the new two airlines agreement proposals, subject to a number of facilitation problems, spare Qantas capacity within Australia could be utilised? Is it not a fact that at that moment the new two air lines agreement, giving Ansett Airlines of Australia unprecedented power to block the use of spare Qantas capacity across Australia and access to half-price air travel for Western Australians, had already been prepared and that it

954 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

was signed less than 20 hours later? Was the information given to the Parliament inaccurate or was the Minister not aware of the contents of the agreement he was about to sign?

Mr HUNT-There was no inaccuracy in the statement. I made on 1 8 September. From mem ory, the statement indicated that under the new two airlines agreement it would be possible for negotiations to take place between the domestic carriers and Qantas Airways Ltd for the provision of capacity to use over certain designated routes. This has always been the case, subject to the Government and my Department being able to make the necessary arrangements to handle pass engers on international airlines travelling on those routes between Perth and Sydney, Melbourne or wherever. It involves other departments because of the provision of quarantine and customs facilities.

That position still obtains. It is possible to enter

into an arrangement to allow that excess capacity

to be used in a manner that does not disrupt the

volume of traffic flying over those routes to the

extent that it disturbs the regular scheduled ser

vices between the eastern States and Perth. Many

people do not understand that if we allow a

number of 747 aircraft to fly intermittently over

these routes it will ultimately affect the volume of

passengers available for the scheduled domestic

services. Ultimately this must affect the frequency

of the scheduled elsewhere.

servi' ces

to

Perth,

Darwin

and

Mr Morris-Mr Speaker, I wish to raise a point of order. It relates to the relevance of the Minister's answer. The precise question was whether it was a fact that at the moment the two airlines agreement giving Ansett unprecedented power to block the use of that capacity had already been prepared, and why did he not so in form the House. It was not about the implications elsewhere.

Mr Malcolm Fraser-That is not a point of order.

Mr Morris-How would you know? You have not read the Standing Orders yet. I ask you, Mr Speaker, to direct the Minister to answer the specific part of the question.

Mr SPEAKERThe Minister is giving material which I believe is relevant to the question, The honourable gentleman is not entitled to require the Minister to" answer in the form the questioner wishes, As long as the material is relevant-and 1 rule it relevant-the Minister can proceed, Does the Minister wish to continue?

Mr HUNT-I had finished, Mr Speaker,

IMPORT DUTY ON KILTS Mr MacKENZIE-I ask a question of the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs. It should be dear to the hearts of many members and Ministers, including the Prime Minister, and, per haps, of you, Mr Speaker. Is the Minister aware that full duty is currently levied on imported dress kilts? Does the Minister acknowledge that no similar dress kilts are made in Australia? Why is the national dress of other nations allowed in duty free, or at concessional duty rates? For how much longer does the Minister intend to discriminate against us Scots? Mr MOORE-I can appreciate the great feel ing of those from the northern part of the British domain. As I am of Irish extraction, I would per haps take a more pragmatic view of the problem. I am sure it is a matter of great concern. Because of that I will look well into the matter.
DEFENCE PERSONNEL Mr HAYDEN-The Minister for Defence will recall that on Tuesday at Question Time he stated that, far from facing no direct threat of invasion in the next 10 years, Australia faced and had to be prepared and able to respond to a multitude of threats from international communism. Is it a fact that because of flying time restrictions the number of crews for F I l l aircraft has been reduced, that overall squadron flying time is at a level below that required for efficiency, that we have 20 Orion aircraft but only 1 5 crews, that we are 2t crews short for our six submarines after allowing for one reserve crew, which accords with proper practice, that one-quarter of our Mirage aircraft still exist ing are not operational, that well over 40 military aircraft have been lost during the time of his min istry and that from mid-November 1980 the Skyhawk aircraft from the aircraft carrier Melbourne cannot be catapulted from or based on that aircraft carrier for another two years, thereby crippling the main strike weapon of our major surface vessel? Is it also a fact that according to the chief of the Air Staff, because of an insufficient number of ser vicing crews, the hours flown by Mirages are fewer than eVen the minimum required and that in the event of war, expansion of the air forces would be difficult because no trained personnel could be released for training? In the light of those facts, and many similar ones, I ask the Minister whether he regards the situation as being consist ent with a credible Defence Force capable of responding to Australia's needs in the light of the grim scenario that he has outlined as potentially threatening Australia?

Questions Without Notice

26 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 955

Mr KILLEN-The Leader of the Opposition has sought to give purported facts to this H01\se. They may be evaluated by turning to the preface of his question in which he attributed my having
on Tuesday referred to a number of years.. I said
nothing of the sort. I defy the honourable gentle man to point to any speech that I have made, either in public or in private--
Mr Hayden-So it is not this decade; it is the next decade.
Mr KILLEN The honourable member seems to have a premature senile addiction to being itchy. I try to treat my honourable friend with courtesy. Despite temptations to the contrary I will keep at the matter. I have never used, those words at any time in relation to any threat to thi country. What 1 sought to convey to the House on Tuesday was a clear understanding that there is a variety of contingencies that this country must be prepared to face up to, ranging from what I de scribed as the massive threat to the entire world. If it is of any interest to the House, I was just reading the last report of the former Secretary of De fense in the United States of America, Mr Harold Brown. I am dealing with the most sober consideration that this world faces today. I despair at the honourable member's understanding of the seriousness of that. Secretary Brown, referring to the fact that some 1 6,000 available strategic weapons are held by the two super powers, painted a positive picture of holocaust. As I said, the Soviet's maintenance of a declared ambition that its suzerainty should stretch over the world remains a threat to this country. The threats can range from that down to a threat that may be made against an oil rig. We can deal with a threat to our lines of communication and so on. I was simply seeking to give the House the understanding that there is a wide range of contingen cies for the government of the day. I have sought during my five years and more as Minister for De fence to encourage a bipartisan approach to this serious matter despite a lot of dissuasion.
Mr Hayden-Forty aircraft have fallen out of the air since you have been Minister for Defence-crashed.
Mr KILLEN-I do not know who does the re search for the honourable gentleman, but I would give him the cane. He referred to a number of incidents-crashes, call them what you wilJ almost making the allegation that I, as the responsible Minister, deliberately crashed the aircraft. Extraordinary cerebral processes take over the honourable gentleman from time to time.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. The question I asked the Minister is a very

serious one and it deserves a direct answer. The armed services need more than a bristling mous tache and florid rhetoric to defend the country.
Mr SPEAKEROrder! There is no 'point of order.
Mr KILLENUnlike the honourable gentle man, J did wear a uniform. The honourable gentleman has asked in total about eight questions relating to-
Opposition members interjecting Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will re sume his seat. The House will come to order. I re mind all honourable members that this is the nationa1 Parliament. I ask honourable members to remain silent. Mr KILLEN-The Leader of the Opposition asked about eight questions. I propose to treat those questions as being on notice and I propose to give a detailed answer to them in this House this day and provide the honourable member with an opportunity-Mr Hayden-Let me know. Mr KILLEN-Yes, I will observe the proper courtesies. I will see that he gets a copy of my .statement before I seek leave to make it. I just want to say this to the honourable gentleman: In t'gard to the development of an operational capa bility, this country's capacity in the region today is without peer. That is not my view; that is the view of the present Chief of Defence Force Staff, Admiral Synnot; it is the view of his predecessor; and it also happens to be the view of the former Secretary of Defence in the United States, M r Harold Brown, produced in his report only a few weeks ago.
HOSPITALS AND COMMUNITY HEALTH SERVICES: NEW SOUTH
WALES Mr BAUME-I refer the Minister for Health to the increased Federal funding in real terms this year for hospitals and community health services in New South Wales. Has the New South Wales Health Department failed to take up its full entitlement under the approved budget for that State's public hospitals? I ask that question par ticularly in the context of the denials by the New South Wales Minister for Health. Can the Minister inform the House as to the accuracy of the State Minister's claims on alleged cuts in Federal funding for community health services in New South Wales? Mr MacKELLAR-As I informed the House earlier this week, the amounts of money made available to the States by the Commonwealth

956 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

under the cost sharing agreements have in fact maintained the real levels of expenditure at those obtaining in 1 979. As I also informed the House earlier this week, New South Wales had not taken up the total amount of money that was earmarked for it from this year's Budget. Because it had not taken up these amounts, any amounts claimed were paid automatically because that State was well within its Budget allocation. Mr Stewart, the New South Wales Minister for Health, has confir med that at the end of February New South Wales claims for cash were about $ 1 7m less than it was entitled to at that stage. That was still the case in mid-March when the figures that J cited earlier this week were taken out. Since then New South Wales has made an unusuallylarge cash ad vance claim. In fact, it is about $ 1 2m more than was provided for in the cash flow. Despite that unusually large cash advance claim, the amount taken up is still below that which has been ear marked for New South Wales during the current Budget year. So on these figures J think it can be plainly seen that the Commonwealth Government is more than adhering to its stated commit ments. Of course, naturally enough, we would be anxious to look at any particular instances that any State Health Minister may have in relation to his or her Budget problems. But on the figures available to me so far the claims made by Mr Stewart simply do not stand up to examination.
TOUR OF NEW ZEALAND BY SOUTH AFRICAN RUGBY UNION TEAM
Mr SPEAKER-I call the honourable member for Newcastle.
Mr CHARLES JONES-Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your very generous call this morning.
Mr SPEAKER-I expect the same response. Mr CHARLES JONES-I direct a question to the Prime Minister. Whilst not wanting to in terfere in the domestic affairs of New Zealand, I ask: Will the Prime Minister assure the House that if the proposed tour of New Zealand by the South African rugby union team proceeds the New Zealand Government will not be invited to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meet ing scheduled for Melbourne on 30 September, nor will New Zealand sportsmen and sports women be invited to participate in the Commonwealth Games in Brisbane next year? Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Yesterday I had discussions with Mr Ordia from Nigeria, who has been having discussions with various Ministers and officials in Queensland, with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and with myself. He has assured both the Foreign Minister and myself that it is the

wish of the African states to come to Australia for the Commonealth Games, that they very much want to come, and at the same time very much hope that no circumstance will arise which might make that difficult or, in their eyes, impossible. I have no doubt that Mr Ordia will be doing what he can to help. I believe that his visit to Australia was helpful. I also believe that the discussions he has had with a number of people have led to a better understanding of Africa's view about apart heid and the reasons for it, and the reasons for the Gleneagles agreement in relation to sport.
The Commonwealth Games do not belong to any one nation. Brisbane happens to be the host at the Games next year, but the Games are not ours. They belong to the Commonwealth as a whole, and decisions in relation to the Games belong to the Commonwealth as a whole. J do not think it is in the Commonwealth tradition to take the course of action the honourable gentleman has suggested. I certainly hope that that line of action will not be pursued because I do not believe that it would be helpful overall. Mr Muldoon has said that he wishes the Springbok tour of New Zealand would not proceed. It is the first time that the Prime Minister of New Zealand has made that statement, and I believe it is significant that in recent days he has made the statement that it is his personal view, as I understand it strongly held, that the tour should not proceed.
I do not think that I can usefully add anything more to the position at the present time. This is a sensitive area, and I believe that there has been a bipartisan policy in relation to these matters and in relation to southern African questions gener ally within this House. I ask the honourable gentleman and the members of his party to be of some assistance over the coming months in these difficult and sensitive matters while we try to reach an appropriate and sensible conclusion .
PENSIONERS: TAXATION BENEFITS Mr BOURCHIER-I ask the Treasurer whether he is aware of the recent investigation carried out by the Taxation Office into the extra income being earned by some pensioners? Is he aware that much of this extra income is earned by pensioners carrying out such duties as gateman at sports meetings, school crossing duties, and so on? In order to overcome this problem, will he consider in the next Budget, firstly, lifting the level of income to be earned before tax is levied, or, secondly, introducing a special rate of taxation equal to 50 per cent of the existing base rate to be applied to pensioner recipien ts?

Questions Without Notice

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 957

Mr HOWARD-I am not specifically aware of the investigations to which the honourable gentle man has referred. I assume that they are part of the normal administration of the income tax legislation by the Commissioner of Taxation. The proposal the honourable gentleman has put is a vari ant of a large number of proposals that I receive fairly steadily throughout the year suggesting in one form or another either that taxation should be reduced or that expenditure should be increased or, desirably, a combination of both. That is often the flavour of the suggestions I receive. That comment is not in any way intended to dismiss the im portance of maintaining a fair approach to pensioners in these areas.

Mr HUMPHREYS-Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start again. I address a question to the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs. Is it a fact that a parcel addressed to a prominent Queensland personality and marked 'Books and pamphlets only' was discovered by Customs officials to be a 19-kilogram parcel of beans, an import prohibited subject to quarantine. Did the person or the agent of the person attempt to take delivery of the parcel as marked? Was the person or his agent interviewed by Customs officers about the prohibited nature of the parcel's contents? Will the Commonwealth Government be proceeding against the person for his attempted breach of the Quarantine Act? If not, why not?

I can assure the honourable gentleman that the type of interest he has demonstrated in his question will be kept very much in mind as we start to put the Budget together. We will be as sympath etic as we can, consistent with our overall economic responsibilities and the achievement of our objectives, which are of enormous benefit, par ticularly to those people in the community on relatively fixed incomes. The greatest losers from high inflation are pensioners and those people on fixed incomes. The greatest beneficiaries of suc cessful economic policies are those same groups of people.
BREACH OF THE QUARANTINE ACT Mr HUMPHREYS-I direct a question to the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs. Is it a fact that a parcel addressed to a prominent Queensland personality and marked 'Books and pamphlets only' was discovered by Customs officials to be a 1 9-kilogram parcel of beans, an import prohibited subject to quarantine? Did the person or an agent of the person attempt to take delivery of the parcel as marked?

Mr MOORE-Among the many items of interest coming from Queensland, I am informed that an air freighted parcel described on the air ways bill as 'Books and catalogues' was addressed to Mr J. Bjelke-Petersen. It was examined on entry and was found to contain 1 9 kilograms of seed. These seeds were then sent to the Government Analyst, and honourable members will be interested to know that the seed was identified as black-eyed bean. The goods were detailed as being subject to quarantine, but a quarantine permit had not been obtained for their entry. In accord ance with the normal circumstances of the De partment the Collector of Customs in Brisbane visited the Premier and, from the conversation that took place, it was established that the Prem ier was in no way responsible for the importation. We are currently attempting to establish who was the sender of the parcel and attempting to establish from that end the area of responsibility for its direction to the Premier of Queensland. Quarantine matters will be taken up when we have established who was responsible for sending the parcel.

Mr Jull-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. I refer you to Question No. 926 on the Notice Paper in the name of the honourable member for Lilley.
Mrs Darling-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. I have withdrawn Question No. 926 from the Notice Paper this morning.
Mr Keating-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. Is the honourable member for Bowman try ing to protect the Queensland Premier in this matter?
Mr SPEAKER-I am informed by the Clerk that the question has been withdrawn from the Notice Paper. I call the honourable member for Griffith.

HOBART AIRPORT Mr GOODLUCK-I direct a question to the Minister for Transport. Will the direct air link between Hobart and Christchurch continue? Has the direct link been a success? Will the Minister give consideration to upgrading the Hobart Air port to international status and to increasing the length of the runway to enable overseas visitors to come to the best State in Australia, which has casinos and apples? Mr HUNT-The honourable member for Franklin is quite correct in saying that the Hobart-Christchurch service has been a success, in spite of predictions that it would be anything but a success. Mr Barry Jones-Three passengers a week.

958 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr HUNT-Actually, I think the honourable member's maths are no good. He ought to check the facts on that. If he were to do so he would see that the loadings have been quite good. Currently the Department is discussing with the airlines--
Mr Young-People are trying to get out of both places.
Mr SPEAKER-The House, will come to order.
Mr HUNT-Mr Speaker, I am sure that the honourable member for Franklin would like, to hear the rest of the answer. Currently the Department is discussing with the airlines the nature of future services between Hobart and Christchurch. There will be further discussions with the New Zealand authorities. Honourable members will recall that when we announced that this service would serve Tasmanian and Australian mainland travellers wishing to go to Christchurch we indicated that a review would be undertaken at the end of the first three months of the operation of the service. That review is under way. I have every reason to believe that, subject to approval from New Zealand, that service will continue to grow and will continue to increase tourist development between Tasmania and New Zealand.
Discussions are going on to see what additional facilities would be needed at the Hobart Airport terminal to accommodate equipment that may be necessary to handle a growing traffic between that port and New Zealand and, one day, perhaps else where. I think the honourable gentleman can be very confident that the service has been a success and that both Ansett Airlines of Australia arid Trans-Australia Airlines are quite happy to continue the service subject to the approval of New Zealand.
SCHOOLS COMMISSION Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education) For the information of honourable members. I present the Schools Commjssion report for the tritmnium 1 982-84. Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate ( o n motion by Mr Dawkins) adjourned.

' Mr DawkinsBefore I move that the debate

on this matter be adjourned, I indicate that yester

day;in discussions with the Minister for Education

(Mr Fife) the Minister said that it was not the

convention for debates to ensue following the

,presentation of both the Schools Commission and

the, Tertiary Education Commission papers. I

point out, as the Minister does not seem to be

aware of this fact, that when the previous trien-

sneianlterde'pinorttheofSetnhaeteScbhyotohles

Commission was preMinister's predecessor

a debate ensued and continued for some COll

siderable time. ] very much regret that that prac

tice has not been followed on this occasion. 1 hope

that the Minister will ensure that this matter will

be'brought back for debate next week.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman might move the motion for the adjournment of the debate.

Debate ( o n motion by Mr Dawkins) adjourned.

NATIONAL COMPANIES AND SECURITIES COMMISSION
Mr MOORE (Ryan -Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) -- -Pursuant to section 52 of the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1 979, I present the National Companies and Securities Commission first annual report and financial statements for 1 980.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION Sir WILLIAM McMAHON (Lowe)-Mr Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented in this morning's Australian and therefore seek leave to make a personal explanation. Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentle man may proceed.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHONIn today's edition of the Australian the following appears under the heading 'Russia was "tipped off" on Petrov':
A former Prime Minister, Sir William McMahon, con firmed yesterday that Russia was "tipped off" about the defection ofSovietdiplomat VladimirPetrov in 1954.
Sir William said the leak could have resulted from the activities of Sir Roger Hollis, the former British intelligence chief . . .

TERTIARY EDUCATION COMMISSION Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education) For the information of honourable members T present the Tertiary Education Commission report for 1 982-84, Volume 1, Parts 1 to 5. Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:

Yesterday T did appear on a program with Laurie - Oakes, but before doing so I indicated on three occasions that I had no evidence whatsoever to lead me to believe that there had been any associ ation between ' , the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation and the KGB. I want to prove that. On that program Oakes asked me:

That the House take note of the papers.

Do you think they could have been infiltrated by the KGB?

Industrial Relations

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 959

Referring to the article, that meant the United Kingdom people. I replied:

I could not say that but we have got evidence in the Philby and other cases.

Laurie Oakes asked:

You have said in Parliament in fact that you were suspicious about ASIO ASIS and other Australian agencies. Do you believe they could have been infiltrated?

I replied:

No. I have never used the word 'suspicious'. I do not think

they were efficient . . ,

.

Laurie Oakes asked:

Do you think they are any less vulnerable to infiltration than the British organisations?

I replied:

Less vulnerable certainly.

Oakes then posed the following question:

When you were Prime Minister were you quite certain that ASIO had not been infiltrated?

I replied:

I never had the suspicion that it was so. I did not make any enquiries. I was more worried about not gettinginformation.

Laurie Oakes then said:

You have no evidence now that in the light of the British situation that there has been no infiltration in Australia.

I replied:

I would have thought not but I could not say to you without any reservation at all that it has not happened.

Laurie Oakes stated:

They could be in your view.

I said:

They could be yes but I have no evidence at all which would sustain the idea that they have been or are likely to be.

Laurie Oakes went on to ask:

Is it possible for example that the Russians could have been tipped off in advance about the Petrov defection?

And this is a possible way they found out, do you think?
I replied:
It is a possible way but only a possible way.
Finally, Mr Oakes asked:
What other ways could they have heard?
I replied: .
They may have been able to get direct by their own efforts rather than through ASIO. They could have got it through ASIO. I don't know how they got it but they did.
I absolve Mr Pinwill for his article because he was given only a very small extract from the information which I have conveyed to the House. I believe it was disgraceful that he should have been given that very small piece of .information on which he could have made representations which were not consistent with the facts.

INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS Ministerial Statement
Mr PEACOCK (Kooyong-Minister for In dustrial Relations)-by leave-The Australian economy is poised to enter a period of consider able growth. The Organisation for Economic Co operation and Development has forecast that economic growth in Australia in 1981 will be the highest of all developed economies. The year 1981 represents the beginning of a period of expansion as resources development intensifies and economic growth is consolidated. I regret to state, however, that the benefits of much of this growth will be jeopardised if recent trends in earnings continue and if the union campaign for a 35-hour working week is successful. The Government is aware that an estimated 36 per cent of all full time non-managerial employees are currently working less than 40 hours a week. It does not follow, how ever, that the economy can stand an across the board application of a 35 or even a 37t hour working week to the total work force.
Although the Australian eC,onomy has achieved some stability over the past six years, that stability would be seriously jeopardised if the shorter working hours campaign were achieved in the near future. It is worrying enough that claims that have a damaging economic impact are made, but this damage is compounded by the fact that trade unions are pursuing these claims by direct industrial action; action which is disruptive to the Australian community and robs the eC'onomy of its full potential. Over recent weeks the unions' shorter working hours campaign has received widespread attention. These claims are bound up with the more general issue of wage demands. It is crucial that restraint be exercised. Those engaged in the union campaign seem to ignore the fact that their campaign for reduced hours and their unre mitting pressures for wage increases will seriously damage the Australian economy and undermine the benefits of the period of growth.
The Government is deeply concerned about this situation. It is necessary therefore to ensure that all Australians are aware of the threat posed if the current campaign continues and is success ful. Reductions in hours of work prima facie lead to an increase in hourly wage costs. Wage costs are the most significant element in unit labour costs, and increases in unit labour costs are a significant element in price increases. I strongly em phasise the Government's concern about the possible growth of unit labour costs in the light of the recent trends in wages and earnings and in view of the number of current claims for shorter working hours.

960 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Industrial Relations

The Government's primary economic objective When this is compared with the 9.3 per cent in

is to promote a growth in the standard of living of crease in the consumer price index over the period

every member of the Australian community. it is quite apparent that employees have made sig

However, this can be achieved only if the problem nificant real gains over the last 1 2 months. Clearly

of inflation is overcome, the consequences of sus such rates of wage increase cannot be allowed to

tained high rates of inflation are well known to all continue without adverse implications for the

members of the House. It damages business con Australian economy.

fidence, curtails competitiveness

iannvdeswtmeaeknte,nrsedduemeasnindt, eercnoantioomnicl

activity and employment. Further high rates of

inflation have a destabilising impact on wage

fixation and industrial relations. Wage restraint is

crucial in meeting the primary anti-inflation

objective. Developments on labour costs could

have a significant influence on the course of infla

tion in the short and medium terms. If growth in

money and real wages is not restrained and/or

labour costs are added to by reductions in working

hours, then clearly the battle against inflation will

be made all the more difficult. Every worker

knows from experience that a wage increase does

mean a price increase. The higher the wage in

crease, the greater the consequent effect on prices

and the living standards of people.

[ am concerned, of course, that these labour cost pressures are in the system. I am concerned, of course, that some union leaders apparently think there is some bottomless pit into which they can dig for wage increases without affecting the economy or the well-being and the employment prospects of their own members. The lessons of the 1 970s have not been learnt well enough by some union officials. But that is not the end of it. Now superimposed on these excessive wage press ures is the union campaign for a shorter working week, a campaign which, if successful, would lift unit labour costs in Australia by such magnitudes as to erode significantly our advances in lowering inflation, erode seriously business profitability, confidence and international competitiveness, reduce employment and generally undermine the

Since 1 974-1 975 the rate of inflation has been return to economic health which is under way.

reduced. This has been the result of and a vindi cation of the Government's policies. While inflation in the year to the December quarter 1 980 dropped to 9.3 per cent, this is regarded by the Government as too high. Unfortunately-this must be understood-there is no prospect of the much-needed further significant decline in inflation if the current surge in labour cost is not moderated. In the period since 1 978 the acceler ation in the rate of growth in award wages, com bined with renewed over-award activity, has resulted in significant earnings growth. It is a matter of concern to the Government that there has been such an acceleration of wage movements since 1 978. This reflects both increases through the indexation of award wages and increases gained outside national wage cases.

Unions are increasingly pursuing their wage de mands and their unrealistic demands for a 35-hour week with direct industrial action. This magnifies the economic consequences of the unions' demands. Industry, that is, the livelihood of both employers and workers, faces increased costs due to the effects of industrial action and employers face greater uncertainty in planning decisions for the same reason. Their decision on whether to invest in new machinery and equip ment, or in new building and construction works, or to expand employment and in-plant training schemes for workers, becomes far more difficult if they cannot make reasonable estimates of the de gree to which such machinery, plant and work force will be idle because of industrial disruption in their own or interdependent industries.

Award wage increases for work value adjust ments began to occur in late 1 978 and have gathered momentum so that a very large proportion of the work force has now participated in that work value 'round'. Wage increases of the order of $8 a week have been awarded across a wide range of industries. Additionally, the increasing import ance of over-award payments has been reflected in the re-emergence of considerable earnings drift since late 1 979. For example, the most recent stat istics available indicate that in the December quarter last year, the series for average weekly Of dinary time earnings for full time non-managerial employees showed a 1 5.2 per cent increase over
the corresponding quarter in the previous year.

The Conciliation and Arbitration Commission does not share the view of some unions that the effects of industrial action are not significant and serious. In its national wage case decision of 14 July last it discounted the increase awarded in specific recognition of the damage caused by the excessive levels of industrial disruption that prevailed. More recently, in its national wage case decision of 9 January of this year, the Commission identified the excessive levels of disputation as one of the factors which led to the suspension of wage indexation. In the latter decision the Commission said:
Costs to the economy arising from stoppages and bans threaten not only improvements in real wages and conditions

Industrial Relations

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 961

but even the maintenance of existing standards. This is not a moraljudgment but a matter ofhard economic reality.
The effects, both direct and indirect, of the shorter hours campaign have now been felt in all States and many sectors of the economy. Some, and this is by no means a comprehensive list of the areas directly concerned, include: the engineering and metals sector; shipbuilding and repair; mining equipment manufacturing; glass manufacturing; power generation; the brewing industry; and the Altona petrochemical complex. In relation to the Altona petrochemical settlement 1 have already said that it is disgraceful that the form of industrial pressure used by the unions concerned at the complex over such a long period has brought about a settlement so costly to the public interest. The Government intervened in this hearing and strongly argued against the settlement. It con tinues to oppose the productivity bargaining con cept in its application to reduced working hours.
It is important to note that the Commission began consideration of this matter in September 1 980, before the last national wage case began. It will be recalled that the Commission was strongly critical of this type of campaign by the unions in bringing down its decision in that case. When the Australian Council of Trade Unions took over the shorter working hours campaign last year it was claimed that direct industrial action would be minimised. It was stated that the ACTU was coordinating the campaign, and the implication was that it would be less disruptive. Unfortu nately for the community and indeed the Australian economy as a whole, this has just not been the case.
Dr Theophanous-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. Is it in order for the Minister, in the course of making a ministerial statement, to utter an untruth as he has just done?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Ml' MilIar) There is no point of order, and I must caution the honourable member for Burke against reflecting upon another honourable member.
Mr PEACOCK-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. The honourable member is condemned out of his own mouth. Take, for example, the situation in the metal industry. This is a major sector of Australian industry. It has thousands of employers, who provide jobs for hundreds of thousands of Australians. It is an industry which, in a very real way, confronts competition from over seas. It has been disrupted by direct industrial action of some form or another for nearly 1 2 months now. I f the unions think that they have a justifiable claim then they should cease this harm ful action and submit their claims to arbitration.

They have not done so. They are resisting arbi tration. That is not an attitude usually taken by groups who believe they have justifiable claims. It is an attitude of groups who recognise the unreasonableness of their position and have to re sort to the weapon of duress to try to get their own way.
The economic consequences of reduced hours of work must be clearly understood. The implications of the campaign are enormous, and the public should be made aware of the facts. The Government intends that this be done. The effect of reduced standard hours is best understood by thinking about the costs of producing a given level of output. Assuming that the given level of output requires the same total number of hours of labour input whether standard hours are 40 or 35-in other words that labour productivity is the same-then an employer has to pay out more in wages to purchase the required labour input if standard hours are reduced.
If a sector which currently works a standard 40-hour week were to move to 35 hours there are a number of courses of action open to an employer. Firstly, he could seek to maintain his level of output by taking on more employees. If he were to do this, unit labour costs must increase. The weekly standard wage remains the same so that the hourly wage rate is higher. As well, an extra five hours' labour has to be paid for at this higher hourly rate to maintain the level of output. In this case unit labour costs could increase by about 1 4 per cent. This is a clear disincentive to the employment of more people and, as I will explain later, gives the lie to arguments that shorter work ing hours would stimulate the overall level of em p loyment. Secondly, an employer faced with a re duction of weekly standard hours from 40 to 35 could seek to maintain his level of output by having his existing work force work more over time. This would compound the cost factor in the first example because if the difference is made up with additional overtime the penalty rates involved would cause an added burden on unit labour costs. As a result, they could increase by about 2 1 per cent. Finally, as an alternative to maintaining output, an employer confronted with such a labour cost rise could allow his output to fall. If he were to do this then no extra employees or overtime would be required but unit labour costs still increase since the same total is being paid in wages but output has fallen.
If the employer or industry concerned were to accept a reduction in output broadly in line with the reduction in hours worked, then unit labour costs could increase by approximately 12t per cent. Cost increases of this magnitude would

962 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Industrial Relations

clearly have a devastating effect on Australian In Those advocating a reduction in hours some

dustry. Now, employers facing an increase in unit times argue tliat the cost increase will not be sig

labour costs of this order can be expected to in nificant because there could be productivity

crease their selling pri-;es. They may or may not offsets. Given the magnitude of labour costs men

increase them in the same proportion as the in tioned earlier, up to 2 1 per cent, such productivity

crease in unit labour costs, but two things are growth would have to be extraordinary. Firstly,

clear: Firstly, the increase in costs resulting from a the rate of productivity growth would have to

substantial reduction in the standard working take a sudden leap to compensate - for any sig

week would be so large as to ensure some significant reduction in working hours and, more im

nificant price response; and secondly, if employers portantly, it would have to be sustained at this

do not fully cover their increase in costs, then new, higher level if the reduction were not to have

their profits are eroded. This will inevitably re adverse implications in the future. Because it is

duce the level of economic activity and, conse clear that unions also have expectations of wage

quently, the number of jobs available. The price increases based on annual productivity growth

response is, of course, just another expression for then any productivity growth to offset a reduction

the effect on the rate of inflation.

of working hours would need to be over and above

the underlying rate of growth in the Australian

I ask the House to contemplate the conse economy. Clearly it is nonsense to suggest that

quences for the CPI of a jump in the rate of in this is attainable for any large segment of the work

crease of unit labour costs-currently in the order force. The flaw in the unions' argument is that on

of 1 0 per cent-to something like 20 per cent or the one hand they say that productivity growth

25 per cent if there is a general move to a 35-hour will cover the increased costs, on the other hand

week. The proper conclusion is inescapable to all they tell us that shorter working hours are necess

except those who, for their own selfish purposes, ary to provide additional employment oppor

will not admit it. We must consolidate the recent tunity. Clearly if productivity were to increase to

improvements in economic growth which have the extent that there was no increase in unit

been reflected in the consistent growth in employ labour costs, then there would be no need to in

ment over the past year or so. A higher labour cost crease employment; output could be maintained

input would reduce business profitability and at existing levels of employment. These unions

business confidence and undermine the competi cannot have it both ways.

tiveness of Australian industry; it would inhibit any long term advantage in promoting employ ment. Inflationary expectations can themselves adversely affect the economy's performance. This is the situation that now confronts us. The realisation of those expectations would be disastrous. In this context, the shorter working hours cam paign is particularly ominous.

There is one final point about labour costs that I wish to emphasise. It is the fact that labour costs play a particularly vital role in whether Australian industry is internationally competitive. Any increase in the Australian inflation rate now would be contrary to world trends. Any failure to match a declining trend in world inflation would have implications for Australia's international

Those advocating a reduction in standard hours argue that such a move would create additional employment opportunities and would thus assist the unemployed. Frankly, those arguments are simplistic and misleading, ignoring as they do changes which such labour cost increases will cause in the aggregate demand for labour. The av enues for adverse effects on the demand for labour-namely, the impact of the initial increase in unit labour costs on inflation, international competitiveness, profitability and the desire to substitute away from labour-are so pervasive as to ensure that the supposed employment gains

competitiveness. This proposition can be applied to the economy as a whole or any sector or it. The continued viability of many enterprises and the extent to which they can establish export markets, depends heavily on their competitive position . This applies whether they be large corporations or small businesses. Let there be no understatement of the potential magnitude of the impact of a five hour shortening of the standard working week. It would increase unit labour costs in the industries concerned by as much as 2 1 per cent. The inflationary consequences of this ought to be clear to all.

will not be realised. It is ridiculous to suggest that Mr Deputy Speaker, the points that I have

a change that would have the effect of dampening made form the basis of the Government's con

aggregate demand, shifting demand away from cern. If a close check cannot be held on rising

Australian production, and of increasing the cost labour costs then Australia's economic prospects

of employing labour would actually stimulate are lessened. Because of the high potential costs

employment.

involved, Ihis applies in particular to working

Industrial Relations

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 963

hours claims. If unions believe that they have jus tifiable claims let them come forward to have them tested by arbitration-let them come for ward to allow both sides of the argument to be put and let the result rest on merit but not on industrial might. The Government expects employers atondrerseisdtuicneddushtoriuarls.pWresesuinretesnfdortoinacsrkeaesmedpwloaygeerss'

We will be writing to all major Australian companies urging them not to switch orders away from firms faced with industrial di fficulties as part of this general union campaign. Such a response plays into the hands of a union campaign of selective bans against some but not all companies in an industry. Clients of these firms must appreciate that a united stance is essential.

collectively and individually to resist such claims, 1 have written this week to three firms which are reported to have conceded shorter working hours. I have asked for details of any concessions they may have made and J will be making a report to the Government on appropriate responses,
However, the Government is heartened by employers' general attitude to date, The Government will be supporting them in their stance with all appropriate means. As indicated yesterday, we intend to approach State governments to urge them to support a resistance to inflationary press ures. It must be recognised that all governments have a responsibility in this regard. We are invit ing the ACTU to sit down to talk and we will ex plain in detail the reasons for our opposition to reduced working hours, higher wage demands and the economic consequences of such actions. We will be taking all appropriate opportunities before industrial tribunals to advocate the need for re straint in handling wages and shorter working hours claims because of the very real implications for the national economy.
As I indicated earlier, the Government's approach to the unions' campaign is one which is strongly supportive of employers who stand up to the union pressure. This is the only responsible action for the Government to take. We intend to take a number of steps to lessen the burden that industrial action over the 35-hour working week issue places on companies and firms. We will be requiring Federal Government departments and authorities to act flexibly and sympathetically in connection with businesses that have difficulty in meeting government contractual obligations because of bans, strikes and other forms of industrial action as a part of the shorter working hours cam paign. Pressure will not be exerted on firms in this situation. We will be asking State governments to do likewise. Naturally, we would expect that cli ents of firms under industrial pressures for reduced standard working hours will also exercise forbearance in calling for the execution of contracts,

We are prepared to consider other measures to support employers' resistance to union claims for shorter hours. For example, we will consider measures such as the deferment of company taxation payments where companies are experienc ing difficulties and other appropriate measures which might be indicated in individual circumstances. This is an indication of the Government 's resolve. The Government will continue to ensure that its own authorities resist claims for shorter working hours. We will be asking State governments to adopt a similar approach. Under the Australian system of conciliation and arbitration, organisations, such as unions, gain registration. This confers on them a number of benefits but also involves responsibilities and obligations. The unions should discharge these obligations, cease their campaign of industrial action and work within the objects of the Conciliation and Arbi tration Act.
Finally, as 1 indicated earlier, we will make a concerted effort to bring home to the Australian community, and that includes members of trade unions who are now engaged in industrial action in support of shorter working hours, the economic reality of the situation. The economic facts of life are simple; Australia cannot afford a reduction in working hours at this time, We will be informing the public in some detail of the reasons why. Mr Deputy Speaker, current wage and hours de mands by the trade union movement represent a very serious threat to the emerging economic re covery and lessen the potential advantages that the whole community can enjoy from the exciting projects which are ahead of us in the 1 980s. The Government recognises the problem and is prepared to take all necessary steps to meet it. I present the following paper:
Industrial Relations-Ministerial Statement, 26 March 1981.
Motion (by Mr Wilson) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Motion (by Mr Wilson) -by leave-agreed to:

As a Government we will not be pressing for the payment of bills by firms which have been singled out by the union campaign. Equally, we will ensure that money owing to such firms by the Government and its agencies is paid promptly.

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member for Wills speaking for a period not exceeding 27 minutes.
Mr HAWKE (Wills) ( 1 1 .55)-1 thank the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock)

964 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Industrial Relations

for his courtesy in allowing me access to his statement at the earliest possible opportunity this morning. Whilst the Minister has not engaged in the personalised irrelevancies practised by his Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in this area, nevertheless the statement which he made t,) the House today is extremely disappointing for the reasons which I will outline. I ask the House to note from the outset of my remarks that I will not be engaging in any generalised assertions and that I will back up everything I have to say with concrete references to the factual situation including-I emphasise this, Mr Deputy Speaker--references to several statements by members of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. These are particularly relevant because you will have noticed that the Minister in his speech sought to rely on the statements and attitude of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.
The subject with which the Minister has been dealing today is one of extreme importance. That cannot be denied. It seems to me that we can best put this matter into its proper context by con sidering a statement made by people who could not be considered wildly radical or unconcerned with the welfare of this country. I refer to the statement made unanimously in 1 947 by the Full Bench of the Arbitration Court, as it then was, when the existing 40-hour standard working week was introduced. That, of course, was 34 years ago. As I have said, we can best put this issue in its con text by reminding ourselves of what the Full Bench unanimously said in 1 947. I refer to 59 Commonwealth Arbitration Reports, 58 1 at page 587. The Full Court said:
The pursuit of leisure by the workers of the world has per
sisted through history for many centuries . . .
One hundred years ago in England a lO-hour day or a 60-hour week was enacted. In Australia 90 years ago an 8-hour day or 48-hour week was achieved in limited cases. Twenty years ago this Court awarded a 44-hour week. There is no reason to assume that the capacity of industry has ended at 44 hours.
It has been the historic role of employers to oppose the workers' claims for increased leisure. They have, as is well known, opposed in Parliament and elsewhere every step in
this direction . . . This case is no exception. The arguments have not changed much in 1 00 years. Employers have feared such changes as a threat to profits, an added obstacle to production, a limitatiori upon industrial expansion and a threat to internal and international trade relations. Steadily, first in one country and then in another, this opposition has been overcome until great institutions, such as the International Labour Organisati611 in the international arena, the Conciliation and Arbitration

Commission in this country and the legislatures both here and elsewhere have declared for the de sirability of added leisure. The Full Bench of the Arbitration Court concluded:
And history has invariably proved the forebodings of employers to be unfounded.
Exactly the same statement can be made today as the Full Bench made in 1 947. The arguments have not changed much. The same arguments are trot ted out in the Minister's speech. I ask the House to consider this fact: The Full Bench reduced stan dard working hours from 44 to 40 in the year 1947. I do not think one honourable member in this House will be heard to dispute my assertion that the whole of recorded history has not seen a period of 34 years which can compare with the 34 years since 1 947 in terms of the revelation of the application of the infinite genius of men and women to apply themselves to the more efficient production of goods and the better provision of services. No other period in history has witnessed the dramatic changes of the last 34 years. Therefore, to the extent that the Full Bench was right in saying in 1 947 that, because of changes that had taken place up to 1947, history had not stood still and leisure could be improved, so much more true is the case that in 1981 it is the height of unrealism to suggest that we have come to the end of the line.
Of course, in respect of the level of standard working hours history has not stood still since 1 947. We are faced with the fact that at this time there are more than 300 Federal and State awards and determinations allowing for standard working hours of fewer than forty. That has not happened as a result of the operations of evil trade unionists or weak employers. Indisputably, the fact that about 40 per cent of the work force enjoys stan dard working hours of fewer than 40 hours reflects the technological revolution to which I have adverted. Men and women have applied their inventive genius. We can do things more efficiently. We can provide services in a better way than we did in 1947. A sensible and harmoni ous way of ensuring that those changes are equi tably reflected throughout the community is by saying to the people who are employed in the pro duction of those goods and services that they shall share in the increased productivity by working fewer hours. That is what has happened from 1947 until the present time.
I will not make airy generalisations and resort to abstruse economic theorising. I want to assist the House in what I hope can be seen as a non partisan sense. I want to assist the House to understand these issues by examining what has been said by the experts, the umpires to whom the

Industrial Relations

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 965

Minister referred and to whom he said the unions should go. Let us see what they have said when considering the factual situation relating to the revolution that has taken place since 1 947. Before I do so, I will make a couple of preliminary observations. The Minister, in the concluding section of his speech, asked that unions work within the objects of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act. I remind you, Mr Deputy Speaker, and the HOllse of the objects of the Act in the context of what has been presented to us by the Government. The Act states as follows:
The chiefobjects of this Act are
(a) to promote goodwill in industry; (b) to encourage, and provide means for, conciliation with
a view to amicable agreement, thereby preventing and settling industrial disputes.
Therefore the first concrete and specific object of the Act is directed towards encouraging conciliation, that is, discussions and negotiations between parties. That is what members of the Con ciliation and Arbitration Commission have attempted to promote in a number of instances. They have brought about a lowering of the level of standard working hours in so many cases.
The second preliminary point I will make before dealing in some detail with those cases is to remind the Minister of something he said. I am sure that he in no way intended any misrepresen tation but in his speech-the references are pages 1 and 1 2 of the printed speech-he referred to and seemed to base his case to a considerable extent upon an across-the-board application. I make it clear-I think the Minister understands this that the Australian Council of Trade Unions has made no suggestion of an across-the-board appli cation. It is not contained in the decisions of the ACTU. It is not a position which has been espoused. Perhaps the most specific illustration of that is what the advocate for the ACTU, Mrs Marsh, said before the Full Bench of the Arbi tration Commission on 26 February. Page 473 of the transcript states:
The ACTU executive has rejected an across the board approach and the campaign must be seen in terms ofyears rather than days or months. As we submitted earlier the campaign has no target date.
r merely put that in because, as I say, I am sure the Minister intended no misrepresentation. But insofar as he referred to an across-the-board ap plication I make it clear that that is not the position of the ACTU Executive and it is not what is happening.
Let me make it clear why it is not happening. We understand there are different levels of capacity. That is the nature of a dynamic and changing economy. Some sectors and some

enterprises within different sectors are going to have a capacity which is greater than and different from others. It makes sense, not only in terms of the people who are engaged immediately in that situation but also in terms of the welfare of the whole community, that account be taken of the fact that there are differing capacities. The campaign that has been mounted has been directed to take account of that fact.
The third preliminary point I wish to make before I refer to some of these cases in detail con cerns the economic scenario set out by the Minister in his statement to this House. He said that if we lower hours in this way it must have this result, this result or this result. He emphasised right through his speech the point that this must mean that inevitably there will be very significant incrcases in costs. The Minister is entitled to put that view. But in contrast to the generalised assertion, not backed up by specific considerations of fact, I wish now to go with you, Mr Deputy Speaker, and the House to a consideration of what has been said by the tribunals, what has been said by the umpires upon whom the Minister seeks to rely, what has been said factually about this issue and the related issues.
I refer first to what was said in the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Commission case. My reference is print D 4028. In this case the Commission was constituted by Mr Deputy President Isaac, Mr Justice Sharp and Commissioner Griffin. I assume that the Minister will not be heard to say that Deputy President Isaac, Mr Jus tice Sharp and Commissioner Griffin are irrespon sible people who do not understand the obli gations of their oath, who do not listen to the evidence properly before them. I am sure he will not say that. Let us see what Deputy President Isaac, Mr Justice Sharp and Commissioner Griffin had to say in their decision of 1 8 July 1977. Their remarks are very interesting because they go to the intervention of the Commonwealth Government and they make some comment about how helpful the Government has been in that regard. On page 6 of the print they say:
The evidence before us is that as a direct result ofchanges in work practices, it will be possible to work a 36+ hour week at a lower cost than the present 40 hour week without a reduction in the standard of service.
That is a pretty straightforward, practical statement in regard to a factual situation assessed by the umpires having regard to the evidence before them. I ask you, Mr Deputy Speaker, and the House to contrast the factual situation and assessment with this generalised theorising of the Minister. The remarks are very interesting because the

966 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 198 1

Industrial Relations

Commissioners went on to say something about the contribution of the Government. They said:
Mr Rowlands, for the Minister for Employment and Indus trial Relations-
As the portfolio then was, Mr Deputy Speaker
expressed doubts on the integrity of the feasibility exercise by suggesting that it did not fully satisfy the criteria which had been applied in the postal and telecommunications 36i-hour week cases. More specifically, Mr Rowlands questioned whether the changes in work practices and the consequential cost savings would not have been achieved sooner or later in
anycase . . .

I refer now to what the Commission said in the Overseas Telecommunications Commission case which involved Mr Acting Public Service Arbi trator Watson who is another member of the Commission. I do not have the print number in respect of this case. However, I want to point out just what he had to say in regard to what was put before him concerning arrangements to bring about reduced hours and off-setting costs. This case relates to determinations Nos. 6 1 0 and 6 1 1 of 1 977. On page 502 he stated:

The members of the Commission said they shared the Minister's concern lest contrived arrange ments be used to bolster a case. But they said they would have been assisted more if, instead of merely questioning the manner in which the guidelines had been applied, Mr Rowlands had been able to draw on a more thorough analysis of the feasibility exercise. In concluding this .section they said:
It is unlikely that all this would have occurred--
They were talking about the specific improvements in productivity which were to be associated with the reduction in hours-
in the absence of clear prospects offered to the workers of obtaining a shorter working week in return. Thus, not only--
This is the umpire talking-

All government criteria had been met, the reduction of hours could be achieved with no increase in overtime or staff totals and existing service standards and output would be maintained. Labour costs would be marginally increased but productivity (above trend) would be substantially increased. The resultant net saving in terms of annual man/hours would be equivalent to an increase in overall productivity, above tar get, of over 8 per cent.
That is what the Commission, constituted at that time by the Acting Public Service Arbitrator, had to say in this regard.
Acting Public Service Arbitrator Watson quoted from another decision of the Full Bench in the Australian Postal Commission case. I again ask the House to note this statement. The Full Bench in the Australian Postal Commission case asked:

has the feasibility exercise provided the basis for the shorter working week to be implemented without any increase in costs and, indeed, at red,uced cost, it also offers prospects of a faster growth ofnormal productivity in the future.
We can have the ums and ahs. But I hope the people who um and ah are identified because if they are uming and ahing they are necessarily impugning the integrity of members of the Con ciliation and Arbitration Commission who have taken their oath to listen fairly and impartially to the evidence before them. If people on the other side of the House sneer at the decisions and state ments of the Commission we on this side of the House are not surprised or hurt by it because in the long run-the Minister understands this-if the Government impugns the integrity of the Commission in this area it is doing, as I believe the Minister knows, a grave disservice to the community.
Let me read briefly from page 8 of the print. What the Deputy President, the Justice and the Commissioner had to say is very relevant. They said:
It--
They aretalking of the Commission-
has no doctrinaire attitude for or against productivity bargain ing as such in any area of industry but it applauds closer labour management co-operation reflected in this or other forms ofnegotiation.

. . . should the Commission deny a claim for shorter hours to workers seeking the hours of work of the majority in the industry, when the granting of the claim would lead to closer and more constructive relations between labour and manage ment, both immediately and in the long run; and when the necessary increase in productivity arises directly from such relations with no inroad on the normal trend of productivity, thus making the shorter hours possible with virtually no cost to the consumer and no reduction in the standard of service?
That is another statement from the Full Bench of the Commission. Let me now refer to what happened in the Australian Postal Commission case, set out in print C6637. This was a case in which the Commission rejected the claim before it, but it had a very important statement to make. I ask the House to take note of the statement to see how it is relevant to all the issues we are talking about. The Commission consisted of Mr Deputy Presi dent Isaac, Mr Justice Sharp and Commissioner Cohen. The statement is of fundamental import ance because it goes to the question of what the Commission is doing, and how it sees what its responsibility to the public is when it is faced with claims which reflect this industrial and economic reality to which I have been referring: At page 7 of the print the Full Bench of the Commission stated:
. . . we would be failing in our statutory duty, if we did not grant this application and applaud the new spirit in industrial relations which it reflects.

Industrial Relations

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 967

That is the umpire speaking, the umpire to whom the Minister referred in his speech. The Commission said:
. . . we would be failing in our statutory duty. if we did not grant this application and applaud the new spirit in industrial relations which it reflects.
Mr Peacock-The claim was rejected, was it? Mr HAWKE-It was rejected in that case, yes. Mr N. A. Brown-Why did they reject it? Mr HAWKE-J correct my statement there. It was granted in that case. The Minister is correct; he has picked me up. It is the next case to which I am going, the Gas and Fuel Corporation case, in which it was not. I am indebted to the Minister. I n the Gas and Fuel Corporation case, although the application in question was not granted, I want to make the point here about the attitude of the Commission on these issues. At page 2 of the print of the gas industry case in 1 976 another bench of the Commission, constituted on this occasion by Mr Justice Ludeke, Deputy President Isaac and Mr Commissioner Vosti,,had this to say:
The Commission has an obligation to encourage the parties to resolve their differences wherever possible by conciliation.
In other words, if the parties can get into the situation of negotiation and conciliation then it is ap propriate, and the Commission will stand ready to put its imprimatur for reduced hours upon the discussions whichcome out of that situation.
I should like to take the House now to an interesting decision of the Western Australian In dustrial Commission. As can be seen, I am not going just to the federal tribunal, I am showing the House what is happening right around Australia. This case is of particular interest because, whilst we are used to the situation of Queensland and Western Australia being engaged in joint rather conservative action, in this case we have the West ern Australian Industrial Commission quoting with authority the position of the Queensland Government on the question of reduced working hours. This case concerned the State Energy Commission of Western Australia and judgment was given on 24 July of last year. Let me quote what happened in this case where the reduction of hours was granted. Significantly, the Western Australian Industrial Commission relied very heavily on what had been done in Queensland. The Commission in court session in this case constituted Senior Commissioner Kelly and Com missioners Martin and Halliwell. I ask the House: Are these irresponsible people? Do they not know what they are doing? Are they not concerned with economic and industrial realities? Are they oblivi ous to the welfare of this country? Of course they are not. This is what that Commission had to say:

Of particular importance to us are a number of statements made to the Queensland Commission by the representative of
the Queensland MinisterforLabour Relations . . . The Commission went on to quote him, and J refer quickly to what it relied on as a basis from Queensland for implementing reduced hours in Western Australia in that area. The Commission said:
the parties have entered into a phase of negotiations which will bring industrial advantages to employees and manage ment alike by the introduction of new methods, procedures, and practices in return for shorter hours and rectification of anomalies,
The Commission said other things, but in particu lar I conclude with this statement. Referring to Queensland, and doing the same thing in Western Australia, the Commission said:
The granting of the applications qn be supported in the public interest.
Is this an act of irresponsibility? This is the umpire speaking, the umpire in Western Australia using the umpire from Queensland, exactly in line with what the umpires in the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission were doing. Let me come directly to what was said in the most recent decision on this matter, the decision handed down this week in respect of the Altona Petrochemical Co. Ltd situation. The Full Bench comprised Mr Justice.Williams, Mr Justice Coldham and Mr Commissioner Neyland. Are these irresponsible people? Are they people with out a sense of understanding of the requirement of the community? I read from page 2 of their unani mous decision:
The parties also reported that at each company, agreements had been reached for a number of improved and more efficient working methods resulting in a considerable cost saving which would almost entirely offset the overall cost of introducing a 35 hour week at the six companies.
That was the statement of the Commission. The decision went on:
In our view in a case such as this, the proper procedure is clearly to examine the position of each company and also the overall position. The overall figure must be the ultimate consideration, otherwise the intolerable industrial position may result where hours of work might differ between companies within the complex.
There we have it. The Commission looked at the facts, not the vague theorising, and came to the conclusion in terms of this cost argument that the savings which would flow as a result of improved productivity specifically associated with the agreement would offset the cost.
Because my time is running out, I merely want to go to one point which the Minister goes on about, that is, the harm to our internationally competitive position. Of course, that argument is based upon the assumption that Australia is the only country in which there are moves to reduce

968 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Industrial Relations

hours. What did the Economist of 1 9 July of last year have to say on this matter? I read from page 76 under the heading 'Where's that 3D-hour week'?:
Hours are gradually shrinking almost everywhere in the
industrialised world . . . That is what the Economist had to say in July of last year. If that is the truth, and it is happening everywhere else, it is completely misrepresenting the situation to say that as it is happening in A ustralia our competitive position will be reduced. That can be true only if it is not happen ing elsewhere.
Mr Barry Jones-In Sweden it is 30.2. Mr HAWKE-I thank the honourable member. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilJar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. Before calling the honourable member for Boothby, I inform the House that this is the first speech the honourable member for Boothby has made in this place. However, the honourable member is not without parliamentary experience. He has informed Mr Speaker that he does not wish to claim the protection afforded by the tra ditional courtesy of this place in similar circumstances. Notwithstanding that, the Chair of its own volition reminds honourable members that interjections are contrary to the Standing Orders. I call the honourable member for Boothby. Mr STEELE HALL (Boothby) ( l 2.24)-Mr Deputy Speaker, it is a fact that I have spoken here in different circumstances on a previous occasion. The honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) today demonstrated and underlined the point that he and others are obscuring the fundamental issues which confront the Australian public in relation to a decrease in working hours. They are either deliberately, or in ignorance, ob scuring from the Australian public the fact that there is a choice to be made as to how working hours relate to working conditions and wages , and that the Australian worker can, by that choice, choose other things to benefit him in other direc tions. Yet the honourable member for Wills and the Australian Council of Trade Unions and union leaders in this country are maintaining the fiction that at this moment we are undergoing, through the arbitration system, the approval of a number of productivity agreements. By his argument he tries to elevate the argument on the re duction of hours from the shop floor, where the standover tactics occur, to the Arbitration Commission from whose records he can quote volubly. However, he neglected to quote this appropriate passage from the 1 947 decision of the Conciliation

and Arbitration Commission on the reduction to 40 hours.
. . . the appropriate time to add burdens to industry or, from another angle, to give ourselves added benefits is when industry is booming and when nature is bountiful.
That is something about which the honourable member for Wills quite clearly neglected to in form the House. He should elevate himself from the stand-over tactics of the Apaps in South Australia and the associated wholesalers from which I hope he would dissociate himself. When the union goes to a company and says 'We will break you and your constituent parts and send you bankrupt unless you give us a 35-hour week'; when the members of the union involved say 'We will give up our l O-minute tea break to consoli date and give the company a productivity increase'-which in itself is a fiction because everyone knows that the tea break will not be given up-the honourable member for Wills can then come into this House and quote from the agreement when it has been ratified by the Arbi tration Commission and he can say that it is a pro ductivity agreement. What fiction! In maintaining that fiction he maintains his personal support of the standover tactics and the brutal economic force of the unions as they are applied to large and small companies in this community.
Mr Hawke-Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member for Boothby is making a personal reflection on the integrity of the honourable member for Wills. I would require him to withdraw the reflection implicit in his re marks and to refrain from so offending. Mr STEELE HALL-I withdraw any personal reflection on the character of the honour able member for Wills. However, I say in substi tution that obviously the policies which he adopts in this House allies him with the conduct of those unions. It cannot do otherwise. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair cannot accept that qualified withdrawal. Mr STEELE HALL-Mr Deputy Speaker, I withdraw. In response to the claim by the honour able member for Wills that the aim is selectively to reduce hours around Australia, I will quote from what he said to a reporter of the Melbourne Herald on 27 October 1 980. On that occasion he was speaking to a call by a union leader that he be made Leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party. It was, therefore, a serious assessment of his view on union hours and can be taken by the Australian public as a general view. The article stated:

Industrial Relations

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 969

He said he hoped to fight a number of issues, including ex cessive taxation and put the facts properly to the public and Parliament.
It was 'pathetic, ludicrous and counter-productive' for the Prime Minister, Mr Fraser, to be opposinga 35-hour week for Australian workers, Mr Hawke said.
The honourable member made no qualification as to whether it should be selective or whether it should be industry by industry. As a prospectively named Leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party he maintained a general 35-hour week stance for all Australia. He cannot run away from that today by claiming selectivity. Since the 40-hour week was granted in 1 947 in Australia, which was referred to by the honourable member for Wills, there have been very significant decreases in the hours worked by the Australian work force in the spread of long service leave, additional holidays and like benefits. There has not been a gap in the rewarding of Australian workers with reduced working hours; it has been a continuous process. Now they are faced with a choice of taking further gains out of this community by reduced hours or by stronger economic strength in their own lives.
This is something that the Opposition spokes man failed to discuss today in this House. Throughout his campaign he has not allowed the public and the work force of Australia to make a considered judgment as to whether they want to take out advantages by way of reduced working hours or in some other way. If the honourable member for Wills is successful, if the ACTU is successful and if union leaders are successful and this group of people introduces these reduced working hours into this country they will be long remembered for the chaos and the hardship that they will bring to people on limited incomes-to people living on superannuation benefits and to the pensioners of this community--who buy their daily or weekly necessities at the stores which in many cases are run by people who have no resort to the 35-hour week but who must pay the costs introduced by the reduction in hours. The honourable member, for instance, could talk to people employed in the car industry in Australia which affects my State among many others. He could explain to them how an increase in costs from 14 per cent to 21 per cent could break an industry in this country; let alone make it competi tive with the imports flooding the market daily. That group of people will be remembered for the chaos and economic disturbances that they will bring to this country.

There have been discussions in my State concern ing this volume of support which was answered by a spokesman for the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union who said that the vote had been 4,046 for and 1 ,0 1 1 against. The great economic decision of this decade is to be taken on the vote of a few thousand people in Australia. Their vote will affect the whole economy, for 1 5 million people; yet the union leaders talk of 4,000 to 1 ,000 voting. It is an absurdity! The honourable member for Wills knows that it is an absurdity. I will quote for him from remarks made by the International Labour Organisation which he called a great institution. In a report compiled and published in 1975 the ILO made this comment:
The problem of fixing limits to hours of work is, therefore, one of striking the right balance between social and economic aims. For the individual worker, it is a balance between a higher real income and more time off . . . For society, it is a balance between a higher level of production of goods and services and the social benefits arising from an improved qual ity oflife for workers.
The honourable member for Wills has not referred in the slightest to that choice which is available to the Australian public.
M r Hawke-We will give you later ILO re ports than 1 975.
Mr STEELE HALL-I can quote further from reports of the ILO if the honourable member for Wills so wishes. There are many of them. They do not support, in the context of the present Australian economy, his contention. This is what appears on page 1 3 of that same report and it refers to the approach since 1 945:
There was, however, one major consideration which dominated the discussions in many countries. The general view being that in no case should a reduction in hours of work lead to a fall in total output and in real earnings and since in practice the usual wish was to take out only a certain pro portion, never specifically defined, of any gain in the country's product in the form of more time off work, it was desirable that the rate at which hours of work were reduced and other benefits made available should remain well below the rate of growth of production.
Neither the honourable member for Wills nor anyone in the ACTU has demonstrated that the cost of reducing such hours will remain well below the growth of production. That also is fiction. I will quote again from a document so well sup ported by the honourable member for Wills:
This Recommendation aims at a progressive reduction of normal hours of work 'with a view to attaining the social stan dard' of the 40-hour week 'without any reduction in the wages of the workers as at the time hours ofwork are reduced'.

This mounting campaign conducted by the hierarchy of unions is a selfish one and is without necessarily the support of those union members.

'the extent to which the country is in a position to bring about a reduction in hours of work without reducing total production or productivity, endangering its economic

970 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Industrial Relations

growth . . . or its competitive position in international

trade, would

anudl ti.wmitahtoeulyt

creating reduce

infiationary pressures which the real income of the

workers' . . .

Does the honourable member for Wills wish to

hear more from the six or seven quotes to be con

vinced that there is a cost that the Australian

community cannot meet today without a re

duction of real wage standards and real standards

of living? Is he pursuing this matter for his own

political ends? It cannot be for the Australian

worker, with the facts before him of the rate of

growth of the gross domestic product in Australia

in the last several years. Can the honourable

m?",cermeabseer

m?",acinosttasinofin1

this House 4 per cent

that a projected in wages can be

met by a 1 per cent or 2 per cent increase in GDP?

Of course he cannot. All that he can do when he is

compressed is squeak. I will not quote any further

from the ILO report as I am sure that the honour

able member has read it. Why has he not told the

public that he knows of these things? It is interest mg to look at what the Leader of the Opposition

(Mr Hayden) said in this House in the Address

in-Reply debate. He said:

I talk, of course, about the 480,000 Australians who cannot find jobs. I talk of the two million Australians-I stress the figure of two million-who now live in poverty, a total which has doubled over the past five years.

He went on to say: AuLstarsatlhra,nis,taalnkdoofutrhseI.cmkaannydpheonsspi?ItnaelirseAduAsturastlriaanlisa,nosu. r young

The Confederation of Australian Industry has

brought out a booklet which contains many useful

figures. It refers to the effects as tabulated from a

survey which was made of its members. It was

shown in that survey that the effects of the in

crease in overtime levels meant an increase of 79

per cent. This will not cure the unemployment

problem. People will be paid at a higher rate an

hour for working the same hours. That is the most

! inflationary prospect, which will mean an increase

oMfl.1s1lsmteert.hDinegahl nkge

21 per cent, as with the fiction

defined by that it will

the cre

ate employment, another table indicates that 72

per cent of employers and large companies, when
as ed how they would meet this cost--push factor,

saId they would meet it by using increased

mechanisation. The honourable member for Wills

and th Australian Labor Party are saying that

they wIll push up the costs for union members at

?WcwdthouIemtsl.htccrmhmoyumtaWnoclIh1trlUylms.nkpeAintsoy.son'wsadl,e,lxtmoopdneseuunsrswtverihyvaoenh;dhabasdyseobrsenetprleyolnayoctjhinonrebgosuwpgieanhoytpihnilnee

Mr Barry Jones-But they're doing it anyway.

Mr STEELE HALL-The honourable member says that it is being done. Of course, the honourable member for Wills will accelerate it.
.He will accelerate it by deliberate design and pol
ICy. He and his party will stand responsible to the people of Australia.

I is
traban

ffoarmtl.hh.eesse

people, and the who have seen

great their

majority of all Aus living standards go

backwards . . .

Whether or not one agrees with the Leader of the

Opposition, I submit that on his words there is no

base whatsoever for deliberately increasing the

cost of production in Australia and deliberately

harming those millions of people for whom he

spoke on that occasion. It is the greatest contra

diction that one has ever heard from a leader of

any political party. It is an absurdity for the

honourable member for Wills to try to elevate this

argument from all these distasteful facts which

SIOilnl ecrosmoef

tfhr?ISmcoitunwtrhyena

he will decent

deny living

the pen standard

and when he will force those young couples who

are now paying off their homes with large repay

ments because of very high rates of interest to face

weIelln

higher rates of take away the

interest and repayments. He economic choices of Aus

trcahliOaIcse. oTfhseuyrV,,:I,iVlal lhuanvdeenrotnheelaepftp. lIitcawtiilolnsiomfpalcyobset

mput. As the Minister has said in his statement

today, the inflationary effects will begin on a

figure of 9 per cent. One could go on.

Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) ( 1 2. 38)-1 shall start by contrasting what the Government has said with the facts.

M.. Shipton-You've got your heavies going now, Bob!

Mr CHARLES-If the honourable member

ofours.HTighgI.iSnsGhoavdehrnamlfeanbt'rsaicnohnferownotualtdiobne

danger attitude

has reared its ugly head once again. Despite an

agreement between all parties concerned

employers and unions-this Government has

oMnm.clstaegrafinooIpnpdoussetdry tahned

umpire's decision. The Commerce (Sir Phillip

Lynch) deCIded that he would get in on the act of

union-bashing. I wish to quote from the Mel

bourne Herald of yesterday. I refer to the front

page headline which reads: '35 ruling callous

Lynch'. The article stated:

The M,inister for nuslry and Commerce, Sir Phillip
Lynch, saId the commISSIOn had shown 'callous disregard' for the unemployed.

'The comission has opted for a. policy of appeasement in the face ofumon pressure,' Sir Phillip said.

Industrial Relations

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 971

In fact, the opposite is the case. Let me turn to the decision of the Australian Conciliation and Arbi tration Commission of this week. Mr Justice Williams, Mr Justice Coldham and Mr Commissioner Neyland reached a decision which, even though it has been alluded to by the honourable member for Wills, (Mr Hawke), is worth repeat ing. The judgment stated:
The parties also reported that at each company, agreements had been reached for a number of improved and more efficient working methods resulting in a considerable cost saving which would almost entirely offset the overall cost of introducing a 35 hour week at the six companies.
On page 3 of that same decision on Tuesday of this week it was stated:
In addition, each agreement provides for the setting up of two committees: a 'shorter working week committee' to solve problems which may arise with respect to the introduction of the shorter working week and a 'shorter working week moni toring committee', which will be a continuation of the existing working party, to monitor the implementation of all cost saving factors. Procedures for settling disputes and for examining technological change and improving industrial relations are also contained in the agreements.
Is that not a settlement that just about every employer, employee and most governments would like to see-an agreement which, on the one hand, promotes industrial peace, and working together to sort out the difficulties of the future with tech nological change that will occur as we enter the next century? But no, not this Government. I re turn to the article in yesterday's Melbourne Herald in which the Minister for Industry and Commerce is reported as stating that the Commission had shown a callous disregard for the unemployed. The agreement makes way for the employers to employmore men to be trained over the ensuing months so that we will have, contrary to what Government Ministers have said, more productivity and more employment. On page 7 of its decision the Commission stated:
We are also satisfied, having regard to the history of the matter, t4e examinations by the working party, including the various sub-committees and the terms of the agreements themselves that the results are not contrived arrangements but will, in fact, lead to cost savings which would not other wise have been achieved.
Productivity bargaining or consultation, as some people may like to call it, has been around for quite some time. The matter came before the Commission in 1 975 in regard to the Australian Telecommunications Commission, in 1 976 in relation to Australia Post and in 1 977 in relation to the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories. It is not exactly a new idea that the Government came across only this week. The concept of productivity bargaining is based on common sense and experi ence; that consultation and co-operation between workers and management can be beneficial to both parties and to Australian industry. It is not

surprising that the Government cannot under stand the value of productivity bargaining because it does not believe in co-operation with the trade union movement.
The stance of the Government in the field of industrial relations is one of divisiveness and ag gression. In contrast, the Australian Labor Party stands for industrial democracy with mutual respect and co-operation between workers and management. Productivity bargaining has been proved to be effective in the real world of industrial relations. The Altona agreement shows that it can produce beneficial results for both manage ment and workers and job opportunities at a time of great unemployment. Throughout the process of the Altona negotiations, the employers and the unions co-operated in all aspects to help bring about a mutual agreement that would benefit everyone. This co-operation which has charac terised the process of productivity bargaining has brought a new development to industrial relations. I believe this co-operation will continue and develop further under the nine-day 70-hour fortnight agreement in the Altona case.
Of course, judging from the Government's re action to this agreement, one would think that today no one is working a 35-hour week in Australia or, in fact, anywhere in the world. The reverse is true. The British engineering unions broke through the 40-hour working week barrier in 1979. The United States of America and Sweden have an average of a 36-hour working week. In Japan the manufacturing industry has a 36-hour working week. These are just a few examples. Turning to Europe, in Austria, the average working week is 34 hours and overtime is limited to around 60 hours a year. Let us look at Australia. As the honourable member for Wills has pointed out, there are some 300 Federal awards and agreements that encompass a 35-hour working week. I cite a few of them just to prove to honourable members opposite that the agreements are not a myth: The Administrative Clerks (Container Terminals and Depots) Award 1 972, the Australian Coastal Shipping Commission (Terminal Supervisors) Award 1 970, the Fore man Stevedores Award 1 972, the Hospital Em ployees (Radiographers-ACT) Award 1 970, the Municipal Officers (NSW Electricity Undertak ings) Award 1 964, the Waterside Workers Award 1 960, and so on. Let us look at one of the later awards, namely the Storeman and Packers (Car bon Black) Award 1 979. People working under that award have a 35-hour week nine-day fort night, which is pretty well the same as the situation at the Altona complex about which we are talking and which prompted this debate. Yet the

972 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Industrial Relations

metal industries have struck strong opposition from national employers, although not the Altona complex employers, and of course the confronta tionist Federal Government. Of course, the Government's statements about this agreement and others like it-that is, that it will ruin the country-are just not true. As the honourable member for Wills said, the same arguments have been trotted out for over 1 00 years. The same thing has been alluded to in the statement today by the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock ) .

The objective of the whole exercise of pro ductivity bargaining or consultation and the negotiations for a shorter working week in the indus tries and work places that can afford it-we emphasise that point; we are not saying that everyone across the board should have a 3S-hour week tomorrow-is to achieve a fall in actual hours of work greater than the fall in normal hours. The prime objectives are increased leisure-it would be helpful to the people of Australia if this Government had a responsible leisure policy-increased employment opportunities and increased efficiency with increases in pro ductivity leading to reduced costs.

I look at one Melbourne company-Trico Pty Ltd-which works a four-day week. Since the introduction of the four-day week the company has found that costs have not increased. Costs are saved by not running the plant on the fifth day. As an added bonus absenteeism has dropped from 1 3.2 per cent to 2. 1 per cent. Let us turn to today's Melbourne Age. I recommend to everyone who is listening to the debate today to buy the Melbourne Age and read this article by Michele Nayman entitled 'The Shorter Hours Fight'. It reads:

But the campaign for a 35-hour week is not new.

The first 35-hour week was awarded in Broken Hill in 1921
when underground miners won their claim . . .

Further on the article states:

One of the conditions of the agreement was that the em

ployers could never did.

re-open

the

case

whenever

they

wanted. .

They

Funny about that! Some six years later Mr Justice Beeby in a judgment in a case seeking to reduce the working hours from 48 hours to 44 referred to the underground workers. Referring to that case the newspaper article states:

. . . Justice Beeby . . . said that it had been 'con clusively proved that the underground men on the average produced substantially more ore in 35 hours than in 44'.

In today's Age we also have an article quoting Mr Meares who is the spokesman for the six Altona companies. The article states:

Mr Meares said that as a result of the productivity bargain, the companies have been able to simplify relationships and responsibility to establish a 'much more efficient operation'.
Really, how much more do we need? The Minister in his statement kept referring to increased wages but he never really got down to the facts and figures concerning increases in productivity that, in fact, far outweigh the shorter hours that are involved. I bring before the House one more quote. It is from a former Prime Minister who obviously had a little more wisdom than the present Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) . I refer to the late Sir Robert Menzies. On 30 September 1 947 in the Budget debate the then Mr Menzies stated:
Therefore, if we are to produce more, we must produce
more per man-hour, and we can do that only by having greater efficiency of management, greater availability of horsepower at the elbow of the worker . . .
This is exactly what we are saying. That is exactly what has happened at the Altona complex. This Government does not seem to realise that. The Minister's statement is frivolous in the extreme and does not address itself to the facts of the situation. The Government should attempt to cooperate and to co-ordinate its industrial relations if it wants industrial peace-it does not seem to want that-rather than engage in the confron tation which it usually continues with, The number of quotes from the various decisions mentioned by my colleague the honourable member for Wills and the ones that I have just brought before the House are substantial evidence that the Altona complex agreement is a good one for management and employees. If this Government had a rational policy towards industrial relations and industrial harmony it would commend the agreement for all the Australian people to see and it would put the facts before the Australian people.
I conclude by asking the Minister to look at the situation again and not to start a confrontation which will put Australian against Australian. There is room for productivity bargaining and consultation. I sincerely hope that everyone in this House will be working towards that situation.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley) ( 1 2. 52) -Let me say two things at the outset about the speech by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke ) . The first thing to be said about it is that it was what one has come to recognise as a typical speech from the honourable member. He goes over all the history time after time. He looks at all the historical precedents and he seems to base his case on that sort of history. In the course of doing that the honourable member, the Australian Labor Party and some sections of the trade union

Industrial Relations

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 973

movement completely ignore the economic reali ties that are facing this country. In other words, they say: 'Well, there has been an historical movement towards shorter working hours. Objections are put up against that movement to shorter working hours. The country has not fallen apart. Therefore, we can go on to reduce hours from 40 hours to 3 S hours a week'.
Let us assume that everything that was said about that history is correct. Let us assume that the history outline was all perfect. Nevertheless, that does not make out a case for reducing stan dard hours of work from 40 hours a week to 3 S hours a week. It does not make out that case because it ignores the economic issues that are facing this country. It ignores the fact that if we intro duce a 3S-hour week generally across the board at this time it will pose enormous economic burdens on the Australian economy and on the Australian worker. If there were ever a case of sections of the trade union movement and their Labor Party sup porters in this place acting to the prejudice of the workers of Australia it is this case. If there were ever a case of the Government parties in this Parliament advancing the cause and the real interests of the workers of Australia it is exactly this case. We are advancing the case of jobs-preserving jobs that already exist and creating new jobs for the unemployed. The Labor Party and sections of the trade union movement are advancing upon a course which can lead only to increased costs which can lead only to further economic problems of the type we have seen in this country over the last few years.
The second thing that should be said about the speech of the honourable member for Wills is this: With the new modest, mellow approach and image which he is trying to project to us he says to us in the House today: 'Well, of course, we are not asking for a 35-hour week in all industries or across the board. We are not asking for a 35-hour week immediately. No, it is all going to come slowly but surely as the country can afford it and can adapt to it'. The honourable member seems to ignore the fact that the Australian Council of Trade Unions, in which he seemed to have played some part in the past, at its Congress in September 1979 passed a resolution on this subject. To test the accuracy of what the honourable member has said, we should look at what the ACTU Congress itself has said. The resolution stated:
Congress calls on affiliates in all industries to immediately develop and actively pursue programs for achieving shorter working hours.
I emphasise the words 'in all industries'. The reference is not merely to the power industry or to those industries where it can be proven that the

35-hour week can be afforded; nor is it suggested that it ought to be introduced in a leisurely fashion, or step by step as the country can afford it. It is to be implemented immediately. The resol ution stated:

. . . to immediately develop and actively pursue programs for achieving shorter working hours.

That is the policy of the ACTU-to introduce a 3 S-hour week immediately in all industries. Again, the resolution spoke of an urgent need; it was not something to which we were to adapt as the country could afford it. That is the situation so far as the ACTU is concerned.

Mr Hawke-Mr Deputy Speaker--

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Does the honourable member wish to take a point of order?

Mr Hawke-Yes.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-If the honourable member wishes to raise a point of order the honourable member may address himself to it.

Mr Hawke-I ask as a point of order: What source is the honourable member quoting from?

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.

Mr Hawke-How are we to know the accuracy of what he is saying?

Mr N. A. BROWN-The honourable member for Wills has asked the most stupid question I have ever heard in this Parliament. He asked: 'How do we know the source from which the honourable member is quoting'. The source is the ACTU congress resolution passed in Setpember 1 979.

Mr Hawke-Read the next paragraph.

Ml' N. A. BROWN-Over the suspension of the sitting for lunch I will make it available to the honourable member to look at. Now let us look at the result of this campaign.

Mr HoJding-I rise on a point of order. As the honourable member was quoting he must name the source, the book, from which he was quoting. He has merely identified it as a resolution.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-If the honourable member vouches for the accuracy of the document to which he is referring he may quote from it in the course of his remarks.

Mr N. A. BROWN-I will even make a pho

tocopy of the document and give it to the honour

able member for Melbourne Ports so that he too

may know September

what the ACTU 1979. It gives

said the

at its Congress in lie to what the

-

honourable member for Wills has said. We should

974 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Industrial Relations

now consider what the results of this action will be.
Mr Holding-On a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker, the Standing Orders clearly require any honourable member who is quoting from a document to name the document and indicate its source. It is not good enough to read from a document and say that it is a resolution. I invite the honourable gentleman to comply with the Stand ing Orders.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no substance to the point of order.
Mr N. A. BROWN-The honourable member for Melbourne Ports will find the document set out in the records of the ACTU.
Mr Hawke-What are you reading from? Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Diamond Valley will re sume his seat. Honourable members on my left will come to order. They seem to be in a state of confusion in regard to the point raised by the honourable member for Melbourne Ports. The requirement to which he referred relates only to ref erences to documents made during questions without notice.
Sitting suspended from 12.59 to 2.15 p.m.
Mr N. A. BROWN-Before the suspension of the sitting I was dealing with the last shattered remnants of the credibiity of the h onourable member for Wills. The House will recall that he sought to rely upon the Arbitration Commission as an authority in support of his case and he quoted, with the normal selectivity, from some re marks made over the years by various members of the Arbitration Commission. It is appropriate to look at what the Arbitration Commission said on the most recent occasion when it turned its mind to the issue of the 35-hour week. On page 4 of its jUdgment on the national wage case, on 9 January this year, the Commission turned to the issue and said:
Of particular significance is the 3 5 -h o u r week campaign . . .
So, the Commission addressed itself specifically to the campaign for the 35-hour week. It stated:
Throughout the campaign the Commission has warned about the threat which it poses to the continuation of indexa tion, and in a statement on 14 November 1 980 it said: 'We are not satisfied that the 35-hour week campaign. taken as a whole. is being processed in accordance with the spirit and letter of the guidelines with proper regard to economic priorities and realities'.
The whole case of the Government is that this campaign should be assessed in the context of economic priorities and realities, but the Labor

Party and some sections of the trade union movement want to close their eyes to those economic priorities and realities. In that same judgment of January this year, the Commission went on:
There is no doubt that throughout 1980. action in connec tion with the shorter hours campaign has usually been ini tiated in a manner which calculatedly avoided any examin ation by the Commission. of the costs involved in the grant of the claim. This has occurred despite repeated warnings by the Commission.
Again, the Opposition cannot rely in support of its case upon what the Arbitration Commission has said because the Commission has expressly drawn attention to the fact that we must have regard to the costs involved if the claim for a 35-hour week is granted. All the Government asks is that the costs and the implications for Australia of grant ing this claim across the board be taken into account. That is what the relevant umpire in these issues has said. Nor can the Opposition, or those sections of the trade union movement pursuing this campaign, rely upon the deliberations of the International Labour Organisation. It is appropri ate that we consider what the ILO has said. In its determination of 1 962-which is still the relevant statement by the ILO-in regard to the measures taken to pursue a campaign for shorter working hours, it stated:
Such measures should take into account(a) the level of economic development attained and the
extent to which the country is in a position to bring about a reduction in hours of work without reducing total production or productivity. endangering its economic growth. the development of new industries or its competitive position in international trade, and with out creating inflationary pressures which would ultimately reduce the real income of t h e workers - . . .
That is what we say to the people of Australia-we must have regard to those sorts of factors and to the economic consequences of low ering the number of hours worked in an ordinary working week. If one has regard to productivity, the dangers to economic growth, the need to de velop new industries and the need for Australia to compete on world markets and to keep its costs down so that it can compete, there is no conclusion that any fair-minded person can come to other than that we should not have a standard 35-hour week for the work force of Australia.
What will be the results of such a claim? What will be the results of a universal 35-hour week? Clearly there will be a reduction in working time. That must surely be obvious. Clearly there will be an increase in costs; there must be an increase in costs. To maintain the output within the economy at previous levels, some additional fact0r will have to be added. We will either have to increase

Industrial Relations

26 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 975

overtime, with all the costs involved in that, or increase mechanisation in industry. Probably both will follow-there will be an increased overtime cost and increased mechanisation, which cannot create additional jobs for people in Australia. Those who support the other side of this argument ask why the result will not be that we em ploy more people. They ask why we will not need more employees. If one follows that argument through and makes the same calculations as those made by the Confederation of Australian Indus try -they were based on its own investigations and inquiries-one finds that there will be an increase in the wages bill in Australia of $7 billion a year. I ask whether the country can afford that. The answer must be no. If that does not happen and we find that employers do not take on additional employees, there will be increased over time worked. The calculations show that the cost of the increased overtime to keep production at present levels will be $ 10 billion per annum. Again I ask whether the country can afford additional costs of $ 1 0 billion per annum at this stage of its economic development. The answer to that must be no. Can we hope to compete in world markets and expand our trade if we have that sort of input of costs into the economy? Again the answer must be no.
Surely the situation that will come about if we have a universal 3 5-hour week is a classic formula for inflation. When the Government has achieved so much in getting inflation down, why put it at risk at this stage with a guaranteed formula to increase inflation? I say that because less must be produced. It will not just be less produced for the same cost, but less produced for a greater cost. There must be a greater cost, whether additional employees are taken on-which is extremely un likely, jUdging from surveys of employers-or whether the costs will come about as a result of increased overtime. Any fair-minded person would have to conclude that the most likely result will be an increase in overtime, with all the additional costs involved, or an increase in additional mechanisation, or a combination of both. The surveys of employers suggest that that will be the result. Over 70 per cent of employers have said they would either decrease the number of employees or keep the number the same. Only 1 4 per cent have said there may be some increase in the number of employees. In regard to overtime, 79 per cent said there would be an increase in the cost of overtime in their enterprises and 72 per cent said there would be im increase in labour saving mechanisms. So it is a formula for disaster.
Finally, I cannot understand why the Labor Party and some sections of the of the trade union

movement pursue this cause, for the reasons I have given and for the additional reason that the people do not want a 35-hour week. The workers do not want it because they know that their liveli hoods and standards of living will be at risk. One has only to look at the most recent gallup poll on the issue, published in the Melbourne Herald yesterday, in which only 9 per cent of the people said they wanted a 35-hour week immediately. I em phasise the word 'immediately'. As I said before the suspension of the sitting, that word is used in the ACTU Congress declaration. Only 9 per cent of the people want it. Over half the people of Australia-57 per cent-want a 40-hour week retained. I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard the September 1979 resolution of the ACTU Congress.
Leave granted. The document read as follows-
Attachment 4. ACTU CONGRESS-SEPTEMBER 1979
RESOLUTION "4. Hours, leave and leisure
Congress believes that meeting on the threshold of the 1980-s. we must recognise the urgent need foraffiliates to cam paign around the issues of reduced working life and increased leisure. This need is reinforced by the facts that:
It is now over 30 years since the general introduction of the forty hour week and in that intervening period there have been considerable increases in productivity due to ad vances in technology and improved working practices.
There has been a disastrous increase in unemployment over the past five years. As such it is vital that unions press for increases in leisure. to be taken in a form which increases employment and with out loss of pay. There are various forms in which leisure can be taken. including:
A shorter working week. Reduced working period over fortnight or month. Increased annual leave. Earlier voluntary retirement. Increased Long Service Leave. These forms of leave may also be supplemented by edu cational and paid study leave.
4.1 Shorter Working Week
Congress notes that it is over 20 years since.the demand was formulated for a 35 hour week and that over this period suc cess has been achieved in a number ofindustries.
Congress declares that the current economic and social environment requires affiliates to continue to press for the introduction ofincreased leisure. one form of which can be the shorter working week. with reduced standard hours.
Congress calls on affiliates in all industries to immediately develop and actively pursue programmes for achieving shorter working hours.
Congress recognises the need for affiliates to undertake an educational campaign to ensure that when the trade union movement is successful in achieving a shorter working week in IIny industry, it becomes a reality and not a means of obtaining extra overtime for people already in work.

976 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

lndustrial Relations

In conformity with this policy Unions should seek to re strict overtime by award or agreement prescription and by union action.
Reduced working period over a fortnight or month Congress recognises that increased leisure can be taken in
forms other than a reduction in standard hours per week. In particular, it notes the successful campaigns to introduce a 9-day fortnight coupled with reduced standards working time over that period by providing a complete day off, workers have been able to gain extra leisure by avoiding the need to travel to and from work.
Congress also notes that fiexitime arrangements can provide for complete days off, but without reducing hours cannot be regarded as falling into the category of reduced working time."
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (M!' Millar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

When the 35-hour working week was introduced in 1 972-nine years ago-there were 1 3 ,000 waterside workers throughout Australia. It was not the 35-hour working week which caused that reduction of 1 7,000 jobs; it was technological change. It was the introduction of roll-on, roll-ofT ships, the containerisation and the bulk handling of cargoes. I can remember that in Queensland in the 1950s some 4,000 to 5,000 people were work ing to load sugar for export. By 1 972, when the 35-hour working week was introduced because of technological change, that figure had been reduced to 1 ,000. I remember that men went to destinations and ports all over Austr"iia. They sold their homes and possessions. They got no re dundancy payments or assistance to move and, above all, no shorter working hours.

Mr WEST (Cunningham) ( 2 . 2 4 ) - The honourable member for Diamond Valley (Mr N. A. Brown) quoted extensively from a booklet that he got hold of somehow. From his speech it clearly emerges that all the Government has been doing is acting in a partisan, biased way in favour of one section of the economy, that of the employers. All that we have seen is a hysterical attack on trade unions and workers who wish to improve their wages and living conditions. This attack has been typical of these types of people in this House and of those they have represented throughout history. One can be sure that back in the days of the Industrial Revolution the very same type of people would have opposed the re moval of women and children from coal mines as well as the reduction of nTf)rking hours from 20 to 1 8 hours a day which people in those times worked. Honourable members can expect that people on the Government side back in those days would have opposed a reduction of hours from 60 and in the 1 940s they would have opposed a re duction of hours from 40 when all the prophets of doom prophesied at that time that the economy would be wrecked by the introduction of a 40-hour working week. Of course that did not happen, just as it is not happening now, because the 35-hour working week and reduced working hours have been a reality over the last decade, introduced stage by stage. They have been introduced into the coal mines. Shorter hours have been introduced into the oil industry, the power industry, the Public Service and on the waterfront.
I might extrapolate a few points on that matter because, as a trade unionist I worked on the waterfront for 24 years before being elected to this place. As an 1 8-year old I went to work on the waterfront in 1953. I know that at that time there were 30,000 waterside workers in Australia.

So do not tell us on this side that the 35-hour working week has been responsible for increasing unemployment in this country or for the loss of jobs. Do not tell us that if the 35-hour working week is introduced industry by industry it will en courage the replacement of people with machines, because this has already been done. It is in the nature of the capitalistic economy that this will occur. If technology exists and if it is profitable to implement it then the owners in the industry concerned will do so. This clearly emerges from figures if one looks at the situation industry by industry. Take manufacturing in 1 973 and 1 974. During that time in New South Wales there were 5 1 6,000-plus people engaged in manufacturing, but there are only just over 433,000 today. In Victoria in 1 973 there were 1 0,000 people employed in the television, radio and electronic equipment area. Today there are not more than five and a half thousand. Similarly, in South Australia in 1972-73 in the shipbuilding and repair industry there were just over 3,000 people. Today there is scarcely a person employed in shipbuilding in South Australia. In a capitalist economy if tech nology exists, it will be introduced. It is not a matter of replacing people with machines because of the introduction of shorter working hours. If the technology exists and if it is profitable to implement it, it will bl, implemented under the present system that the people opposite stand for.
I want to take up a question introduced by the honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall) , who complained that only a few thousand metal workers attended the union meetings at which the decision to push for the 35-hour work ing week was made. That may be true, but he misses the point entirely. What about the foreign companies and the national companies who make the decisions affecting people's jobs and lives in this country without consultation with anyone

Industrial Relations

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 977

else? Surely their base is narrower than that of the 5,000 metal workers who attended those meet ings. What about the decision of General Motors Holden's Ltd to close the Pagewood factory in Sydney? Did that company consult with the Fed eral Government or State Government or with the trade unions concerned? The decisions were made overseas. It may be necessary to rationalise the Australian car industry; but not to dismantle it. We must keep our capacity to build the total car in Australia. The point is: What consultation is going on in these matters now? What attempt is being made in these industries to ensure that as these better methods of production are introduced, as technological change and rational isation occur, the fruits of those changes will also flow on to the workers and trade unionists instead of being concentrated in the hands of the foreign companies which are implementing them?
1 move on to the case in point of the Altona decision, which has so obviously provoked the Min ister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock) and this Government. A number of 850-odd chemical workers, after struggling and then negotiating with the company, finally reached agreement and then went to the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, which ratified what amounted to a freely negotiated agreement in a collective bargaining situation. The Commission indicated that it was satisfied and that the agreement was within the productivity guidelines that it had previously outined. Of course the Commission had regard to three points: Firstly, that specific productivity rises could not otherwise be forthcoming, nor be at the expense of normal pro ductivity gains; secondly, shorter hours must be an agreed objective of both employer and employee; and thirdly, the agreement must involve negligible costs and maintenance of existing standards.
I want to refer to that point because despite what the honourable member was saying, on the company's own figures produced to the Commission there has been negligible cost to the company in that regard. It has been said that the gross cost of introducing the 35-hour working week was put at $3.8m and that that figure was to be saved by the introduction of the improved pro ductivity methods that had been negotiated. Now we see that the ICI company has negotiated with the various unions for reduced hours and an increased productivity deal affecting 3 ,700 workers. I f that company can achieve those aims, why is it not a good thing? Why can the Government not support it if it is mutually beneficial to the workers in that industry and to the company?

I want to put it on record that the policy of the Australian Labor Party, as determined at the Adelaide conference in 1 979, is to encourage shorter hours where it can be established on an industry by industry basis by mutual agreements, and where it can be ratified by the Commission. Our document states that we stand for the exam ination of the potential for increased leisure for wage and salary earners or changed life styles based on reduced hours of work and changed work practices. This should be encouraged at the industry level. That is what should be done.
This Government states that the 35-hour work ing week will cause inflation to rise, yet it totally disregards the inflationary problems that will continue to emerge because of its commitment to unmanaged and unrationalised resource develop ment in this country. Even the Treasury says that. H is talking about capital expenditure in both the private and public sectors of approximately $35 billion to $40 billion over the next eight to ten years with greatly increased export earnings. As any economist will tell honourable members, if the earnings in the capital inflow are allowed to accumulate, and if we do not re-structure industry and allow more imports, we will get inflation. Where do we see the pattern and the plan emerg ing from this Government to deal with that situation? The Government simply says: 'The inflationary situation will not be too bad. If we pay off the loans quickly enough and if we repatriate the profits of the national companies fast enough per haps that inflationary situation will not emerge'.
I draw the attention of the House to what happened in the early 1 970s when the Country Party resisted Treasury advice to revalue the dol lar. Honourable members know what happened with inflation then. By that act of cowardice the Country Party created the right conditions for inflation rates to take-off in the mid-1 970s. It was not increases in wages that caused that; it was the cowardice of the Government in capitulating to the Country Party in the mining boom of the early 1 970s. In the present situation, when we can see that earnings are increasing as a result of the development boom, of course we will find workers demanding an increased share of the cake, especially during the construction phase. There is a danger of polarisation in that situation. But what Government policies do we see being implemented, other than a policy to stand back and watch certain representatives of capitalism in this country, such as the publishers of the Australian Financial Review, expound the merits of returning to collective bargaining, which is aimed at preventing a spill-over of increased earnings,

978 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Industrial Relations

shorter hours and so on, into the general industrial of productive effort in capitalist economies will

sector?

ensure that the workers will continue so to

What has the Government done, what has the struggle.

Minister done, to institute policies to control the Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)

situation other than to oppose and ultimately to destroy wage indexation-which was one of the , mechanisms the Government had at its disposal other than to oppose productivity deals, and other than to threaten employers if they do not come to the Government's miserable party? All the things I have mentioned will occur. The Government pins its hopes of recovery on resource develop ment, despite the fact that between 1 977 and 1 980 in that sector the level of employment increased by only 4.3 per cent and export earnings increased by 63 per cent. The Government knows that that will happen in that sector, but it is not formulat ing policies which will be necessary in order to dis tribute the benefits throughout the whole economy, including the services sector. All the Government hopes to 'do is to restrict the benefits to one sector and to condemn the workers in other industries. All the Government will create will be increasing desperate polarisation and industrial turmoil as other workers try to catch up.
The Minister has outlined a series of incentives

Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr LUSHER (Hume) (2.39)-1 am appalled at the general irresponsibility of the proposition which is being propounded by the Australian Council of Trade Unions on behalf of, or suppos edly on behalf of the work force of Australia, to push for a reduction in standard working hours. As the honourable member for Diamond Valley (Mr N. A. Brown) pointed out so properly, in September 1 979, under the leadership of the now honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), when he was the President of the ACTU, a resolution was passed in the ACTU Congress in favour of the proposition before us. That makes this prop osition ACTU policy. The ACT U has taken it over from the unions which started to push the proposition. The ACTU-as 1 said, supposedly on behalf of the trade union movement of Australia, the working man of Australia-is pushing this proposition.

to companies to resist the unions' claims in this. It Does the ACTU suggest that a 35-hour week

favours some companies more than others. It has can be achieved without its having an effect on

said that some companies can postpone paying costs and employment in this economy and on

their accounts and that it will give those companies government orders if they kowtow to

Australia's international competitiveness? Today the honourable member for Wills said something

it. The Government has said that maybe it will to the effect that the capacity of industry has not defer the payment of company tax and so on by been exhausted. Obviously he and the trade union

those companies who resist the 35-hour week. I movement leadership want to bleed the system

put it to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, that that is simply a formula designed to support those companies which may well afford to introduce a shorter working week, but will not do so, and to penalise those companies which might be in a

even ency

finurrtehleart.ioWn hteorethiiss?the nOtphpeoosintieonh'as ncdonAs'iusst

tralian Labor Party members come into this Par

liament and decry the Government's economic

policy and talk down the economy. They keep

more marginal position but, because of their genu making the point that the economy is in a disas

irie desire either to achieve industrial harmony or to pass on to the workers some of their increased, productivity, are prepared to introduce a shorter working week.
The Government's approach to this matter is
hypocritical in the extreme. It is the biggest employer of workers who work less than 40 hours a week. The Government's position is as biased as it is unfair. The Government is determined that the benefits of technology, science and man's ingen uity and enhanced profitability will go to the cor

trous state because of the policies being pursued by this Government. On the other hand, they come in here and indicate that they expect the economy to absorb the enormous additional cost that must, flow from a reduction in working hours from 40 to 35 hours a week. The Opposition can not have it both ways; it has to take a side on this issue. Either it has to start to agree that the economy perhaps is on the improve or, alternatively, it has to lay off its ridiculous and irresponsible call for a 35-hour week.

porate sector and not to the workers. But the The reality is that the economy is improving. It

Government will not be successful in doing that has been a long haul back from the depths of the

because history shows that throughout the Indus Labor-induced recession of recent years. But the

trial Revolution and Post Industrial Revolution economy is still fragile. It certainly is not healthy

the workers have struggled to improve their work enough for us to consider the sort of impost that

ing and living environment. The dehumanisation the honourable member for Wills, the ACTU and

Industrial Relations

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 979

the Opposition want to place upon the economy at this time. In 1 947 the Full Bench of the Arbi tration Court stated:
All the economists of both sides agree that never in our his tory have all the factors been so favourable, nor is it easy to conceive their ever being more favourable.
That was related to the agreement to lower the standard working hours from 44 to 40 hours a week. No government, Federal or State, opposed that at that time. Were they not amazing in their foresight in indicating that it was most unlikely that circumstances would ever be as favourable? Here we are in 1981 in a situation which is totally different from that of 1 947. Regrettably, the un employment level is high, international competition is intense and costs are only starting to be brought under control in our economy. Yet the Opposition and the ACTU, supposedly on behalf of the working man of Australia, are trying to in troduce a 35-hour week. What would the cost of that be? I think costs are important; they are a very significant factor in this whole scenario. People need to know that if a 35-hour week were introduced and no reduction was made in the hourly rate of pay the cost of employing people receiving roughly average weekly earnings would rise by over 1 4 per cent. If the five hours difference between the 40-hour and 35-hour week were worked as overtime and paid for at overtime rates, which in most cases would be necessary, costs would increase by 2 1 .4 per cent. That would be the cost resulting from such a reduction in hours.
What is happening? The ACTU, the Labor Party and particularly the honourable member for Wills are getting on the bandwagon in support of people who have jobs at the moment and are going to try to have an easy ride. God help those who will lose their jobs as a result of such a policy and God help those who do not have a job now. It is very interesting that this Government, a Liberal-National Country Party conservative government, is doing more for the workers than are the Labor Party and the ACTU. This Government is creating jobs at a faster rate than any other government has created jobs. All the policies of the Labor Party Opposition and all the policies of the ACTU are designed to put people out of jobs. That is fascinating. People ought to stop and think about that. What the Labor Party and the ACTU are doing will cost jobs. There is no doubt whatsoever that that is the case. I refer to an article by Mr Powell which appeared in the Australian Bulletin ofLabour in March 1 980. It reads:
For the proposal to work it would need to lead to a fall in labour supply . . . to a rise in labour demand . . . or both. Because the proposals whichget to first base

with organised labour never involve a drop in weekly earnings for the shorter working week, they imply an effective increase in real wage costs to employers. Therefore it is likely that in fact labour demand would decrease . . . maintaining fixed weekly wages and changing the length of the working week is simply equivalent to an increase in the average hourly wage.
That should be obvious. Mr Hawke-Who said that? Mr LUSHER-The article was written by Mr
A. Powell and appeared in the Australian Bull etin of Labour in Mar.ch 1 980. Her Majesty's Treasury in England, in Treasury Working Paper No. 1 4 of June 1 980, made a major study of the economic effects of a shorter working week. It made some interesting comments. It admits that what it calls some 'first round' effects might result in an increase in employment. It also said that there would be second round effects. The working paper reads:
The second round effects arise largely because of the impact ofshorter hours on unit labour costs and international compe titiveness, and the consequent downward pressure this exerts on the exchange rate.
It is a very interesting paper. I think it ought to be circulated to far more honourable members than it probably has been. It also states:
While the reduction in the length of the normal working week creates the potential for increasing employment, the actual change in employment in the 'first round' will depend on the extent to which this potential effect is offset through more overtime working, higher output per man hour, or a fall in output.
How did the working paper sum up the argument? It was a pretty damning summary. Her Majesty's Treasury stated:
The essential weakness of the argument that shorter hours are an effective way of promoting work sharing is that weekly wage rates would probably not be reduced and that any increase in output per man would be insufficient to prevent a significant rise in unit labour costs of production. Under these circumstances additional inflation would be generated and this in turn would over a period set forces in motion that wholly, or largely, offset any first round gain in employment.
That statement speaks for itself. I have referred to what was stated by Her Majesty's Treasury. There are international comparisons. What is happening in other countries? Once again the ACTU , the honourable member for Wills and the Labor Opposition wonld have Australia take the role of an international pacesetter. In Sweden the Work Environment Act prescribes a 40-hour, five-day working week. In Italy the standard is 40 hours. Canada has legislation for a maximum working week of 48 hours. In the Federal Demo cratic Republic of Germany the maximum stan dard under federal laws is a 60-hour, six-day working week. In France labour law legislates for

980 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Industrial Relations

a 40-hour maximum. I n May 1 979 the Government indicated a commitment to lower the maxi mum average from 48 hours to 46 hours. In the United States of America the Fair Labour Stan dard Act prescribes a 40-hour maximum working week. In New Zealand legislation and most awards prescribe a standard working week of 40 hours. Yet some people in Australia want to see a return to the days of the former honourable member for Hindmarsh when the Australian Government took on the role of the pacesetter. This time people are not content to use the Public Service to destroy the rest of the economy. They want to do it in an international context and de stroy Australia's international competitiveness.
Let me say something else about costs. When this debate was brought on I remembered the problems of the Wran Government in New South Wales in relation to the cost of power at the proposed aluminium smelters in the Hunter Val ley. An article which appeared in the Australian Financial Review in January reads:
The cost of giving a 35-hour week to NSW power industry employees has emerged as a major element in the continuing controversy over raising electricity charges for the three big aluminium smelters in NSW . . .
But another important element in the climb in the energy rate is the effect of the 35-hour week in causing a jump in the hourly rate for labour, because the weekly wage is spread over a shorter number ofhours.
I do not want to talk down the proposal but if per chance the aluminium smelters in the Hunter Val ley do not go ahead it could be largely attributable to the 35-hour week in the power industry in New South Wales with the resultant increase in the cost ofpower making such projects uneconomic.
There are compelling arguments why Australia should not move in the direction of reducing its standard working week. I wish to dwell for a minute on the rural industry. In the last four years or so the working week in that industry has been reduced from 44 hours to 40 hours. People in the rural industry are prepared to work. They under stand the problems involved in the capital or own ership side of the industry. They are concerned about their employment. People in that industry work. The rural industry suffers from enormous seasonal peaks. Any further restriction in the number of hours that people work under awards in the rural industry would be totally disastrous for that industry. We should be trying to remove the cost pressures on the great industries that still provide half our export earnings. We should get rid of such things as penalty rates to try to help; we should not increase them. We should not increase the pressures on rural industry by adding to the restriction of hours. The rural industry is one of the most efficientexport industries in Australia.

It can sell overseas consistently and well. Its record is unsurpassed. People in the industry work. For reasons unbeknown to me-I can only be thankful for them and perhaps we can thank the honourable member for Port Adelaide ( Mr Young) for entering the Parliament and getting out of the shearing industry-unionism has not taken a hold in rural industry. That is very important.
We have to tie into the argument serious thought about what should be done about Australia's protection policy. If, as must happen, Australia becomes less competitive on export markets what will the ACTU-Labor Party sol ution be? It will call for more protection. That is the only thing that it could do. We would have to provide more protection, otherwise we would sacrifice many more jobs. We have to be realistic about this matter. The ACTU and the Labor Party, again, cannot have it both ways. They have to come to grips with the facts and be prepared to say that Australia will have to raise tariffs even higher than they are now to protect its industries so that they can at least sell on the domestic market even though they will have lost export mar kets as a result of the cost increases consequent upon the introduction of the 35-hour week. Where is Australia's responsibility as a major trading nation if it raises its tariff rates? Where are our responsibilities under the General Agree ment on Tariffs and Trade and other international agreements to which we are a party? These things are important. They need to be considered. The Opposition and the ACTU is not considering them. There has been no discussion of the effect on international trade of the introduction of the 35-hour week.
I conclude by saying that this is a disastrous proposal which has been brought forward by the ACTU and the Labor Party.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (2.55) -Some years ago the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mf Peacock) , who presented today's statement, had the reputation of being a progressive man, a person concerned to ensure that members of the Liberal Party represented positions that were moderate and, to some degree, progressive within the context of the limitations of that party. In fact, he used beliefs about his progressiveness as a basis for his claim to the Prime Ministership of this country. From the remarks made by the Min ister today it is quite clear that he has abandoned any concept of progress in history and that he

Industrial Relations

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 9 8 1

does not understand the role of the historical de Government? Does it get gratitude for its actions?

velopment of the struggle by workers for rights, Is there any recognition of the responsible fashion

better conditions of employment and reduced in which the union movement has behaved in this

hours. The struggle for the 35-hour week is part of important matter? Certainly not. Instead, what

that overall historical struggle for the improve we have from the Government is an attack on the

ment of the conditions of workers throughout the process the union movement has used to pursue

world.

its goal. What has that process been? It has been a

Unfortunately, the Minister seems to have come to the view since he was given this portfolio that he ought to put on the unconvincing per formance of the big tough buy towards the union movement. In adopting this stance towards the shorter hours campaign he has completely capi tulated to the draconian and extreme conserva tive policies of the present Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) . In so doing he has lost any

process based on the principles of negotiation and consultation with employers. It has been based on an attempt to work through the question of a 35-hour week with individual employers and to argue for its implementation because of pro ductivity and work value increases. It has been based on an attempt to negotiate with employers on the basis of increased profitability and a capacity to pay.

claim to represent the more moderate, more When we have a situation where a group of

reasonable elements within the Liberal Party. The companies and unions come to an agreement on a

tirade we heard from him today was another con 35-hour week and put that proposal before the

coction of ideological dogmatism and nonsense.

Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, what

Let me say to honourable members opposite that history will condemn them for their oppo sition to this proposal. They will be recorded as opposing one of the major and most important changes in our history-the development of increasing leisure time and greater employment opportunities which would arise from a 35-hour week. They will be recorded by history as being opposed to this development, and they will stand condemned.

response do we get from the Government? Do we get acceptance of this model as a way in which unions should be operating? Do we get the Government's approval of the umpire's decision as to the way in which the 35-hour week should be gradually introduced? We do not. Instead, we get from the Government an hysterical attack on the unions and the companies involved, and an hys terical attack on the consequences of the 35-hour week.

Before I go on to examine the arguments put forward by the conservatives, let me first make a point of congratulating the union movement for the way in which it has behaved in this whole matter. The union movement has behaved in a thoroughly responsible fashion in dealing with this campaign. Contrary to the ravings of the Prime Minister and the Minister for Industrial Relations, the union movement, the Australian Council of Trade Unions, and in particular the new President of the ACTU, Mr Dolan, have shown a sense of national purpose and national responsibility in pursuing this campaign on behalf of the workers of Australia. I say that because if the union movement, which sees great justice and great urgency in this cause, had wanted to act in a thoroughly disruptive fashion in respect of the 35-hour week it could have organised massive strikes, it could have organised massive protests, it could have organised strikes in key industries to bring the economy to standstill until such time as the 35-hour week was achieved. It even could
! have organised a national strike in order to
achieve th s highly important goal. Instead, what

In attempting to justify the Government's cam paign against the 35-hour week the Minister throws out a few slogans of conservative economic theorising as if these were incontrovertible facts. The essence of his argument is basically that the 35-hour week will necessarily increase unit labour costs and that this will result in more of the economic disasters which the Liberals have inflicted on this nation, namely, inflation, unemployment and recession. Before I say something about that argument, let me make it clear that these economic ills are likely to occur in Australia, not because of the 35-hour week but because the Government persists with its present economic policies which are not working, as the recent increase of unemployment to record post-war levels clearly indicates. There is nothing more hypocritical than this Government and its Minis ters pretending to be concerned that the 35-hour week will create unemployment when they have created the greatest level of unemployment since the Great Depression and show no willingness to act to create jobs.
Leaving aside their false moral concern, what

has the ullion movement done? It has not acted in of the argument itself? The Minister in his state

that fashion because it does not want to disrupt ment presented only one point of any substance to

the national economy. What does it get from this back up his claims ofdoom and disaster. He said:

982 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Industrial Relations

The flaw in the unions' argument is that on the one hand they say that productivity growth will cover the increased costs. On the other hand they tell us that shorter working hours are necessary to provide additional employment opportunity.
That is a misrepresentation of the unions' position. The unions have never claimed that all the costs would be taken up by increased productivity in the future. The Minister left out completely any reference to history, namely, the enormous increases in productivity in the 33 years since the 4D-hour week was introduced. Since 1973 alone productivity in Australia has risen by 1 0 per cent, with no wage adjustments specifically covering that increase. Of course, the Minister did not refer to past increases in productivity because he avoided most of the important economic variables in his discussion. In particular, he avoided any reference to the tremendous growth in profits since this Government has been in power. He forgot to mention facts such as the following, which were listed in the Australian Financial Review of 1 1 March 1 980: During 1 979, four in every five companies increased their profits; two in every five increased them by 1 0 per cent to 50 per cent; a further two in every five increased them by over 50 per cent, or over five times the inflation rate of 10 per cent a year. During 1980, by all indications, the profit position of most corporations was further strengthened. This exposes the claims of the Government when it talks of the economy not being able to afford the 35-hour week . That is economic gobbledegook. The question that should be asked is this: Can the corporations, especially the huge multinationals which are filling the coffers of the Liberal Party, afford it? Given their record profit levels, there is no question that big business can afford to pay and distribute some of this wealth to the workers who have generated it. The Government is acting here as nothing more than the mouthpiece of greedy - big businessmen who refuse to share the benefits of generated wealth with the majority of the Australian people who are workers.
There is no contradiction in the unions' argument. The 35-hour week has been earned because of productivity increases, and it will result in the creation of more jobs in the future. Rather than opposing this development we should be welcom ing it. The empirical evidence is that it will create work for hundreds of thousands of Australians and will dramatically increase the quality oflife of the majority of our people. I should point out that a few years ago when a majority of Belgian workers won a 36-hour week the experts found that the 1 0 per cent drop in working hours resulted in 5 per cent morejobs.

After the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission has rejected the arguments of the Government against the introduction of a 35-hour week, do we get an acceptance by the Government of the arbitrator's decision? Indeed not. Instead, the Government launches into an all out campaign to prevent similar arrangements being made in other sectors of industry and business. It proposes to misuse $3m of taxpayers' money in a propaganda campaign against the 35-hour week. [t should stand condemned for that misuse of taxpayers' money. If that is not enough, we get from the Treasurer (Mr Howard), the honourable gentle man who prides himself on the use of monetary policies to guide and direct the economic destiny of this nation, the threat of the use of monetary policies not for overall economic management but rather as a tool to bash the unions. The Government then comes in with a threat to employers who are prepared to recognise the inevitability of this development and to make an informed decision to allow it to go ahead, to blackmail them into submission by squeezing the money supply, not for any urgent or generalised monetary reasons, not for any reasons having to do with overall budgetary estimates, but with the specific aim of squeezing the money supply as a means of preventing the wider introduction of a 35-hour week. I submit that this is an extraordinary way for a government to behave. A government which prides itself on economic management is using the very tool of the money supply not in the interests of overall economic management but to attack the union movement, to attack the movement towards a 35-hour week.
All these actions are doomed to failure. They are doomed to failure because there is absolutely no fairness and no justice in these proposals op posing the 35-hour week. They are simply the ravings of a group of people who do not even understand the motives of the people of the nation whom they claim to represent. They are simply blinded by the desire to follow the wishes of their masters, and in this case, to follow the wishes of those major corporations which, although they may be making record profit levels, are too greedy to pass on any of their profits to the Australian people. Let me say in conclusion that the 35-hour week will come and it will come relatively quickly. It will help to create employment in this country. The more that honourable members opposite fight it, the more they will stand condemned in the eyes of history.
Debate ( o n motion by Mr Conno l l y ) adjourned.

Nuclear Safeguards Agreements

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 983

NUCLEAR SAFEGUARDS AGREEMENTS WITH FRANCE, CANADA AND SWEDEN

Ministerial Statement

Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-I present the Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of Sweden on Conditions and Con trols for Nuclear Transfers for Peaceful Purposes between Australia and Sweden, signed in Canberra on 1 8 March 1981 ; the Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of Canada concerning co-operation in the . Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, signed in Ottawa on 9 March 1981 ; and the Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of the French Republic concerning NuclearTransfers between Australia and France, signed in Paris on 7 January 198 1 . I seek leave to make a statement on these agreements.

Leave granted.

Mr STREET-In presenting these agreements,

I am fulfilling a commitment by the Government

to ensure that the texts of all Australia's nuclear

safeguards agreements will be presented in the

Parliament as soon as practicable after signature

with a full explanation of their provisions. I wish

to assure the House that I intend to maintain this

practice with the future nuclear safeguards agree

ments which we negotiate. All our nuclear safe

guards agreements are in the public domain and

this will be the case with all future agreements. I

 wish to remind the House that our non

proliferation policy guards policy. The

GisonvoertnsmimepnltyI.Sa

cnounctmeaumsgafteo

work actively to enhance the international non

proliferation regime through action in multilat

eral bodies, as well as through bilateral nuclear

safeguards negotiations. We are continuing our

active role in the Committee on Disarmament,

the main international negotiating forum on dis

armament questions, and we are maintaining our

long-established participation in the International

Atomic Energy Agency-the IAEA. We are con

tinually working to encourage such studies as

those on plutonium storage, spent fuel manage

ment and assurance of supply, and to upgrade in

ternational safeguards measures, particularly in

respect of proliferation sensitive techn()logies.

The agreements I have presented are further important steps in the establishment of a network of bilateral nuclear safeguards agreements between Australia and our potential uranium cus tomers, in accordance with Australia's nuclear safeguards policy announced to Parliament by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on 24 May 1 977. The Government is now well on the way to

completing this network. The purpose of te agreements is to ensure that when Austraha supplies uranium for peaceful purposes it will not be diverted to non-peaceful or explosive uses. To this end and in accordance with our policy, Australia's bilateral nuclear safeguards agreements incorporate stringent safeguards and con trols on the use of the uranium we may supply to other countries for peaceful purposes. These safe guards and controls remain in place over all Australian origin nuclear material so long as the material remains relevant from the point of view of safeguards as determined by the IAEA; that is, until there is no further possibility of its being use ful for the purposes of nuclear weapons manufac ture. These agreements, as with the other bilateral nuclear safeguards agreements concluded by Australia since the introduction of our compre hensive nuclear safeguards policy, incorporate all the requirements of that policy. They provide for the prohibition of explosive or military use, the application of IAEA safeguards, fallback safe eganuprapirlcydh,smpinreintohtrecaeonvndesnetntratthnrtsgftehIrtAss EotvoAertshariefrepdgruocacoreudssnst.tncretea, ssh,Igathos well as internationally recognised levels of physi cal protection. The agreements provide for ad ministrative arrangements to ensure implemen tation of their provisions and the tracking of Australian supplied material throughout the fuel cycles of customer countries. These C:etailed pro cedures enable us to verify that there is no diver sion of Australian supplied material to non peaceful purposes.
Mr Deputy Speaker, I would now like to comment on some particular features of each of the agreements I have tabled. The agreements concluded with France and Sweden include settlements on reprocessing in accordance with the Government's policy of maintaining Australia's prior consent rights over reprocessing of Australian origin nuclear material, while establishing conditions under which this consent may be exercised in our bilateral agreements. I an nounced the Government's policy on these con ditions in Parliament on 27 November 1 980. The Agreement with Canada keeps open the possi bility of agreeing on conditions for reprocessing if the need should arise in the future. Neither Canada nor Australia at present envisages reprocessing nuclear material supplied by the other. In my policy statement on conditions for consent to reprocessing, I made clear that there was no relaxation of any of the existing requirements of our comprehensive nuclear safeguards policy. The elaboration of our approach to reprocessing completes the policy as

984 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Nuclear Safeguards Agreements

foreshadowed when the Prime Minister an cent and fuel fabrication of Australian origin nu

nounced Australia's nuclear safeguards policy in clear material in countries with which we do not

May 1 977 and in August 1 977 when he an have a nuclear safeguards agreement. The letter

nounced the decision to proceed with the further notes that in circumstances where Sweden is

development and export of uranium t.nder strin obliged to use the facilities of such countries for

gent safeguards. As he said on 27 November, the conversion, enrichment or fuel fabrication of Aus

Government has developed an approach to tralian origin nuclear material it may do so on an

reprocessing which fully satisfies the Govern 'all-in, all-out' basis. This principle is already

ment's non-proliferation concerns; encompasses being applied pursuant to the Australia-Finland

all existing nuclear safeguards requirements; ac agreement. Reprocessing by Sweden of Australian

commodates the need of customer countries for origin spent fuel will take place in countries with

the predictable application of non-proliferation which Australia has concluded bilateral nuclear

conditions; and addresses in detail the specific nu safeguards agreements. The agreement with

clear fuel cycle programs in which Australian ori France is our third covering nuclear safeguards

gin nuclear material might be reprocessed and the and co-operation with a nuclear weapons state.

separated plutonium used. This approach is being We have previously concluded such agreements

implemented through our nuclear safeguards with the United Kingdom and the United States.

agreements.

Under the Government's nuclear safeguards

In accordance with the reprocessing policy and before establishing the conditions for the exercise of consent, the Government carried out a detailed and thorough evaluation of the need for reprocessing within the civil nuclear programs of France and Sweden. The Government secured the fullest co-operation from the two governments and was able to satisfy itself that reprocess ing was fully justified in their programs, in ad dition to ensuring, as with all Australian

policy, nuclear weapons states which wish to im port Australian uranium must provide assurances that nuclear material supplied for peaceful pur poses is not diverted to military or explosive pur poses and must accept that the uranium we supply be covered by IAEA safeguards. The French Government has made these commit ments in the agreement and has met all the other requirements of our nuclear safeguards policy. An exchange of letters accompanying the agreement

safeguards agreements, that the applicable non with France deals with the application of two pro proliferation controls on their nuclear industries visions in the agreement. These relate to the avail

were in accordance with international standards ability to Australia of reports by the IAEA of its and met our stringent requirements. It was only verification activities in France and to the ques

on these bases that the Government was prepared tion of re-transfers to third countries. The agree

to consent to the reprocessing of Australian origin ment and the letter protect Australia's consent

nuclear material within the French and Swedish rights over retransfers and make clear that no

civil nuclear programs.

Australian supplied uranium can bt:- transferred to

The agreement with Sweden marks the conclusion of an agreement with a country which, like Australia, has strong non-proliferation cre dentials. Both Governments see their new agreement as helping to strengthen the international non-proliferation regime. Sweden also has a firm commitment to nuclear power confirmed in a ref erendum last year, and to the provision of nuclear fuel cycle services to other countries. In January 1981 a Swedish electricity utility, OKG, signed two supply contracts with Energy Resources of Australia-ERA. These contracts involve supply to the OKG of 3, 1 50 short tonnes of uranium over the period 1 982-96. Of this quantity 1 ,455 short tonnes is on an equity-related basis whereby OKG will acquire a one per cent equity in ERA. These contracts are presently valued at some $A200m.

any third country which Australia itself would not be prepared to supply directly.
France has a large and rapidly expanding civil nuclear program which reflects France's commit ment to the production of nuclear energy and to the provision of fuel cycle services to other countries. I wish to stress that the agreement with France will cover the transfer in either direction of material exclusively for peaceful purposes. Any Australian uranium going to France will be used only in France's civil nuclear industry. France is, of course, a member of the European community and this agreement marks a positive development in Australia's relationships with France. It binds both countries to strong non-proliferation con ditions and opens the way to new trade in energy resources.

Nuclear material supplied under these contracts It remains an important objective of Australian

will of course be subject to this agreement. The policy to conclude an early agreement with

side letter to the Swedish agreement concerns the .E uropean Commission on behalf of

inter alia the conversion, enrichment below 20 per E U RATOM-the European Atomic Energy

Nuclear Safeguards Agreements

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 985

Community. When completed, the agreement with EURATOM will form, together with our agreements with Britain and France, a significant achievement in Australia's relationships with the European community. Negotiations with the . llropean Comrnission an; continuing and the Australia-France agreement, like our agreement with Britain, provides that the provisions of the EURATOM agreement will be complementary to, and where appropriate supersede, the pro visions of the bilateral agreements. I am also presenting for the information of the House the exchange of letters between Australia and France signed in Paris on 30 October 1 980, and a comp lementary exchange of notes between Australia and Japan on 1 2 December 1 980 covering the conversion and enrichment in France of certain uranium supplied to Japan under old contracts. These exchanges cover the conversion and enrich ment of the uranium concerned in France until such time as the France-IAEA agreement, and a comprehensive Australia-France and/or a com prehensive Australia-EURATOM agreement, are in force. The uranium concerned will be transfer red to and from France on an 'all-in, all-out' basis, until such time as it would be covered by IAEA safeguards. The exchange of notes with Japan sets out procedures for the provision to the Government by Japan of details of each shipment to France of Australian origin nuclear material under the relevant contracts, and of its retransfer from France to Japan or to another approved country.

The Australia-Canada agreement replaces the

agreement between Australia and Canada for co

operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy of

7 October 1 959. It would have been inappropriate

for Canada and Australia to maintain the 1 959

agreement, which did not fulfil the requirements

of the current nuclear safeguards policies of our

two countries. The new agreement provides for

co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear en

ergy, although most of its provisions concern nu

clear safeguards. Canada and Australia are both

uranium exporters, and the practical significance

of this agreement is that it provides controls on

Australian uranium while the material is in

Canada for conversion to uranium hexafluoride

for ultimate use in other customer countries.

Canada is a major exporter of nuclear equipment

and technology and the agreement provides a

safeguards umbrella in the event of the transfer of

such items to Australia in the future. The agree

ment with the views

Coaft -atdhaedeCmaonnasdtriaantesatnhde

closeness of Australian

Governments on non-proliferation. Both coun

tries have acquired international reputations as

strong supporters of non-proliferation. The conclusion of the agreement is proof that the two governments are willing to accept the stringent controls that they require of others.
The agreements which have been tabled bring to eight the number of nuclear safeguards agreements concluded by the Government since the an nouncement of its nuclear safeguards policy by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on 24 May 1 977. The Government is proud of its achievements in negotiating these agreements. We believe they provide a convincing demonstration of the international acceptability of Australian policy. They show that, whilst applying stringent non-proliferation safeguards to our uranium exports, we are prepared to ' make Australian uranium available to customer countries for legit imate peaceful energy purposes. Finally, the Agreements show that Australia, by facilitating the peaceful nuclear trade under stringent con ditions, is thereby enhancing international efforts aimed at preventing the .spread of nuclear weapons. I present the following papers:
Nuclear Safeguards Agreements with France, Canada and
Sweden-Ministerial Statement, 26 March 1981 . M r LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith)
-by leave--The Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) tried to suggest that the agreements presented this afternoon are part of a successfully negotiated pattern which ' he says demonstrates that the Government is proceeding in a sensible and principled direction on safeguard policies. I wish to make it very clear that there is a direction of policy which is going backward, not forward, with respect to the Government's commitment to the Australian people to provide adequate safe guards before allowing the export of Australian uranium. I also advert to the fact that there is ministerial competition and a great deal of in fighting about the responsibility for a safeguards policy. Apparently, the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) wants to take responsibility for uranium exports from the Minister for Foreign A ffa irs a n d t h e M in is t e r for N a t i o n a l Development and Energy (Senator Carrick) . That is a n appalling prospect because we have only salesmen in charge of the safeguards. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) should have acted firmly to stop this argument and to ensure that the Department of Foreign Affairs and the Department of National Development and Energy retain their essential role in the for mulation and execution of safeguards policy. Safeguards must be kept out of the hands of sales men. The so-called safeguards policy of this

986 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Nuclear Safeguards Agreements

Government has already been perverted by agree one wanted to get towards what is called weapons

ments with such unreliable governments as those grade. Why would one want to suggest that?

of South Korea and the Philippines.

France has been given this peculiar advantage in

Mr Deputy Speaker, I draw your attention to some of the agreements. For example, I note that

that she can put forward proposals that the par ties enrich uranium above 20 per cent.

we are merely receiving notice of the agreement Mr Street-But we have to consent to it.

with Japan. The note verbal apparently was executed last December. It deals with Australian uranium being forwarded to France for enrich ment, 300 short tonnes of which, honourable members will note, had to be shipped in January 1981 . It has already gone. If one analyses the legal implications of the agreement with Sweden-this situation is very much like previous ones-one sees disappear the retention of control and owner ship of the uranium throughout the whole of the fuel cycle.

Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I would think that the consent aspect would have to go before arbi tration. That is the position. That is where Australia loses its rights. This country of France, despite our protests and against the wishes of our island neighbours, has continued to despoil and pollute the Pacific with its nuclear tests. It has not signed the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nu clear Weapons. Its pipeline of uranium supplies leads straight to nuclear weapons. That is a gross irresponsibility. We are concerned with the ques

We cannot really object to reprocessing. That will be done in any event because of the scarcity of this fuel. Once it has been through the reactor in the first cyCle the waste has to be reprocessed. That is an obvious result. We will find that that will happen. In the course of the reprocessing, plutonium is created, leaving the high level waste in relation to which nobody seems to be in agreement. There is no real satisfactory technology to dispose of that high level waste. That problem is apart from the difficulty which arises in relation to

tion of our doing anything for profit. One has to look at what France is doing, particularly its proposed sales to Iraq for the purpose of getting oil. One must look also at its previous sales of re actors to Brazil and others for the purpose of be coming a very substantial supplier of uranium enriched fuel and uranium reactors. I ask honour able members to bear in mind that France has no uranium. It has build up the biggest uranium industry. On the basis of our uranium it will become the OPEC of Europe.

the plutonium cycle.

The Minister stated that these agreements, as

Let me turn to the legal ramifications of this agreement. Whether we should be entitled to withhold our consent is an argument that should go to arbitration. If it goes to arbitration we are bound by the decision of the arbitrator. No longer will we have in fee simple the title which gives us the right to say that we 9wn and control that fuel. I make that point. It is always the greatest weak

with other bilateral nuclear safeguards agreements concluded by Australia, incorporate all the requirements of the government's policy. That statement is not accurate. As far as I can see the agreement with France is wide open to higher en richment levels by France. On this basis alone, the French Agreement does not incorporate all the requirements of the Government's policy.

ness in any suggestion to the Australian people From what I can see, the transfer provisions of

that we have adequate safeguards, ownership and the Government's original policy have been kept control of the fuel. Let me make it very clear that reasonably intact. The same cannot be said in re

the only way in which an Australian uranium fuel spect of reprocessing. It could be said perhaps that

cycle will ever be satisfactory,'provided we get the the agreement keeps material of Australian origin

technology right, is if Australia owns and controls within the 'energy only' category, but this position

the fuel throughout the cycle. We would thereby is a substantial shift from the Government's orig

get it back for reprocessing. We would therefore inal objective of attempting to put a break on the

know its quantity and we would be, able to be aware of the amount of waste. That is the only way to deal with the matter.

plutonium economy by discouraging processing. It has been argued that this modification to and
derogation from the Government's original safe

Annexure D of the French agreement contains guards policy reflects - the realities of the inter

this extraordinary provision: It is agreed that the national uranium market. We are told .that major

parties to the agreement will consult within 30 potential buyers simply are not in any urgent need

days of the receipt of a request from either party of Australian uranium. This may be the case, but to consider proposals to be agreed on in writing to . it is no excuse for an unprincipled concession to

enrich the uranium to 20 per cent or more. The the private sector; which wants to push this agree

only real reason that one would talk about enrich ment through at the expense of this and future

ing uranium to. 20 per cent or more would be if geneations of Australians. The Government has

Nuclear Safeguards Agreements

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 987

resiled from its original intention to discourage reprocessing. The agreement with France consti tutes a major step backward in that it is the first time that this Government has allowed another country to reprocess Australian uranium. France may not use reprocessed Australian plutonium for the manufacture of its nuclear weapons, but the availability of Australian plutonium or uranium to France will allow the diversion of other supplies for the manufacture of weapons.
In France, one branch of the uranium pipeline supply leads direct to nuclear bomb manufacture. This decision makes Australia a contributor to the logical result of the nuclear fueJ cycle-the plu tonium economy, with all its bomb proliferation and waste disposal dangers. This morning the Minister for Defence ( Mr Killen) stated that there could be no such thing as a limited nuclear war because there are now some 1 6,000 nuclear weapons in the world, any number of which could destroy the whole of the world.
This policy will speed up the development of fast breeder technology by Britain, West Ger many, France, the United States of America and Japan. It will accelerate or facilitate the pro duction of more and more plutonium before the development of a system of watertight non proliferation agreements and adequate methods of permanent waste disposal. Professor Charles Kerr, who was a member of the Ranger inquiry, reported last December as follows:
There is no way in the world that Australia or any other country can keep an inspectorate on the soil of another country which may wish to change its use of uranium from peaceful to military purposes.
J do not think it is possible to keep an eye on where it goes. Some countries such as France do not permit any inspection of their nuclear activi ties. The French civilian and nuclear industry is linked with their military nuclear industry. As owners of a very large part of the world's uranium, we have the responsibility of seeing that it is not used for weapons. The Government is opting out of that responsibility. Mr Justice Fox, our former nuclear ambassador, stated that there is a distinct possibility in the next 10 or 20 years of nuclear weapons being used by one or more of the countries in the less stable regions in the world. He stated also that whilst bilateral safeguards have their purpose by no means do they provide in themselves a satisfactory non-proliferation regime. He went on to say that the international safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency are important but that they are not wholly satisfactory. Another expert has stated that Australian uranium sold to other countries cannot be safeguarded from military use.

I n our view the Government is concerned more about profits for the private sector than it is about its responsibility to this and future generations to have a balanced policy. The terms and prices of Australian uranium contracts are approved by the Minister for Trade and Resources. The Government is, therefore, ultimately responsible for the price at which we sell this resource. The prices for uranium have been declining. Instead of formulat ing a responsible policy; instead of negotiating proper safeguards, instead of waiting to ensure that we obtain the best possible price, this government is presently approving contracts which are following the market price down. The argument must be: Why is this so? It is because the mining companies want sales. It is not because our national interest requires unseemly haste.
At every point at which there has been a conflict between commercial considerations and the necessity for adequate safeguards, the cOm mercial considerations have prevailed. The result is that the safeguards policy originally enunciated by this Government is in a shambles. It is literally a sellout. Let me be specific. The first occasion on which commercial considerations came into conflict with the Government's so-called policies involved the unexpected delay in negotiating bi lateral agreements with our first potential cus tomers. This Government had expected to reach agreement quickly with the significant consumer countries but, by the time the Government an nounced the go ahead for the Ranger uranium mine on 9 January 1979, it had signed safeguards agreements only with Finland and the Philip pines, both of which are likely to be only very small consumers. Until then the Government's pol icy on safeguards had been clear. No contracts could be signed until bilateral safeguards agreement had been concluded. The Government's safeguards policy had required that any future sales agreements should be such that the uranium would be in a form which attracted full Inter national Atomic Energy Agency safeguards by the time it left Australian ownership. Therefore, the Government insisted that the Australian uranium would have to remain Australian-owned until it had been converted to uranium hexafluoride, at which point it would change hands because IAEA safeguards would then apply.
In the Westinghouse suit a situation was created whereby if Government maintained this requirement it would be impossible for the Australian companies involved either to sell uranium to American companies or to have their uranium converted to uranium hexafluoride in the United States. This created considerable uncertainty in

988 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Nuclear Safeguards Agreements

the minds of potential customers about the secur government in the world which has abdicated its

ity of uranium bought from these companies. The ownership requirement thus had the potential to affect significantly the demand for Australian uranium. By January 1 979 the Government was confronted with a situation in which mining was started at Ranger. The companies needed to sign contracts in order to arrange finance for the devel

responsibility and passed entirely to private corporations, that is, to giant mining companies, the question of whether we should have a uranium enrichment industry. The link between reprocess ing and enrichment is fundamental. Inadequate
control of enrichment is more dangerous for pro

opment costs. Yet bilateral safeguards nego liferation than is reprocessing. Yet it is precisely

tiations with major consumer countries were well on the control of enrichment that Australian safe

and truly bogged down. Thus, one week after the guard provisions are the most ambiguous. I

announcement of the Ranger go ahead the Government decided that conditional uranium contracts could be concluded in anticipation of safeguards agreements on the basis that no deliv eries could be made under such contracts until the safeguards agreements were actually in place.
The next case of conflict arose in June 1 979, when it became clear that one of the safeguards requirements could create serious problems for future uranium sales to the United States. This was because Conzinc Riotinto of Australia Ltd,

repeat: There is no other government in the world with a uranium enrichment industry which has
not been closely and intimately involved in the establishment and development of that industry. Why? The answer is that the whole question of uranium enrichment and safeguards is so sensitive because, apart from anything else, very large amounts of money are involved. Most importantly, only a government can discharge the grave
responsibility which this industry entails. It is an

Pancontinental Mining Ltd, Mary Kathleen abject abdication of the role of responsible

Uranium Ltd and Queensland Mines Ltd were all government to pass such questions to large mining

involved in the anti-trust action brought against companies whose primary responsibility is the

them by the Westinghouse corporation. The production of short term financial profits for their

execution of any judgment would involve seizure of any of their uranium or other assets in the

shareholders. That is the point.

United States. The Government, faced with this

conflict and its objective, announced on 1 8 July One thing this Government should be doing if it

1 979 the dropping of that particular safeguard requirement. A further case of conflict between the two objectives arose in the negotiation of the United Kingdom-Australia agreement signed in July 1 979. Australia's model safeguards agreement stipulated a condition which was unaccept

wants to get into this industry is to develop our
own technology. It should talk to people such as Professor Ringwood. If we say the fuel is safe, why do we not own and control it? Thereby we could count it and thereby get the benefit of it. To

able to the European Atomic Energy Commission leave the matter to France, which obviously is

because it provided for Australia's written con involved in active nuclear proliferation and is

sent before uranium could be retransferred from anxious to sell its nuclear reactors, is an abdi

one country to another. As a result of objections cation of responsibility for us as Australians. I

Australia altered its safeguards agreements to insist on prior consent only for retransfers outside EURATOM.

make the point that if the world has to use this fuel-a most dangerous one indeed-it is impera
tive and it is obligatory for this Government to

In a vain search for any principle in this own and control the fuel right throughout the

Government's policy, we turn to the Government's establishment of the Uranium Enrichment Group of Australia, a group comprising Western

cycle, including the proper storage of the high level waste that would result from reprocessing.

Mining Corporation Ltd, Peko-Wallsend Ltd,

CSR Ltd, and Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd. A uranium enrichment industry if established here, will play a vital role in this country's future. As with the question of safeguards agreements, other governments are considering the establishment of uranium enrichment facilities. Other governments

We cannot run away from the fact that this fuel is used for nuclear weapons and can bring about the destruction of the world. The point is well
made that the nuclear power industry inevitably , will facilitate the spread of the ability to make

already have uranium enrichment and reprocess nuclear weapons. Future generations will rightly

ing facilities, and I emphasise that they are condemn us as being criminally irresponsible if we

government owned. This Government is the only do not relate our policies to this grim reality.

Report ofCommittee on Aboriginal Affairs

26 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 989

COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO THE REPORT OF THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES STANDING COMMITTEE ON ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
Ministerial Statement Mi' VINER (Stirling-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs) --by leave-In 1 966 and 1967, the late Dr Elizabeth Eggleston undertook a pioneering study of the relationship of Aborigi nals to the legal system. Dr Eggleston came to the following conclusions concerning the interaction of Aboriginals with police and the courts: Aborigi nals are far more likely to be charged with an offience than any other section of the community; a much higher proportion of Aboriginals are proceeded against by way of arrest rather than summons; Aboriginals are less likely to be released on bail than non-Aboriginals; there is a striking difference in the conviction rates for Aboriginals and non-Aboriginals; Aboriginals are proportion ately more likely to be sentenced to imprison ment; and the prison popUlation has a significant proportion of Aboriginals even though they rep resent only one per cent of the general population. It is sobering to note that after more than a decade has passed since that study was undertaken, the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs should find that Aboriginals are still significantly over-represented in the criminal justice system, and continue to be disadvantaged at all stages of the criminal law process.
On 3 January 1 979 the then Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, Senator Chaney, referred to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs the question of Aboriginal access to legal aid. The Committee subsequently heard evidence from 1 86 witnesses in the States and mainland Territories and examined a substan tial number of written submissions. The Committee's report was tabled in this House on 27 August 1 980. I wish to pay tribute to the work of the Committee, its Chairman, Mr P hillip Ruddock, and its supporting staff in reviewing the delivery of legal aid to Aboriginals and in develop ing its recommendations for consideration by the Government. The scope of the Committee's recommendations is indicative of the effort the members devoted to their task.
The Committee found that the disadvantaged position of Aboriginals within the legal system could be attributed to two factors: Firstly, a his tory of conflict, dispossession of land, prejudice and discrimination within the community and the legal system; and, secondly, the depressed physi cal and socio-economic environment in which the

vast majority of Aboriginal people continue to live. The Government, in considering its response to the report, has been mindful of the Committee's comments concerning the influence of the wider environment in which Aboriginals live in their relationship to the legal system. The govel'll ment agrees that any attempt to reduce the inci dence of Aboriginals being charged with criminal offences must focus on the housing, health and education needs of Aboriginals as well as the pro vision of legal aid. Over the last two years, the Government has accorded even higher priority to the provision of adequate housing for Aboriginals, particularly through the earmarking of general welfare housing grants to the States and the Northern Territory. Some $20m was provided for Aboriginal housing in 1 9 79-80 through this program in addition to the $32m provided for housing programs through the Department of Ab original Affairs. A further $55m is being provided for Aboriginal housing through these programs in 1 980-8 1 . In addition the Government is commit ted to spending an additional $50m over the next five years to improve the environmental con ditions in which Aboriginals live. In conjunction with the States we will also be taking steps to im prove Aboriginals' opportunities to exercise responsibility for their own health care. All these measures are designed to reduce the general disadvantage that Aboriginals continue to suffer.
Notwithstanding these initiatives, the Government is mindful of the evidence that Aboriginals suffer particular disadvantage within the oper ation of the legal system. The Committee's con clusions concerning the availability of bail, work release programs and relations between the police and Aboriginals generally are of concern. The Government is determined to promote equality of opportunity and treatment in the legal system as well as seek to improve the overall socio economic position of Aboriginals.
Mr Deputy Speaker, time does not permit me to respond in detail to each of the Committee's recommendations. I therefore table a document which outlines the Government's response to the Committee's recommendations and seek leave to have it incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs Report, Aboriginal Legal Aid
Government response to the Committee's Recommendations Canberra, March 198 1

990 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Report ofCommittee on Aboriginal Affairs

Aboriginal Legal Services' Operations
l. Government Support and Funding
RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation 6 The Government continue to support separate Aboriginal
legal services through the provision of financial assistance in order to promote the access ofAboriginal people to legal aid.
Response The Government endorses the continued support of Abor
iginal Legal Services as specialist legal aid organisations. The Government believes that Aboriginal Legal Services can most effectively meet the legal aid needs of Aboriginals because of their acceptability and accessibility to Aboriginal people. .
Recommendation 35 Increased levels of financial assistance be made available to
the Aboriginal legal services through the Government's Aboriginal legal aid program.
Response The provision of financial assistance for Aboriginal legal aid
will be considered by the Government in light of overall budgetary priorities.
Recommendation 36 Additional funds allocated to the Aboriginal legal aid
program be directed towards meeting the legal needs and de mands ofAboriginal people in rural areas.
Response Aboriginal Legal Services will be encouraged to give pri
ority to the needs ofAboriginals in rural areas.

recovery is likely and others; and that the Aboriginal legal services be entitled, as funds permit, to pursue matters in the civil jurisdiction which could have long-term advantages for Aboriginal people generally as well as individual litigants.
Response The Government accepts Recommendation 1 1 .
Recommendation 1 2 Where the amount of civil litigation generated by or avail
able to an Aboriginal legal service warrants the employment of a solicitor with expertise in civil law, Commonwealth funds be made available initiallY for this purpose.
Response The Government acknowledges that Aboriginal Legal Ser
vices use Commonwealth funds to provide legal aid to Abor iginals in civil matters and to employ staff to meet the needs of their clients. The provision of additional funds to employ sol icitors with expertise in civil matters will be considered in light of the overall priorities for Aboriginal assistance programs.
Recommendation 1 3 Costs recovered from successful litigation not be subtracted
from Aboriginal legal services' future funds but be reallocated within the Aboriginal legal services enabling them to increase their effectiveness in meeting both the criminal and civil needs of their clients.
Response The costs recovered from successful litigation are not offset
against the funds provided by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs, but are incorporated in a total budget for the Services' operations during a financial year.

2. Legal Fees
Recommendation 31 The Government seek advice on the legality of Aboriginal
legal services in all States and the Territories charging fees.
Response The Government accepts Recommendation 3 1 .
Recommendation 32 The Department of Aboriginal Affairs seek the co
operation of the Aboriginal legal services in developing a flexi ble andinformalmeans test for Aboriginal legal services.
Response The Department of Aboriginal Affairs will consult the Ab
original Legal Services in developing a simple means test which will not impose significant administrative burdens, or cause undue hardship to their clients.
Recommendation 33 Aboriginal legal services apply properly means-tested
charges for legal services provided to clients.
Response Aboriginal Legal Services be actively encouraged to charge
means-tested fees. The provision of Commonwealth assistance will reflect the Services willingness to utilise all the resources available to them.
Recommendation 34 Revenue from the collection of charges be used to sup
plement government grants-in-aid and not be deducted from future levels of funding.
Response Revenue from the collection of charges will be utilised to
extend the delivery oflegal aid to Aboriginals.
3. Civil Litigation
Recommendation 1 1 As and when priority needs in the criminal jurisdiction are
met, Aboriginal legal services be permitted to provide advice and assistance to Aboriginal people in matters involving the civil jurisdiction both in relation to those cases in which cost

4. Reviews and Evaluation
Recommendation 21 If and when the need arises for the management and
efficiency of an Aboriginal legal service to be reviewed other than as part of regular monitoring procedures, the review be conducted by an independent appointee acceptable to both the Aboriginal legal service and the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs or, in the event of there being a failure to agree, by a person chosen conjointly by the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs or his nominee, the Aboriginal legal service concerned and the President of the relevant Law Society or Law Institute in the State or Territory of the Aboriginal legal service to be investigated (in the case of the Pitjantjatjara Legal Service, the third party to be the President of the South Australian Law Society) .
Response The Government will seek the views of the Aboriginal
Legal Services and the State Territory Law Societies and Institutes concerning t h e i m plementation of this Recommendation. The Government notes that the Committee recognises the Department of Aboriginal Affairs has responsibility to maintain a monitoring role in relation to Ab original Legal Services so as to ensure accountability for public funds and to develop a comprehensive framework to assess the effectiveness of the Legal Services.
Recommendation 29 The Department of Aboriginal Affairs seek the co
operation of the Aboriginal legal services to design and implement an evaluation program to gauge the accessibility and acceptability of the legal services to the Aboriginal client population, the present and future needs and demands of Ab original people in criminal and civil law matters and related non-legal matters, and the effects of legal service activities on Aboriginal community development.
Response The Department of Aboriginal Affairs in conjunction with
appropriate Commonwealth authorities will initiate discussions with the Aboriginal Legal Service to seek their cooperation in the development ofevaluation procedures.

Report ofCommittee on Aboriginal Affairs

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 9 9 1

Recommendation 30 The advice and assistance of the Commonwealth Legal Aid
Commission be sought through the Attorney-General in the design and implementation of an appropriate evaluation framework.
Response The Government will ensure that advice and assistance is
available to the Legal Services to assist them in the develop ment ofself-evaluation procedures.
S. Pitjantjatjara Council
Recommendation 20 The Department of Aboriginal Affairs consult the Pitjant
jatjara Council and Pitjantjatjara people to determine the most appropriate way of organising the separate delivery of legal aid to Aboriginal people in the Pitjantjatjara traditional homeland communities and that it provide necessary assistance to the Pitjantjatjara people for the establishment of a legal service which will provide a full range of legal services to them.
Response The Government accepts the need to consult the Pitjantjat
jara Council concerning the demand for legal aid in the tra ditional homelands area and the most appropriate means of providing the assistance. The establishment of an independent legal service will be considered following these consultations and having regard to competing priorities and the availability of funds.
TRAINING AND STAFF DEVELOPMENT
1.AboriginalLegal Services
Recommendation 27 Additional funds be made available to the Aboriginal legal
services to enable Aboriginal field officers to participate in training programs and courses and to provide for the employ ment of relief staff to carry out their duties when necessary so that the delivery of legal services is not disrupted. Response
The Government endorses the development of formal training courses for Aboriginal field officers that are designed not to disrupt the delivery of legal aid to Aboriginals.
Recommendation 28 The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs ascertain the present
and future requirements of the Aboriginal legal services for field officer training and promote the design and implemen tation by appropriate legal and educational institutions of suitable formal diploma or certificate courses and training programs for Aboriginal field officers. Response
The Department of Aboriginal Affairs in conjunction with the Department of Education and Employment and Youth Affairs will initiate discussions with the Aboriginal Legal Ser vices and appropriate State authorities, to develop diploma and certificate courses for the field officers of Aboriginal Legal Services and persons seeking employment in such positions. Wherever possible these courses will be compatible with exist ing law courses so that field officers can readily advance to higher legal qualifications.
2. Aboriginal Legal Practitioners
Recommendation 24 The Government adopt a firm policy of promoting the pro
vision of special educational assistance to Aboriginal people to enable them to undertake university law courses and of pro moting the provision of special entrance conditions for Aboriginal students by university law faculties.
Response The Government has a long standing policy of providing
special educational assistance to Aboriginal people to assist

them to undertake post-school studies. The Aboriginal St4dy Grants Scheme assisted 584 Aboriginals enrolled in tertiary institutions other than technical colleges in 1979. 12 Aborigi nals were being assisted with studies in university faculties of law that would lead to formal legal qualifications.
Recommendation 25 The Government direct the Tertiary Education Com
mission to implement this policy and make known to univer sity law faculties the special needs of Aboriginal students including their need for extra tuition and support for the duration of their courses.
Response The Department of Education will seek to develop methods
of sensitizing tertiary institutions to the need to promote the enrolment of Aboriginals in their law schools in conjunction with other agencies in the Education portfolio and the De partment ofAboriginal Affairs.

Recommendation 26 The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, as a matter of priority,
develop an appropriate strategy for ensuring that Aboriginals receive maximum assistance and support to qualify as legal practitioners so that Aboriginal legal services can, as soon as possible, operate independently of non-Aboriginal pro fessional legal staff and Aboriginals can assume full responsibility for the delivery of legal aid to their people.
Response The Aboriginal Study Grants Scheme assists Aboriginals to
un<!ertake post-school studies through the payment of course fees and the provision of living allowances, extra tuition and counselling services. These benefits are freely available to Ab originals wishing to undertake legal studies. The employ ment of Aboriginal law gra<!uates is a matter for the Aborigi nal Legal Services to determine in accordance with the self management policy.

3. Management Training

Recommendation 22

In consultation with the National Aboriginal Employment

Development Committee, the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs:

assess the present and future needs of Aboriginal com

munity controlled organisations including the Aboriginal

legal and

services

for

management

training

for

Aboriginal

st. aff;

review available management and administration train

ing programs offered by tertiary institutions and other

organisations to assess their suitability for Aboriginal

people and, where appropriate, investigate the need to

negotiate with institutions concerning the introduction of

special entrance conditions for Aboriginals and the pro

vision of appropriate support for Aboriginal participants in

such programs.

Response The Committee's Recommendations concerning the devel
opment of opportunities for management and administrative training were referred to the Australian Aboriginal Affairs Council working party on training which was seen as a more appropriate body that NAEDC. The working party has been requested to consider the Committee's comments in preparing its report for the Council concerning significant gaps in the training of Aboriginals. Following the receipt of the working party's report the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs will review the management and administration training programs offered by tertiary institutions, to assess their suitability for Aboriginal people. Particular attention will be paid to the needs of the staff of Aboriginal Legal Services for manage ment training.

Recommendation 1 6 The Government encourage and provide financial support
to Aboriginal legal services which take initiatives to develop

992 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Report a/Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

community legal education materials and promote community legal education programs.
Response The Government will give consideration to the provision of
funds for community legal education having regard to overall budgetary priorities.
2. State/Territory Legal Aid Commissions
Recommendation 1 7 The Aboriginal legal serices enter into special co-operative
arrangements with State and Territory legal aid commissions and other legal aid agencies SO that legal aid resources can be rationalised, particularly in rural areas and, if necessary, seek the assistance of the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and the Attorney-General in attaining these objectives.
Response The Government will promote the development of co
operative arrangements between Aboriginal Legal Services and State and Territory Legal A id Commissions in the deliv ery of' legal aid.
Recommendation 1 8 When assistance is sought by the Aboriginal legal services,
the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and the Attorney-General intervene on behalf of the Aboriginal legal services and provide such assistance as is necessaryto ensure that co-operative arrangements between the Aboriginal legal services and legal aid commissions and others are established and maintained.
Response The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and the Attorney
General will pursue the establishment of co-operative ar rangements in consultation with the National Aboriginal Con ference, the Aboriginal Services and State and Territory Legal Aid Commissions.
Recommendation 1 9 The Aboriginal legal services make more effective use of
alternative legal aid services by encouraging Aboriginal people to use such services, particularly in metropolitan areas where alternative services are most readily available, and that the Aboriginal legal services direct resources towards meeting currently unmet legal needs of Aboriginal people in rural areas where alternatiVe sources oflegal aid are not available.
Response Aboriginal Legal Services will be encouraged to commit
more of the resources to the needs of Aboriginals in rural and remote areas where the co-operation of State or Territory authorities can be secured concerning the delivery of legal aid to Aboriginals in urban areas.
Recommendation 23 The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs consult with the Abor
iginal Training and Cultural Foundation and the Institute of Aboriginal Development on the development and promotion of special programs to provide suitable management training for Aboriginal legal service management staff and other Aboriginal people.
Response The Government accepts Recommendation 23.
CO-ORDINATION OF LEGAL AID AGENCIES
1. Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission
Recommendation 37 Aboriginal legal services seek the co-operation and assist
ance of the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission in such matters as the development of statistical collections, the evaluation of legal aid programs, the collection and dissemi nation of information, and the development of community legal education programs, and the conduct of research.

Response The Government will promote the development of a closer
working relationship between Aboriginal Legal Services and Commonwealth and State Legal Aid authorities. While the Government endorses the support of separate Aboriginal Legal Services, it is important that co-operative arrangements are developed in the areas of community legal education, stat istical collections, research and evaluation.
Recommendation 38 The Commonwealth Attorney-General direct the Com
monwealth Legal Aid Commission to consult and negotiate with Aboriginal legal services in response to initiatives from Aboriginal legal services which express an interest in entering into co-operative arrangements with the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission and participating in, contributing to and henefiting from activities arising from the Commission's functions.
Response The appropriate Commonwealth legal aid authorities will
consult and negotiate with the Aboriginal Legal Services in re sponse to requests for such assistance.
CRIME JUSTICE AND LEGAL AID STATISTICS
1. Commonwealth/State Collections
Recommendation I The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and the Treasurer, as
the Minister responsible for the Australian Bureau of Stat istics, accord priority to developing a co-ordinated approach to securing the identification of Aboriginals in State and Commonwealth Government statistical collections and, particularly, in crime and justice statistics.
Response The Government supports the development of a national
statistical collection which identifies the interaction of Abor iginals with the legal system. The Treasurer will request the Australian Bureau of Statistics to identify Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders in the collections comprising crime and justice statistics to the extent that the methodologies of the particular collections permit such identification.
Recommendation 2 The identification ofAboriginality in the collection ofcrime
and justice statistics be based on the definition of an Aborigi nal person of Aboriginal descent who identifies as an Aborigi nal and is accepted as such by the community with which he is associated.
Response The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and the Attorney
General will seek the co-operation of State Attorneys General and Ministers responsible for Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders in crime and justice statistics on the basis of self identification and where practicable, community acceptance.
2. Aboriginal legal services
Recommendation 3 The Department of Aboriginal Affairs' chief statistical
officer confer with the Aboriginal legal services to ascertain their information requirements for the development of a com prehensive national statistical system.
Response The Chief Statistical Officer located in the Department of
Aboriginal Affairs will confer with the Aboriginal Legal Ser vices to develop a uniform statistical system which records the Services delivery of legal aid to Aboriginals.
Recommendation 4 The chief statistical officer seek the co-operation of the
Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission in the design of an ap propriate national statistical system and the agreement of the

Report a/Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 993

Aboriginal legal services that the proposed system meets their collective and individual statistical requirements.
Response The Chief Statistical officer will consult the appropriate
Commonwealth authorities and the Aboriginal Legal Services concerning the development of a national statistical system.
Recommendation 5 Following the introduction of a national statistical system
by the Aboriginal legal services, the chief statistical officer provide continuing advice and assistance in the maintenance and, where necessary, the review and adjustment of the stat istical system.
Response The Government accepts Recommendation 5.
ABORIGINALS AND THE LEGAL SYSTEM
1. Aboriginal-Police Relations
Recommendation 9 As a matter of urgency the Government seek the co
operation of the State and Territory Governments to establish Aboriginal-police liaison systems, recruit Aboriginal police and police aides, institute training schemes to familiarise police with the special problems of Aboriginals, and review procedures for investigating complaints against police where these measures have not been implemented.
Response The Commonwealth has been seeking the co-operation of
State-and Territory Go"ernments in introducing programs to improve relations between Aboriginals and police. The West ern Australian, South Australian and Northern Territory Governments have taken positive steps to recruit Aboriginal police aides and make police officers aware of Aboriginal problems. Formal Aboriginal-police liaison committees have been established in South Australia and Western Australia. The Commonwealth has also introduced legislation which will improve procedures for investigating complaints against officers of the Australian Federal Police Force.
Recommendation 1 0 The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs:
ascertain and keep under review developments which have occurred in the area of Aboriginal-police relations in the States and the Territories;
seek the advice of the Aboriginal legal services on this matter;
report regularly to the Government on the effectiveness of special measures or procedures which have been adopted by the States and Territories to overcome problems which Aboriginals encounter in their dealings with law enforce ment agencies; and
in the event of unsatisfactory progress being made by the States in the area of Aboriginal-police relations, rec ommend to the Commonwealth Government further steps that might be taken to improve Aboriginal-police relations through Commonwealth legislative provision.
Response The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs will review develop
ments in Aboriginal-police relations, prior to initiating further discussions with the responsible State and Territory Ministers.
The Minister will consult the Aboriginal Legal Services in conducting this Review.
A statement to Parliament will be considered following these discussions.
The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs will review progress in this area and consider the need for legislative provision following discussions with the Aboriginal Legal Services and State and Territory Ministers.

2. Notification Procedures Recommendation 8
The Government urge those States which have not implemented notification systems to introduce police pro cedures which require the presence of a 'prisoner's friend' or Aboriginal legal service representative following the arrest of Aboriginals by police for all offences except drunkenness and during interrogation and any other investigative procedures. Response
Government policy on notification procedures is being reviewed as part of the Government's c.onsideration of the Criminal Investigation Bill 1 977. The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has written to the Minister for Administrative Services concerning the notification procedures used by the Australian Federal Police Force with a view to early introduction of revised notification procedures in the Australian Federal Police Standing Orders which reflect the Committee's Recommendations.
3. Children's Courts/Panels Recommendation 7
The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs seek the co-operation of State and Territory Ministers responsible for Aboriginal affairs and the Attorneys-General to provide for the inclusion of an Aboriginal representative in the composition ofjuvenile aid panels in all cases involving Aboriginaljuveniles. Response
The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs will consider holding discussions with State and Territory Ministers concerning Ab original representation on juvenile aid panels and the prep aration of reports for juvenile courts on Aboriginal children, following receipt of the Law Reform Commission's report on child welfare in the Australian Capital Territory.
ABORIGINAL WELFARE
1. Aboriginal Legal Services Recommendation 1 4
Aboriginal legal services provide advice and assistance in welfare matters where these arise from related legal problems, and particularly in areas where welfare services are not readily available to Aboriginal communities. Responses
Aboriginal Legal Services have a role in assisting Aborigi nals with welfare matters where other private, State or Fed eral welfare services are unavailable. In other cases the interests of their clients would be better served by the Services referring them to the appropriate public or private welfare agency for assistance.
The Department of Aboriginal Affairs will initiate discussions with the Aboriginal Legal Services concerning the promotion of closer liaison and co-operation between the Ser vices and Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal welfare agencies. These discussions will also examine if training courses for Ab original Legal Service field officers can be arranged which in clude information on facilities and services offered by public and private welfare agencies.
2. Welfare Services Recommendation 15
As a matter of urgency, the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and the Minister for Social Security investigate the delivery of welfare services to Aboriginals, particularly in rural areas, and that as part of the investigation the Minister:
identify and measure the welfare needs and demands of Aboriginal people;
assess the extent to which these needs and demands are being met by State welfare departments, Aboriginal community welfare agencies, and other organisations;

994 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 198 1

Report ofCommittee on Aboriginal Affairs

evaluate the effectiveness of existing welfare programs in terms of their accessibility and acceptability to Aboriginal people;
assess the most appropriate means of meeting the special welfare needs of Aborig:,als; and
seek the views of community-based Aboriginal organisations concerned with the well-being of Aboriginal people, including the Aboriginal legal services. Response The Departments of Aboriginal Affairs and Social Security will arrange a study to be undertaken to review Aboriginal access to Commonwealth welfare services and benefits and assess the effectiveness of organisations funded by the Commonwealth to assist Aboriginals to utilize welfare services. Their report is to be available for the Ministers as soon as practicable. The Government will also refer the question of Aboriginal access to welfare services provided by the States, to the Coun cil of Social Welfare Ministers.
GOVERNMENT POLICY AND ADMINISTRATioN
1. Reporting by Legal Services
Recommendation 39 Aboriginal legal services be required to submit annual re
ports on their operations and activities to the Minister for Ab original Affairs in which proposals for future development and problems relating to the delivery of legal aid and other matters can be drawn to the Minister's attention.
Recommendation 40 The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs respond to proposals
and grievances raised by the Aboriginal legal services in their annual reports and provide the necessary advice and assistance to the Aboriginal legal services which will enable them to attain their objectives. Response
Aboriginal Legal Services will be required to report to the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs annually on the development and implementation of their policy objectives for the delivery of legal aid and the problems encountered in achieving these objectives. The Services will also continue to be required to submit quarterly financial and annual audited financial state ments. Where feasible and appropriate the Minister will respond to proposals and comments contained in these reports.
2. Employment ofAboriginal and Specialist Staff
Recommendation 41 The Department of Aboriginal Affairs employ a full.time
senior lawyer who is experienced in legal aid matters and fam iliar with the special legal needs and problems of Aboriginals to advise both the Aboriginal legal services and the Government on the operation of the Aboriginal legal aid program. Response
The Department in common with Commonwealth Government practice, seeks advice on matters of law and the administration of legal aid programs from appropriate Commonwealth authorities. Recommendation 42
The Government review the promotion and career struc tures for Aboriginal people within the Department of Aboriginal Affairs and Aboriginal organisations and that the De partment of Aboriginal Affairs, in consultation with the Public Service Board, develop a program for the interchange of Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal staff between the Department ofAboriginal Affairs and Aboriginal organisations. Response
The figures used by the Committee failed to take account of the transfer of more than 420 Aboriginal staff from the De partment of Aboriginal Affairs to community employment in

the Northern Territory and the National Aboriginal Con ference. The number of Aboriginals employed in the Department has increased from 1 09 as at 30 June 1 976 to 1 90 as at 30 June 1980.
Consistent with the Government's National Employment Strategy for Aboriginals the Public Service Board is taking action to increase the employment opportunities for Aborigi nals in the Australian Public Service. Action taken includes provision of vocational training opportunities for unemployed Aboriginals, identification of positions requiring the ability to communicate with Aboriginals, special recruitment measures such as the recently introduced Clerks (Aboriginal Services) Program, and personnel development opportunities.
The Government accepts that the interchange of staff between Aboriginal organisations and the Public Service depart ments would improve communications and understanding between the organisations, and improve the participant's management skills. The Public Service Board presently ad ministers an Interchange Program between the private and public sectors. The Department of Aboriginal Affairs will write to Aboriginal organisations to draw their attention to the existence of the program and its availability for develop mental purposes to their senior staff.
3. Role of the Department ofAboriginal Affairs
Recommendation 43 The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs seek an inquiry into the
present structure, role, composition and future of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs and its interpretation and appli cation of the Government's policy of self-determination.
Recommendation 44 The inquiry into the Department of Aboriginal Affairs be
conducted by a small group of Aboriginal people and experts drawn from outside the Commonwealth and State Public Ser vice structures who are familiar with Aboriginal Affairs and experienced in the organisation and delivery of programs designed to assist disadvantaged people.
Response The delivery of services financed by the Department of Ab
original Affairs was reviewed by Sir David Hay in 1 976 and the findings of this review were subsequently implemented by him as Permanent Head of the Department. A further review or inquiry at this time is unnecessary.
Mr VINER-I thank the House. The Committee concluded that Aboriginal legal services have had a major influence on the relationship of Aboriginals with the legal system, and that their effectiveness in meeting the legal needs and de mands of Aboriginal people is specifically attribu table to their accessibility and acceptability to Ab originals, their community based structure and the specialised nature of the legal services they provide. The Committee recommended that the Government continue to support Aboriginal legal services through the provision of financial assistance. The Government has accepted this rec ommendation and will continue to provide funds to self-managing Aboriginal legal services. Some $4.9m was provided for Aboriginal legal aid programs in 1 979-80 and a further $5.3m has been appropriated in this financial year.
Whilst the Government endorses the support of separate Aboriginal legal services, it wishes to en courage a close working relationship between

Report ofCommittee on Aboriginal Affairs

26 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 995

these services and Commonwealth and State legal aid authorities. Discussions will be initiated by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs between the services and appropriate Commonwealth authorities concerning the development of co-operative arrangements in the areas of community legal education, statistical collections, research and evaluation.
The Attorney-General and Senator Baume will also be pursuing the development of co-operative arrangements between Aboriginal legal services and State legal aid commissions. The Western Australian Legal Aid Commission and the Aboriginal Legal Service have developed co-operative arrangements in the delivery .of legal aid. Aborigi nal legal services will be encouraged to develop co-operative arrangements in other States where the co-operation of State and Territory authorities can be secured.
The majority of the members of the Standing Committee recommended that Aboriginal legal services apply properly means tested charges for legal services provided to clients, subject to advice on the legality of such fees. The Attorney General's Department is examining whether Ab original legal services could charge a fee without contravening State or Territory legislation. If it is lawful for Aboriginal legal services to levy such a charge, they will be actively encouraged to collect means-tested charges on the understanding that income from such fees will be used to extend the delivery of legal aid to Aboriginals. Aboriginal legal services which collect charges will not be financially disadvantaged because of their initiative. The Department of Aboriginal Affairs will consult the services in developing a simple means test which will not impose significant ad ministrative burdens, or cause undue hardship to their clients.
Senator Chaney also asked the Committee to examine the interim charter for the operations of Aboriginal legal services which he issued to the services in August 1 97 9 . The Committee concluded that the charter added little to existing controls, particularly the Department of Aborigi nal Affairs' rules for organisations receiving Commonwealth grants and the memoranda and articles of association of the services. The Committee considered that, subject to compliance with these requirements, the question of priorities between cases should be a matter for the services to determine. The Government has noted the Committee's comments and the interim charter will be withdrawn. Aboriginal legal services will be required to report annually to the Minister..for

Aboriginal Affairs on the development and im plementation of their policy objectives for the de livery of legal aid and on the problems which may be encountered in achieving these objectives.

The Committee made a number of significant recommendations concerning the training of Ab original legal practitioners and field officers of the Aboriginal legal services. The Government has a long-standing policy of providing special edu cational assistance to Aboriginal people through the Aboriginal Study Grants Scheme, to enable them to undertake post-school studies. The scheme assists Aboriginals to undertake tertiary or other studies through the payment of course fees and other allowances. In 1979, the scheme assisted 584 Aboriginals enrolled in tertiary insti tutions other than techical colleges. Twelve Abor iginals were being assisted in university faculties of law with studies that would lead to formal legal qualifications. To ensure, as the Committee has recommended, that Aboriginals are provided with maximum assistance to qualify as legal prac titioners, the Department of Education will, in conjunction with other agencies in the education portfolio and the Department of Aboriginal Affairs, seek to develop methods of sensitising ter tiary institutions to the need to promote the enrol ment ofAboriginals in law schools.

The Government has also endorsed the devel

opment of formal training courses for Aboriginal

field officers. The Department of Aboriginal

Affairs, . in conjunction with the departments of

Education and Employment and Youth Affairs,

will initiate discussions with the Aboriginal legal

services and appropriate State authorities to de

velop pilot diploma or certificate courses for per

sons employed or seeking employment as a field

officer. Wherever possible, these courses will be

compatible with existing law courses so that the

participants can qualifications.

readil.y

advance

to

higher

legal

One of the major difficulties in studying the in teraction of Aboriginals with the legal system, is the absence of statistics on a continuing basis which identify Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders in the criminal, justice and legal aid sys tems. There are no reliable national indicators of the number of Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders appearing before the courts, offences with which they are charged and the courts' de cisions. Without this information it is impossible to assess the actual demand for legal aid, the im pact of its availability or the reasons Aboriginals comprise such a high proportion of prison popu lations. The Government has endorsed the development of a national statistical collection which will identify the interaction of Aboriginals and

996 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Report ofCommittee on Aboriginal Afafirs

Torres Strait Islanders with the legal system. The Treasurer will request the Australian Bureau of Statistics to identify Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders in the uniform crime and justice statisti cal system when it is implemented, to the extent that the methodologies of the particular collec tions permit such identification. The Attorney General and Senator Baume will also be seeking the co-operation of State Attorneys-General and Ministers responsible for Aboriginal Affairs in the identification of Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders in crime and justice statistics.

languages in courts, as a result of these observations and comments.
The Government is concerned to assist Aborigi nals to overcome the disadvantage that they face in housing, health, education, employment and their interaction with the legal system. Whilst significant advances have been made in the provision of legal aid to Aboriginals during the last ten years, there remains a lot to be done. As the late Dr Elizabeth Eggleston said in the preface to the 1 976 edition of her book Fear. Favour or Affection:

Relationships between Aboriginals and police forces in the States and Territories have been a matter of concern for some time. The Commonwealth has been seeking the co-operation of State and Territory governments in introducing programs to improve relationships between Abor iginals and police. The Western Australian, South Australian and Northern Territory governments have taken positive steps to recruit Aboriginal police aides and to make police officers aware of Aboriginal problems. Formal police Aboriginal liaison committees have been established in South Australia and Western Australia. The Commonwealth has also introduced legislation which will improve procedures for investigating complaints against officers of the Australian Federal Police. The Government is concerned that better communication and understanding between Aborigi nals and police officers, be promoted. Senator Baume will be reviewing developments in Aborginal-police relations, prior to initiating further discussions with the responsible State and Territory Ministers.
Senator Baume has also asked our colleague, the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) , to discuss with the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police the introduction of amendments to the Force's standing orders to embody the Committee's recommendations concerning notification procedures. Initiatives have already been taken by the Northern, Territory and South Australian police forces to ensure that a prisoner's friend or a representative of an Aborigi nal legal service is present when an Aboriginal is being interrogated by police.
There are a number of observations and suggestions in the Committee's report which were not highlighted as recommendations. Senator Baume will be taking initiatives concerning the impact of the possible recognition of customary laws on the operations of Aboriginal legal services, research on the implications of civil claims by Aboriginals and the development of procedures for accredita tion of translators and interpreters of Aboriginal

The availability of legal assistance specifically for Aborigi nes has already had some impact on the situation described here and will have more in the future. But there are still too many Aborigines being arrested and detained in Australian prisons.
I commend the report and the Government's re sponse to honourable members.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports)-by leave --The House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs report on Aboriginal legal aid has provided a very detailed and largely uniform approach to the whole question of legal aid to the Aboriginal community. The Committee, in preparing its report, was aware of the fact that Aborigines as a group in the Australian community over the years have been gravely disadvantaged within the framework of the legal process. That is largely because as a socio economic group, operating mostly outside the framework of a dominant and often aggressive white culture, Aborigines were often placed in situations within the legal process where they were not adequately defended or represented and were dealt with by a process which had little regard either to their peculiar problems as a people or to the difficulties which they often confronted in coming to terms with this society. Much has been done to improve that situation. As the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) pointed out, and as the report states, much more has yet to be done. One aspect of the Government's response which I commend to the House is the very detailed way in which the new Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, Senator Peter Baume, provided a particular Government re sponse to each of the Committee's recommendations. I believe that is a highly commendable precedent and one that I hope is followed by other Ministers on other reports.
Unfortunately there is one aspect of the Government's response which I find disappoint ing. It is an aspect on which 1, and some of my col leagues, have not concurred with the majority view. The opinion that prevailed amongst the ma jority of members of the Committee was that it

Report ofCommittee on Aboriginal Affairs

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 997

was in the interests of the development of Aboriginal legal services, and the Aboriginal people themselves, to have means-tested charges for legal services provided to Aboriginal clients. I com mend to the House the view of the minority of members of the Committee and seek leave to have that viewpoint incorporated in Hansard. It is to be found at pages 205 and 206 of the report.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
Dissent by Mr A. C. Holding, M.P., Mr S. J. West, M.P., and Mr J. S. Dawkins, M.P..
We are unable to agree with the recommendations in Chapter 1 6, paragraph 587 of the Committee's report that:
the Department of Aboriginal Affairs seek the cooperation of the Aboriginal legal services in developing a flexible and informal means test for Aboriginal legal services; and
Aboriginal legal services apply property means-tested charges for legal services provided to clients.
Our reasons for dissenting from these recommendations are based on the weight of evidence received by the Committee.
All witnesses who appeared before the Committee on be half of Aboriginal legal services spoke of the efforts made by the legal services to build up confidence within the Aboriginal communities they serve by creating an awareness of legal rights and fostering readiness to seek legal advice and assistance in the enforcement or protection of those rights. This process is often painfully slow, having regard to the history of the treatment of Aboriginals within the legal system of a dominant white community. However, the Aboriginal legal services' efforts in this area have undoubtedly been aided by the fact that legal advice and assistance have been provided to Aboriginal people without charge. The announcement by the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs of the requirement that, in respect of each case, the Aboriginal legal services levy a stan dard fee (initially set at $5 per case) and of guidelines for the collection of the fee, has been dealt with very charitably by the Committee. It appears to us, having regard to the evidence given to the Committee by Aboriginal legal services, that the refusal of the legal services to implement this condition in the Interim Charter was not so much dependent upon the out come of this Committee's inquiry, as it was due to problems of bookkeeping and administration which made attempts to col lect the $5 service fee an administrative nightmare which only hampered the efficiency and effectiveness of the delivery of legal aid by those services to the most socially deprived group in Australian society.
These arguments have not changed, nor to our minds has there been any other evidence which would alter our view about the difficulties involved in 'developing a flexible and in formal means test for Aboriginal legal services'. The fact is that the overwhelming body of cases dealt with by Aboriginal legal services deal with citizens living well below the poverty line. In the Report, the Committee has recommended that the Aboriginal legal services should be expanded to take in a more extensive range of services and we support that view. We see no benefit in encouraging further discussion between the Aboriginal legal services and the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs or his Department in an endeavour to create a new scale of legal charges based upon some view of what is an ap propriate 'means-tested' legal fee. While such an attempt might satisfy the reasoning upon which the ill fated $5 stan dard service fee was rationalised, it is doubtful that it would have any significant effect in increasing either the range of

legal services available to Aboriginal people or improving the quality ofservices provided hy the Aboriginal legal services.
We believe that the Aboriginal legal services are staffed by competently trained members of the legal profession who are aware of the range of professional fees currently being charged for legal services. The rare occasion when an Aborigi Ilal legal service is called upon to provide legal services to an Aboriginal whose level of income is such that he could afford to pay for such services, can be provided for by allowing the Aboriginal Jegal service either to charge a proper legal fee or to refer the case to a private practitioner. The appropriate decision can, we feel, best be left to the Aboriginal legal service itself and its professional staff. A. C. Holding, M.P. S. J.West, M.P. J. S. Dawkins, M.P. July 1 980
Mr HOLDING-I wish to enlarge very quickly and very simply on that argument. When considering the range of legal services to be provided to a group such as the Aboriginal community, one has to have regard to developments within the legal profession. One of the significant and important changes within the legal profession throughout Australia is that many lawyers, now that they have been enabled by their own pro fessional bodies to engage in advertising, have indicated, for example, that for simple matters advice is given on a one-interview basis free of charge. For various groups, such as unions, clubs and professional bodies, lawyers or legal firms will provide a range of cut price legal services when dealing with the range of problems that confront the ordinary citizen. It is in that climate, and in view of that development within the legal pro fession, that it seems that the majority of the Committee has erred, and the Government has erred, when it says that the framework for an effective legal aid system for Aboriginal com munities shall be based on a minimum fee or a means-tested charge. The problem with that, and with the basis of the Committee's findings, is that the Aboriginal community lives largely below the poverty line and although the fee charged could be as low as $2, $3 or $5, that is still a great deal of money in terms of the total income of a particular family or group.
Mr Dawkins-No one supported it, did they? Mr HOLDING-As my colleague the honour able member for Fremantle reminds me, no group of lawyers providing legal services to the Aborigi nal community within the framework of existing servives was prepared to support that concept. The lawyers pointed out that, as a simple matter of administration, the collection of $2, $ 3 , $4 or $ 5 would immediately create within their limited resources a need to maintain a set of bookkeeping devices, a method of receipts, which would com plicate their prime objective as legal aid lawyers

998 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Report 0/Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

operating within the Aboriginal community. It strengthened in the years to come. r commend the

would complicate their legitimate and proper aim, report to the House.

which is to deliver legal assistance as quickly and as efficiently as possible. It was argued that, by virtue of cultural background, only a very small

PUBLIC WORKS COMMITTEE AMENDMENT BILL 1981

number of Aborigines whose income is such that Bill returned from the Senate without

they could afford to pay for those services prefer amendment.

to deal with Aboriginal legal services. That occurs now, and where it does occur Aboriginal legal aid services charge such Aborigines. The Government

EMPLOYMENT: RESOURCE-BASED INDUSTRY EXPANSION

proposal will encumber existing Aboriginal legal

Discussion of Matter of Public Importance

services and say that by virtue of a view which we Mr D EP U T Y S P E A K E R ( H o n . I a n

as a Parliament hold they have to work out an ap propriate means-tested scale of fees and apply that in a situation where in almost every instance the legal aid officers working in the service are grossly overworked and very significantly underpaid.

Robinson)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The Government's failure, as disclosed by leaked docu

I believe, and the minority view was, that given the nature of Aboriginal legal services, the officers who worked and were employed in those services were professional men and women who under stood the ethics of their profession and who were

ments, to initiate policies which will maximise job creation and overcome social and economic difficulties resulting from resource-based industry expansion.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.

more than capable of making the same kinds of More than the number o/members required by

decisions as those made by many solicitors the Standing Orders having risen in their

throughout Australia every day when people ar places-

rive in their offices wanting fairly simple and di rect legal advice. The question is whether it is

Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (4.7)- Jobs for all who want to work is the great objective of the

worthwhile giving them that advice and letting them go on their way, or charging them. Those involved in the day to day administration of the legal process, and operating for the Aboriginal community within the framework of the legal process-the legal aid officers-gave evidence that they were committed to the view that they did not need to have their services encumbered by a minimum means-tested charge. I believe that is a correct view, and I believe a great deal of time and energy will be wasted if the Government proposes to spend its time involving the Aboriginal legal services in trying to work out what is an appropri ate means-tested legal fee for a group which it is recognised by members on all sides of the House is one of the most deprived in the Australian community. In that situation I believe the Government and the Minister should look again at the recommendations.

Australian Labor Party. In contra-distinction, under a national government of our conservative political opponents, we have headlines facing us-for instance, those in this morning's Press such as 'February jobless highest since War', That is a disgraceful situation. With the correct policies we in Australia have an opportunity to create jobs at a rate much faster than that at which they are now being created. For instance, the expansion in the resource-based industries-I refer to coal, natural gas, aluminium and others-gives us that opportunity because of a change in the energy equation. But it is an expansion and not a boom. All the signs show that our national Government is not applying the correct policies to that expansion.
The latest evidence of this is in leaked policy documents prepared by the Department of Indus try and Commerce and the Department of Trade

As a member of the Committee I am heartened, and Resources. Those documents betray the econ

as I am certain are all members of the Committee, omic and social difficulties which will be encoun

at receiving from the Minister a very detailed tered during the next few years. They betray also response to each of the recommendations. The the - lack of proper policy responses to those

overwhelming majority of the recommendations difficulties. In summary they show that the poten

have been supported by the Government. One hopes that the role of the legal aid service in

.

tial benefits of sion will, unless

the 1 980s there is a

resource-based expanchange of direction, be

enhancing the standard and quality of justice and dissipated and wasted with little or no benefit

the relationship between our Aboriginal com going to the vast majority of Australians, just as

munity and our l egal processes will be the so-called minerals boom of the 1 960s was

Employment: Resource-Based Industry Expansion 26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 999

wasted by the then conservative coalition national Let me deal with these 10 points in more detail.

Government in this country. The importance that Firstly, there is a wicked lack of effort to bring

this Government places on this subject of proper about co-operation and co-ordination between

policy responses will be indicated in this chamber the national Government on the one hand and the

today by the fact that a mere back bench member State governments on the other, as well as be

will be responding to this matter of public tween the public sector and business. In short,

importance.

there is no indicative planning in this country of

I can put this important choice before the Government and before the Australian people in another way. We can follow the British course where that country's oil boom has been allowed to result in an appreciating currency, which has been one cause of the devastating increase in unemployment in that country, or we can follow the course of Norway or Holland where democratic socialist governments have managed their resources expansion for the benefit of their people.

the kind advocated by the Australian Labor Party. That is essential if we are to maximise our opportunities. We need desperately not to do something radical but simply to emulate what the Japanese, the West Germans or the Norwegians are doing. I could name many other countries which are managing their economies far more suc cessfully than we are. Those countries have built up planning mechanisms which result in that greater co-operation and cohesion which we need here. We need these mechanisms far more than

Let me list some of the reasons why maximising job creation and overcoming difficulties caused by the expansion will not occur if this Liberal National Country Party Government does not change its ways and does not get its act together soon. Its history is one of dodging the real issues. Its reputation increasingly and deservedly being gained in the community is one of a gutless government which is not grasping nettles and not pursuing difficult but correct policies.

those countries which have unitary governments. We need this co-ordination more than most countries because of the cumbersome federation that we have to govern, with the Federal and State governments so often pulling in separate direc tions. Indeed because of our traditions the private and the public sector are going in different direc tions at times as well. The main reason for that is that the private sector does not know what the objectives of the public sector are because there has been no indicati"e planning mechanism to let

I want to go through a list of woes that need to be corrected if we are to make the most of this expansion. Firstly, there is a lack of indicative planning to minimise disruption. Secondly, there is excessive foreign ownership and control. Thirdly, there are inadequate efforts to maximise local equipment supply. My fourth, fifth and sixth

it know. Secondly, we have excessive foreign own ership and control of our resources. This Liberal National Country Party Administration is paying lip service only to maximising Australian partici pation in these great ventures which we hope will lead to expansion and to more benefits than it seems at this point in time they will lead to.

points are that there are excessively restrictive economic policies hampering efforts to overcome supply shortages, skill shortages and efforts to raise Australian capital for these investment ventures.

Yesterday the Labor Opposition in this Parliament raised the matter of the authority to prospect in the Winchester South coal lease being granted to a consortium headed by British Petroleum. I know that so far this has been a

My seventh point is that there is inadequate in Queensland Government decision but that de

vestment in the social infrastructure needed cision was made by a government of the same pol

where this resource expansion is taking place. My itical complexion as the Government we are

eighth point is that there is a threatened appreci suffering at the national level. Where was the

ation of the exchange rate. That is not inevitable if leadership of this Federal Government? Have the

the correct policies are applied, but these docu Ministers of this Government made any attempt

ments show that the threat exists. My ninth point to get involved in this important decision making

is that there is a woeful state of industrial relations at this early stage when it is more meaningful that

which is such a large factor in deterring invest they be involved? Putting aside the aspect of the

ment in new jobs. So much of the problem in in possible scandals which may be involved in that

dustrial relations can be sheeted home to this decision-the payola that is suspected-is it not

Liberal-National Country Party Government and an incontrovertable fact that the Federal Govern

its policies. My tenth and final point is that there ment will have to get involved later at the foreign

is a lack of a resources super profits tax to help to investment participation level and when the

spread to the Australian people the benefits of export contracts are approved? I happen to know

this resource-based expansion.

that the Foreign Investment Review Board has

1 000 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981 Employment: Resource-Based Industry Expansion

received no submission whatsoever on this Winchester South coal project. It is not involved at this stage. It will be involved later, but at that stage will the national Government be presented with a fait accompli because the authority to prospect was granted to one consortium a few months or years earlier? Should we in this Parliament not be interested now in a decision which gives a valuable opportunity to a group dominated by an overseas-owned petrol market ing company when we are informed that wholly Australian-owned consortia were bidding for the authority to prospect in that area?
Let me make it clear that I have no reason at this stage to lay any blame on BP. The blame must be sheeted home to governments for not working in co-operation to see that justice not only is done but also is seen to be done, to ensure in this case that the very best decision is taken, not only by the Queensland Government but also by the national Government, to maximise Australian partici pation in this venture. I use the Winchester South example merely as an illustration of what is going on all over the country in the wasting of oportuni ties for the Australian people. Perhaps BP has the technological know-how, but were there not Australian bidders also with that know-how? Another question which ought to be asked at this stage is whether it was necessary for BP to have such a large stake in the venture. Could not the contrac tual arrangements have given it a smaller stake if it was found essential that it should be involved at all? If tougher negotiations had taken place surely the company could have been influenced by other considerations? It probably would have been quite content with far less of the equity.
My third reason to assert that Australian job and other opportunities are not being maximised relates to the inadequate efforts being made to maximise local equipment supply. As disclosed in the policy paper of the Department of Trade and Resources, far too great a proportion of total capital expenditure on mining and related ventures will be spent overseas on items such as capital equipment and technology. It is an undeniable fact that the greater the overseas ownership of the venture the greater the leakage to imports of capital equipment and technology, rather than using the Australian product. The Industries Assistance Commission showed in an annual report a few years ago that historically we expected a leakage of only 20 per cent to imports. Let us look now at the estimates for leakages as they relate to proj ects in prospect, contained in the Department's report to which I have referred. For the overseas owned Utah company, the leakage to imports is 50 per cent whereas for the Conzinc Riotinto of

Australia Limited the figure is 1 5 per cent to 20 per cent. For the overseas-dominated Alumax company's Farley smeIter there is a 50 per cent leakage overseas whereas for the more Australian-orientated Gove Alumina Ltd Tomago smelter 17 per cent is the figure.
Foreigners think in terms of their foreign sup pliers. They know and are used to them. On many occasions they own them, wholly or partly, and can take their profits overseas. Therefore, foreigners turn to other foreigners with orders. But the minds of Australians turn more to fellow Australians and Australian products. This creates Australian jobs. It is one way of transferring some of the benefits of our resource based expansion to other parts of our country. Given the opportunity, and if the entrepreneurship is there, people in manufacturing industries in Adelaide, Ballarat, Bendigo, Geelong or Bathurst can win orders to supply expanding ventures in the Bowen coal basin, the Hunter Valley, the Latrobe Valley, Portland, and even in the Pilbara. They can win those orders and create jobs only if the orders are being directed to Australian industry and are not automatically going overseas, as so often happens when the ventures are overseas owned.
In our purchasing of defence equipment, Boeing aircraft, and in many other areas we have offset programs. Even though the programs are not as good as they should be they are better than nothing. Even though we may not have the facilities or the technology or the economies of scale to produce the complete items of equipment we need, by offset arrangements we can and do produce parts of the items. By such arrangements we produce the parts not only for those items which are used locally, but also for overseas demand. On behalf of the Australian Labor Party, I advocate that such offset agreements on occasions be ar ranged in relation to equipment used in our re source based industries. Surely we can peruade, even force, such agreements to be entered into at the stage when government approval is being given for export contracts and so on. Such a policy of ensuring that far more equipment or parts of equipment are made in Australia would be a very important means of spreading the benefits of our resource based expansion. What better way is there of spreading the benefits than by creating jobs where they are needed?
In spite of expansion in some parts, the economy in many regions of this country is languish ing. Overall, the energy equation is in our favour and is becoming increasingly so. However, as the price of oil increases and coal, gas and bauxite be come much more valuable, they need to benefit

Employment: Resource-Based Industry Expansion26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 00 I

not only the people in the regions where the re source based industries reside but also those people in other regions. The task is not a small one. We need about 1, 500,000 more jobs. I wish [ had the time to explain how [ made that calcu lation, but I will say that from all the studies of any note that have been made to this time it can be seen that the number of jobs that will be created directly and indirectly by the resource based expansion will equal only about one-third of the extra 1 ,500,000 jobs we need in this country in the 1 9808. The other two-thirds will have to come from other sources, and I am suggesting ways of instituting proper policies so that more jobs will be created in other industries.
Regrettably, I do not have time to refer to the rest of my list of lost opportunities and difficulties which must be tackled. Some of the points on the list relate to the need for government policies to overcome shortages in materials and skills, the need to create the necessary funds for Australian investment, the difficulties caused by the lack of investment in social infrastructure, and the threatened depreciation of the exchange rate. J am sorry that J do not have time to complete all the points I wanted to make. They add up to a sorry story of wasted opportunities.
Mr D E P UTY S P E A K E R ( Ho n . I a n Robinson)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Dr EDWARDS (Berowra) (4.23) -This discussion of a so-called matter of public importance is a totally vexatious and misleading one. It is fac tually incorrect and reeks of hypocrisy. If the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) had spent less of his time talking about the Winchester South lease-a matter which was raised in this House yesterday and adequately answered by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) -he would have had more time to deal with the points which he mentioned last. I certainly expected better of the honourable member than the bringing forward of this debate.
The matter of public importance alleges that government policies have failed. That is a totally false and absurd suggestion, as I know the ma jority of Australian people would recognise. The truth is that Australia has embarked on a great new era in its growth and developmentreal growth, real development. We hear a lot of talk about a 'resources boom' but that conjures up pic tures of stock exchange fever and the like. We are talking about real development centred on our massive energy resources, especially coal, as well as our rich endowment of other resources. One

might speak of an 'energy rush', comparable in di mension and thrust with the gold rush in the 1 850s which made possible the first great period of pros perity and growth in Australia. In an energy hungry world where the advanced industrial countries must change from dependence on oil, Australia's massive reserves of coal and other en ergy resources fairly place it in the box seat of his tory. I hope that all Australians, especially young Australians, can catch something of the meaning and vision of this development. Not only does it mean higher standards of living for all Australians, but also what we do with our resources will affect the lives of millions of people overseas, lifting their hopes and expectations, and improv ing the lives of people around the world, particularly those in developing countries.
T assert as forcefully as I can that although this development is centred around our energy and other resources, this Government's policies have started it moving. They will ensure that it will continue and gain in momentum and that it will be to the benefit of all Australians, and J empha sise this point as T said, all Australians and millions of other people will share in the benefits. The policies of this Government are in place and are working. r refer to policies in the area of con taining inflation, restoring the international com petitiveness of the Australian economy and in other ways getting the fundamentals right so that Australia is a good place in which to invest and so that the economy will grow with higher levels of employment and increasing standards of living for all.
I refer to policies in the area of encouraging greater Australian participation-particularly by Australians and Australian companies-in development projects. I refer to the provision of infra structure in co-operation with the States. I refer to policies encouraging the development and res tructuring of Australian industry and the adapt ing to and gearing up of industry to changed de mand patterns, the provision of the investment allowance, industrial research and development grants, export incentives and the like. r refer to policies and programs for accelerating trade train ing to ensure that increased demands for skilled labour can be met and are met by skilled Australians. And of course, r refer to our continuing policies in the social security area to assist those who are in real need.
As I said, these policies are in place and are working. No one is suggesting that there is not much yet to be done, that everything in the garden is lovely or that the Government does not con tinually have to work at it to ensure that its com mitment and resolve that this great growth and

1 002 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1 9 8 1Employment: Resource-Based Industry Expansion

development will continue and be to the benefit of will be implemented beyond that date. The Indus

all -,ustralians will be realised. The debate earlier try and Commerce figures also include manufac

today-that a precipitous rush to the 35-hour turing projects and other matters. I will not elab

week, which would involve fewer hours for the orate. However, to suggest, as the Press reports

same pay, would prejudice the stability of the did, and the Opposition does, that the Trade and

Australian economy and hence the sound base Resources figure deflates our prospects and that

from which development springs-is sufficient the Industry and Commerce figure correspon

evidence of the problems.

dingly exaggerates the prospects for investment in

Australia is clearly and plainly wrong. It is just

another example of the gloom-mongering that is But so much for the alleged failure of the the Opposition's specialty. Actually, the Industry

Government's policies. I will come back to the and Commerce estimates are conservative in the

policies in a moment. What I have said leads di long view. For instance, W. D. Scott and Co. Pty

rectly to the next charge in the matter of public Ltd estimated there were $50 billion plus of en

importance that has been raised by the Labor Op ergy projects alone; while in New South Wales Mr

position. As r have said, the Government is not Wran, the Labor Premier, has announced that

complacent. It recognises that the problems and expected investments in that State total some $23

associated policy responses must be kept under billion.

continous review if the momentum of develop ment is to be maintained. The very papers to which the Opposition Nfers are examples of such reviews. It is absurd to suggest that in some way these were secret documents which for some nef arious purposes had been clandestinely leaked. In the case of the Trade and Resources document which deals with resources investment and the balance of payments implications, I am informed that, albeit not prepared as a public document, multiple copies have been made available to the Senate Standing Committee on National Re sources, which is inquiring into the aluminium industry. I am also informed that-wait for it-a copy is in the Parliamentary Library. The Indus try and Commerce document is a draft of a paper dealing, as was evidenced in Press reports, with possible supply-side-constraints over the next three to four years. I am informed that it is a draft of a document, to be finalised this week, which was sent to State industry departments for suggestions and comment. So much for the illicit leak claim.

I would like to turn to the Industry and Com merce paper which addresses the supply-side problems that can arise over the next few years as the level of investment and economic activity builds up, which will mean higher levels of employment, more jobs and higher standards of living for all Australians. Shortages of supply could emerge. These could occur in areas such as fabricated metal products, electricity and also in the availability of skilled employees. This is not gloomy; this is not 'failure'. We are talking about a strong, developing, employing economy putting pressure on available capacity to supply and produce. We are talking about the very 'full employ ment' economy such as that of the 1 950s and the 1 9608 that everyone wants. We are talking about such an economy in contrast to the recession that currently prevails in the United Kingdom with millions unemployed and the slow, or no, growth being experienced in many other industrialised countries. So what utter rubbish the Opposition talks.

I would like to use the few remaining moments

available to me to talk specifically about the way

In'what sense are the documents said to disclose this development, economic growth, and the poli

'failure'? Since the honourable member for cies of this Government benefit all Australians

Adelaide spent so much of his time talking about and not just those immediately involved; the way

Winchester South I would like to refer to what the it benefits all Australians as against the stock in

Press had to say. It said that the Trade and Re trade view of the Labor Party that all it means is

sources document looks at a figure for resources big profits for the multinational or transnational

investment projects of the order of $ 1 7.7 billion, companies and that somehow Australians gener

whereas a recent Department of Industry and ally are being exploited. That view is wrong

Commerce survey speaks of a figure of $33 billion, headed. Firstly we note that 46 per cent of every

as if there were some conflict between these dollar of company profits goes directly to the

figures. In fact, there is no such conflict. In par Government to be used for the benefit of all Aus

ticular the Trade and Resources estimate is for tralians. In respect of the mining industry the

projected investment in mining and mineral proj figure, including resources type imposts, is 57 per

ects to 1 984-85, whereas the Industry and Com cent of every dollar of profit. This direct benefit,

merce estimate includes as well projects which as well as dividends which accrue to Australian

Employment: Resource-Based Industry Expallsion26 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 003

ownership, is only the first part of the story. Next there are the new jobs associated directly with the construction phase of the projects, building the plants, towns, railways and wharves. There is also the spin-off in jobs in places such as Melbourne, Sydney and elsewhere for manufactured struc tures, machinery and so on for the new projects. There is the permanent and expanded employ ment base in industries which are viable . in the highly competitive world of today. Aluminium is a good example. The current and prospective investment in new smelters, including the latest Point Henry plant to come on stream will lift capacity from the order of 350,000 tonnes per annum to more than 1 . 3 million tonnes by 1 985 and ultimately to the order of 2 million tonnes per annum. The proposed Tomaga smelter will provide 800 permanent jobs when it is in operation and it is estimated that a further 4,000 jobs will be created indirectly, of which 1 ,400 are likely to be in the Hunter region.
Let me make another specific point. The pro duction of enough bauxite-once bauxite was all we produced-to produce one tonne of alu minium provides one-tenth of a job. Producing enough alumina to make one tonne of aluminium provides one job. Producing one tonne of alu minium, which is what the smelters are all about, will provide four jobs. These jobs in viable inter nationally competitive industries will reduce, though of course they do not eliminate, our de pendence for employment on, for example, the motor industry. It is desperately difficult to sus tain a competitive motor industry. Witness the position in the United States where the losses of the big three manufacturers last year were of the order of $4 billion.
I turn now to exports. I have spoken of the di rect benefits in terms of taxes and dividends. I have spoken of the further benefits in terms of jobs in the construction phase and further spin-off jobs, and of jobs in new industries, viable in the long term. Next there are the exports. I refer to coal and, in due course, liquefied natural gas from the North West Shelf, bauxite, this immensely valuable aluminium and so on. Exports benefit all Australians, for without exports to pay for needed imports, no economy could work at the level of activity required to maintain high employment. In short, this new era ofgrowth and development we have entered adds up to a strong economy which is the envy of the world; higher living standards for all Australians and for countless millions over seas; a natural growth in tax revenue to provide needed government services and lower tax rates. As I have pointed out, the policies of this Government are designed to work, and are working, for

the well-being of all Australians. That is the Government's commitment; that is the Government's resolve. The thrust of its policy is right and it will not be changed.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER ( Hon. hn Robinson)-The discussion is concluded.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE Motion (by Mr McVeigh) -by leave-agreed to:
That Mr Cadman be discharged from attendance on the Joint Committee of Public Accounts, and that in his place Mr Shack be appointed a member of the Committee.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION Mr HUMPHREYS (Griffith) -Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation. Mr D E P U T Y SPEAKER ( Hon. [ a n Robinson)-The honourable member may proceed. Mr HUMPHREYS-Yesterday, in the course of the debate on the Winchester South coal development, I said that statements were being made by people which led to inferences being drawn that Sir Edward Lyons was at the head of this deal, and that these inferences and accu sations were coming from the Liberal Party in Queensland. I now wish to correct that statement. I have just received a telex from Sir Edward Lyons in the following terms:
I assure you I have no financial interest in Westfield or any of its associated companies and had nothing whatever to do with the Winchester South coal decision. I would appreciate you retracting any inference regarding my involvement.
I accept what Sir Edward Lyons has said and I trust that the Liberal Party in Queensland will do likewise.
INCOME TAX (INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (4.40)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill will provide legislative authority for the entry into force of comprehensive double taxation agreements with Malaysia and Sweden. The agreements, which were signed on 20 August 1 980 and 14 January 1981 respectively, deal with all substantial forms of income flowing between Australia and the other two countries. Neither of the agreements can enter into force until all necessary constitutional processes are completed both by Australia and the other country. For

1 004 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

income Tax (international Agreements) Bill

Australia, this Bill will, when assented to, complete the processes required of us.

Double taxation agreements have two principal

functions-the, elimination of international

double taxation and the prevention of fiscal

evasion. The former involves the apportionment,

by one means or another, of the relevant taxation

revenue between the contracting countries. There

are various ways of doing this. For example, some

income is taxed only in the country of residence

while other income is taxed only in the country

where it has its source. The country of source may

agree to limit its tax on some items of income and,

where it is agreed that both countries may tax par

ticular income, the country of residence of the

txpayer agrees to allow relief against its tax in

recognition of the payment of tax to the other

country. Such taxation revenue as is forgone by

one country or the other has to be seen in the light

of the favourable impact that these agreements

have on trade and investment flows, and on the

improvement of more general relationships be

tween countries. And it is often overlooked that,

where a country in which income originates agrees

to reduce its rate of tax on income, the taxpayer's

country of residence will also be levying tax on the

income with credit for the reduced tax of the

country of origin. Each of the new

agreements

accords

in

. essential

respects with the position that Australian govern

ments have taken over the years in relation to

double taxation agreements. Both of the new

comprehensive agreements provide for the

country of source to limit its withholding tax on

dividends. Under both agreements, Australia is to

reduce its withholding tax on dividends flowing to

the other country from 30 per cent to 1 5 per cent

of the amount of the dividends. In converse cir

cumstances, Sweden will reduce its rate of divi dend withholding tax from 30 per cent to 1 5 per

cent, while Malaysia, which does not at present

impose a tax on dividends paid to residents of

Australia in addition to the Malaysian tax on

company profits out of which the dividends are

paid, agrees that if it should subsequently impose

a tax on dividends it will be limited to 1 5 per cent

in the case of dividends paid to Australian resi

dents. Both agreements specify a limit on each

country's tax on interest and royalties paid to resi

dents of the other.

Under the Malaysian agreement the general limit is to be 1 5 per cent fot both interest and royalties. This is the rate at which, under Malaysian law, withholding tax is payable on interest and royalties paid to non-residents. However, as an incentive measure, Malaysia will exempt from tax interest on approved loans or

long terms loans, and 'approved industrial royal ties', as defined in the relevant Malaysian incentives legislation, paid from Malaysia to Australian residents. Australia's withholding tax rate on interest is 10 per cent and will not, therefore, be affected by these arrangements. We do not have a withholding rate for royalties paid overseas. These are taxed on the ordinary assessment basis, The limit on the tax on royalties will affect Australian tax on royalties paid to Malaysia only where our tax on the ordinary assessment basis on the profit element in the royalties would have been greater than 1 5 per cent of the gross royalties.
If nothing were done to avoid the situation, the action of Malaysia in providing an 'incentive' exemption from its tax on certain interest and royalties would simply result in Australia not having to give credit for Malaysian tax against its tax on the relevant interest and royalties. In other words, Australia would pick up the tax forgone by Malaysia, thus nullifying the incentive. To avoid that result, Australia, as a 'tax sparing' measure, is to tax Australian recipients of the relevant interest and royalties, and allow credit against its tax, as if Malaysian tax of 1 0 per cent of the interest or royalties had been paid . These special arrangements are appropriate in an agreement with a developing country, such as Malaysia, in a sector of the world in which Australia has vital interests of more than one kind.
The rules under the Swedish agreement are more conventional. The tax of the country of source is to be limited to 1 0 per cent for both interest and royalties. This will not affect Australia's tax on interest flowing to Sweden nor, since Sweden does not tax interest paid to non residents unless the interest is classified as business income, will it affect Sweden's tax on interest flowing to , Australia. However, were Sweden to tax such income in the future the limit of 10 per cent would apply. As in Australia, royalties are taxed in Sweden on an assessment basis, so that the limit on the tax on royalties under the agreement will affect Australian tax on royalties paid to Sweden, or Sweden's tax on royalties paid to Australia, only where tax on the ordinary assessment basis on the profit element in the royalties would have been greater than the agreed limit. Both agreements contain measures for the formal relief of double taxation of income that may be taxed by both countries. The country of residence of the taxpayer is obliged to provide the necessary relief. So far as Australian residents are concerned, income in respect of which a limit is imposed by the agreements on the tax of the country of source-dividends, interest and

Commonwealth Banks Amendment Bill

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES l O05

royalties-will be taxed here with credit being al Commonwealth banks have always been con

lowed for the tax of the country of source, apart scious of the need to ensure, to the greatest extent

from dividends received from abroad by Aus that is practicable, that they operate in such a

tralian companies, which are effectively tax-free manner as to make efficient and economical use of

here. Other income that is taxed in full in the their staff resources and, since their inception,

country ofsource will be exempt from our tax.

have practised redeployment of staff in the

A memorandum containing more detailed ex planations of technical aspects of the Bill and of

interests of providing efficient service to their customers.

the agreements will be made available in due In addition, in the light of the sensitive and con

course to honourable members. I regret to say that fidential nature of banking business, it is felt im

owing to industrial disruption at the Government portant by the Corporation that the Common

Printing Office the explanatory memorandum for wealth banks maintain an image of independence

this Bill will not be available until Friday. Copies in the eyes of their customers, including those

will be available for the debate next week. I com with international affiliations. However, the Cor

mend the Bill to the House.

poration, with the support of the Commonwealth

Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.

Bank Officers Association, sought the Government's agreement to introduce voluntary early re

COMMONWEALTH BANKS

tirement from age 55 for male officers of the Cor

AMENDMENT BILL 1981

poration by appropriate amendments to the

Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.

Commonwealth Banks Act. Female officers in the Corporation already have this right.

Second Reading

Accordingly, after consideration, the Government decided to introduce amendments to the

Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) Commonwealth Banks Act to provide for age 55

(4.46)-1 move:

retirement for all Corporation staff on the basis

That the Bill be now read a second time.
The main purpose of this Bill is to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1 959 to give effect, with respect to the Commonwealth Banking Cor poration, to the Government's policy on volun tary early retirement, and management-initiated redeployment and retirement. The Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retire

that, as appropriate, the Act also be amended to bring it into line with relevant provisions of the CE (RR) Act. This Bill implements that decision. The nature of the proposed amendments has been discussed with the Commonwealth Banking Cor poration and the . Commonwealth Bank Officers' Association and both parties fully accept the approach taken.

ment) Act 1 979, referred to as the CE(RR) Act, The principal provisions of the Bill-clauses 6

which was proclaimed to come into operation on and 9-will provide for miniml,lm and maximum

6 February 1981 , makes provision with respect to retiring ages of 55 and 65 years respectively for all

the redeployment and retirement of Common Corporation staff and specify the grounds on

wealth employees, including those of prescribed which action may be taken by the Corporation

Commonwealth authorities. It is open to any under sections 1 02 and 1 06 to redeploy an officer

Commonwealth authority, such as the Common within the Corporation service or to retire him.

wealth Banking Corporation, to seek to become a The Bill will provide an officer with the right to

prescribed Commonwealth authority for the pur appeal against action taken by the Corporation to

poses of that Act. This would bring the authority retire him or, in specified circumstances, to re

within the scope of the redeployment provisions deploy him within the service. The opportunity is

of the Act, and the provisions for management also being taken with this Bill to amend section 24

initiated retirement and for voluntary retirement of the Commonwealth Banks Act relating to dis

by officers who have attained the age of 55 years. closure of interests by Board members and to

The Commonwealth Banking Corporation effect certain other minor amendments.

does not wish to avail itself of this option. This is I now outline the main provisions of the Bill.

in the light of its role as an integral part of the Clause 2 of the Bill will amend section 24 of the

competitive banking and finance industry. It is Commonwealth Banks Act, which requires the

considered that the Corporation already has, disclosure of certain interests by members of the

within its existing staffing policies and practices, Commonwealth Banking Corporation Board. The

effective internal redeployment arrangements proposed amendments will bring section 24 into

that are consistent with the spirit of the redeploy line with standard provisions that are being incor

ment provisions of the CE(RR) Act. In fact, the porated in statutory authority legislation to give

1006 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Commonwealth Banks Amendment Bill

effect to the Government's adoption of the rel as to permit the Corporation to make efficient and

evant recommendations of the Committee of In economical use of his services. This is somewhat

quiry concerning Public Duty and Private broader than the corresponding provision in

Interest, otherwise known as the Bowen Com clause 9 applicable to officers under age 55 that r

mittee. In particular, a Board member will be will explain later. The Corporation considers that

required to disclose any direct or indirect pecuni this broader provision is desirable in the commer

ary interest in any matter coming before the cial environment in which it operates as it will en

Board or an executive committee of the Board of able the Corporation to redeploy or retire an

which he or she is a member.

officer who has attained the age of 55 years and

Currently section 1 0 1 of the Commonwealth Banks Act, which provides for the appointment of the Chairman of the Promotions Appeal Board, does not empower the Governor-General to appoint the Chairman for a specified period. Clause 5 will amend section 1 0 1 to allow an appointment to that office to be made for a term not exceeding three years with provision for the appointee to be reappointed. The clause makes

who is no longer carrying out his duties in such a way as to enable the Corporation to use his services efficiently and economically. Where, in such a case, it is not reasonable or practicable to re deploy the officer, the Corporation may retire him from the service. The provision is in accord with the broad objectives of the CE (RR) Act and it is fully acceptable to the Commonwealth Bank Officers Association.

provision enabling the Governor-General to ter Clause 9 will effect a restatement of sub-section

minate an appointment for specified reasons and 1 06 ( I ) of the principal Act which, broadly speak

for an appointee to resign voluntarily. Provision is ing, currently provides that, if an officer appears

also made for the present office holder to retain to the Corporation to be inefficient or incom

office notwithstanding these amendments. Clause petent or unfit to discharge his duties, the Corpor

1 3 will effect corresponding amendments in re ation may retire him from the Corporation service

lation to the appointment of the Chairman of or redeploy him within the service. The main

what will become the Tenure and Disciplinary effect of clause 9 will be to apply the revised sub

Appeal Board. Clause 6 will amend section 1 02 of section 106 ( 1 ) only to officers under the age of 55

the principal Act to provide for a minimum retir years and to require the Corporation to explore

ing age of 55 years and a maximum retiring age of all the options for redeployment and the like be

65 years for all officers of the Corporation. Cur fore action is taken to retire an officer from the

rently the minimum and maximum retiring ages Corporation service. This is in keeping with the

are 60 and 65 years respectively for male officers, intentions of the CE (RR) Act.

and 55 and 60 years respectively for female officers. The amendment will remove the present differences between retiring ages for male and fe male officers and bring the provisions of the Commonwealth Banks Act into line with the pro visions of the CE(RR) Act with respect to voluntary early age retirement.

Clause 1 2 will amend sub-section 1 08 ( 1 ) of the principal Act to provide for rights of appeal against action taken by the Corporation to re deploy or retire an officer under revised sub section 1 02 (2) or to retire an excess officer under sub-section 1 03 (2) . The existing rights of appeal under revised section 1 06 and sub-section 107 ( I )

Sub-section 1 02 (2) of the principal Act pro will be preserved. Hitherto, an officer has not had

vides that, where a male officer continues in the a right to appeal against action taken to retire him

Corporation's service after the age of 60 years, the after reaching the minimum retiring age or as an

officer may at any time before attaining the age of excess officer.

65 years be retired by the Corporation from the service. The corresponding ages. for female officers are 55 and 60 years respectively. Clause 6 will replace existing sub-section 1 02 (2) with a new provision that will apply to an officer who has reached the minimum retiring age of 55 years. Under the new provision, the Corporation will cease to have the right to retire an officer simply because he has reached the minimum retiring age.

Clause 1 3 provides that the present Disciplinary Appeal Board will continue in existence under the name Tenure and Disciplinary Appeal Board. In addition to the powers of the existing Appeal Board, the reconstituted Board will have the power to hear appeals against action taken under the Corporation's new powers to redeploy or re tire officers.

Apart from retaining the standard provision for Clause . 14 will provide for a new section 1 1 0A

retirement on health grounds, the new sub-section to be inserted in the Commonwealth Banks Act to

1 02 (2) will provide for the redeployment of an authorise the making of regulations to provide for

officer who is, for any other reason, no longer per forming the duties of his position in such a manner

.

the payment, in such circumstances as are prescribed, of a benefit to an officer who is retired

Antarctic Marine Living Resources Bill

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1007

from the Service under proposed paragraph 1 02 (2) (b) or sub-section 1 03 ( 1 ) of the Act. In the case of an officer between the ages of 55 and 60 years, who is retired under sub-section 1 02 (2) (b), that is, on other than health grounds, it is intended to provide in the regulations for the pay ment of a lump sum benefit corresponding to the benefit payable to an officer retired from the Australian Public Service under the relevant pro vision of the CE(RR) Act. Consideration is being given to the nature of any benefit that may be pay able in the case of an excess officer ret.ired under sub-section 1 03 (2) of the principal Act.
Clause 16 contains various transitional pro viions with respect to the reconstituted Tenure and Disciplinary Appeal Board. They are self explanatory. I am circulating an explanatory memorandum that explains in more detail the individual provisions of the Bill. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
ANTARCTIC MARINE LIVING RESOURCES CONSERVATION BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr MeVeigh, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction and Acting Minister for Science and Technology) (4.57)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to allow Australia legally to implement the Convention on the Con servation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources. The text of the Convention is provided as a sched ule in the Bill. The Convention was drawn up within the Antarctic Treaty Forum and finalised at an international conference in Canberra in May 1 980. The signatories include all the Antarc tic Treaty consultative parties as well as a number of other nations, including the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Repub lic, which have recently entered the international Antarctic community.
Australia was honoured at the conference by being chosen both as official depository nation for the Convention, and as host nation for the head quarters of the new international Commission which is to be established to administer the Con vention. The Convention comes into force when the eighth 'instrument of ratification' from a national government is lodged with Australia as depository nation. The passage of this Bill will fa cilitate ratification by Australia. The Government is also pleased to note that Hobart has been

selected as the site for the Commission head quarters, and this will be an added boost to Hobart's role as the focal point of Australian Antractic activity. This is a notable first for Australia as it will be the first international organ isation based here.
The Convention on the Conservation of Ant arctic Marine Living Resources is also a notable first. The Convention is based on a conservation standard which embodies an ecosystem approach to conservation; that is, it seeks to protect not only harvested species but also the entire ecosystem, including species dependent on the harvested species. In this way it differs from traditional fisheries agreements which seek only to protect the target resource. The area of application of the Convention is the seas south of the Antarctic con vergence, a natural physical boundary between the colder Antarctic waters and warmer oceans in temperate zones to the north. This is the first time an Antarctic agreement has had effect outside of the traditional Antarctic zone delineated by the 60 degrees south latitude.
This Convention is the third international agreement developed by the Antarctic Treaty nations in a series of agreements, designed to pro tect Antarctic wildlife and the Antarctic environ ment. The first was the Convention on the Con servation of Antarctic Seals, which was finalised in 1 972. The second was 'Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora', which was given effect by the Antarctic Treaty (Environment Protection) Act 1 980. The Treaty nations, including Australia, are currently work ing on the question of mineral rights and exploi tation. It is likely that these discussions will lead to the development of another, fourth agreement.
The Commission provided for in Article 7 of the Convention is likely to be established in 1 982 following a preparatory meeting to be held in Hobart later this year. The Commission will over see the implementation of the Convention and will devise and recommend conservation measures for adoption by participating nations. Conservation measures may take the form of catch limits or total bans on harvesting delicate or endangered species. Restrictions may be imposed on fishing in certain areas during periods of the year when the risk of permanent damage to the species is high. Conservation measures such as these are commonly used in the management of living resources in both the marine and terrestrial environment. The Commission will decide which ones are applicable to the management of the Southern Ocean ecosystem and make appropriate recommendations to member countries. The Con vention also establishes a scientific committee.

1 008 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Excise TarifAf mendment Bill

This scientific committee will undertake analysis of research related to the ecosystem and formu late advice on this for the Commission.
The Bill itself is quite straight forward and establishes a permit system for research and com mercial fishing in the area south of the Antarctic convergence. It provides for the adoption of con servation measures recommended by the Commission. The permit system to be established under the Bill gives the Minister power to regulate organisations and individuals in respect of activi ties involving marine life, including harvesting and research, and provides for penalties for fail ure to comply with these. The Bill also allows the Minister to appoint inspectors, including every member of the Australian Federal Police or of the police force of a Territory, and specifies their duties and powers.
Australian sovereignty in the Australian Antarctic territory is in no way prejudiced by the Convention. The Convention, like the Antarctic Treaty itself, safeguards all national sovereignty in the Antarctic. The Bill covers both the activi ties of Australians anywhere in the Convention area and the activities of any national in Australian territory.
The Minister for Primary Industry ( Mr Nixon) , of course, has primary responsibility for the regulation of fishing activity in the Australian fishing zone and I will be consulting with him in the application of the Bill. Australia's policy towards Antarctica is based on the premise that the region is an important one for Australia. Therefore Australia has had a history of invol vement and a range of interests and potential interests to protect. It is Government policy to maintain and strengthen that role and ensure that Antarctica remains both a zone of peace and of international co-operation. As a consequence, Australia has maintained an appropriate level of activity there and, as one of the J 2 original signa tories of the Antarctic Treaty, has played a promi nent role in international discussions of Antarctic issues. International agreement on the convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Living Marine Resources is another important step in this pro cess. It will help conserve the Antarctic heritage for future generations. This Bill represents the culmination of extensive and carefully considered efforts by many nations, including Australia, and is an important step forward in the protection of the Antarctic environment. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Barry Jones) adjourned.

EXCISE TARIFF AMENDMENT BILL 198 1 Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first
time. Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Busine, and Consumer Affairs) (5.5)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1 92 1 to enact the excise tariff alter ations made by Excise Tariff Proposals No. 3 ( 1 980) and Nos. J and 2 ( 1981 ) . Excise Tariff Proposals No. 3 ( 1 980) were validated by the Excise Tariff Validation Act 1 980. They altered the excise duty on stabilised crude petroleum oil from $ 1 40. 1 1 to $ 1 57.21 a kilolitre and on nat urally occurring liquefied petroleum gas from $41 .65 to $43.48 a kilolitre. The alterations operated from 1 July 1 980. Excise Tariff Pro posals No. 1 ( J 98 1 ) were moved in the House on 3 March 1981 . They further altered the excise duty on stabilised crude petroleum oil from $ 1 57.21 to $ J 74.08 a kilolitre and on naturally oc curring LPG from $43.48 to $36.67 a kilolitre. These alterations operated from 1 January 1 98 I . The alterations followed determinations of new import parity prices for crude oil and the setting of new wholesale prices for naturally occurring LPG by the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Carrick).
Government policy in relation to crude oil is that all Australian produced crude is sold to refineries at import parity prices. These are based on the official price of Saudi Arabian light market crude. This policy is designed to maintain an ad equate supply of liquid fuels over the longer term by encouraging conservation. At the same time it is intended to provide an incentive for the explo ration and development of Australian energy resources.
Government policy on naturally occurring LPG is to link the wholesale price of this gas to the price of Australian crude oil. The wholesale price of this gas incre",es by the same percentage as any increase in the f rice of that crude oil. However, there is one ovemding qualification: If world price trends result in the export value of LPG be coming lower than the domestic price, a price based on the export value will become the basic price for domestic purposes. This policy is designed to encourage use of LPG as an alternative fuel, thus reducing Australia's dependence on imported crude oil. The rate of excise duty on nat urally occurring LPG is set at 60 per cent of the average wholesale price for both domestic and export markets in excess of $ 1 47 a tonne. Because of a decrease in export values over the six-month

Federal Proceedings (Costs) Bill

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 009

period ending on 30 November 1 980 the rate of excise duty was reduced by $6.81 a kilolitre from 1 January 1981 .
Excise Tariff Proposals No. 2 ( 19 8 1 ) also were moved in the House on 3 March 1 981 . They created a new excise tariff item for mixtures of fuel ethanol and petrol. This new item provides the administrative basis for the excise treatment of ethanol-petrol mixtures as a transport fuel in its own right. Previously, the components of such mixtures had to be separately entered for excise tariff purposes. It is Government policy that the ethanol component of such mixtures be duty free. This has the objective of also encouraging the pro duction and use of this product as an alternative fuel. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
FEDERAL PROCEEDINGS (COSTS) BILL 1980
Second Reading Debate resumed from 25 February, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (5. 1 0) -This Bill relates to the payment of costs in certain circumstances. The Opposition does not oppose the Bill, which was debated in the Senate on 1 2 December last year. In drawing attention to the time lapse we are not being critical. Sub missions have been made to the Government since that date and amendments to the legislation are to be moved by the Minister representing the Attorney-General in this House, the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) . The amendments will improve the l egislation, although it could be argued that they will not go far enough.
The basis of this legislation is to provide reim bursement for litigants who have to bear the costs of appeals in Federal proceedings when the cost is brought about through no fault of the litigant-I stress the words 'through no fault of the litigant'. The Bill, by way of an attached schedule, pre scribes a maximum amount of reimbursement. It is $5,000 for High Court of Australia appeals, $3,000 for Federal Court of Australia and su preme courts of Territories appeals, and $2,000 for Family Court of Australia appeals. For su preme court appeals, in Victoria, for example, the maximum amount prescribed is $4,000; in New South Wales it is $3,000. Accordingly, one is en titled to think that the level for the Federal Court and, in particular, the High Court might have been set higher, both because of the nature of

appeals to those courts and because of the additional cost of High Court appeals which has been brought about by the location of the Court in Canberra.
In that context I refer to a letter sent to the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) by Mr Peter Cranswick, the President of the Australian Law Council. The point made by the Council is that there should be a prescribed maximum amount in view of the fact that a condition precedent to the payment of any sum is that the party has incurred the cost through no fault of his or hers. Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek leave to have a copy of that letter incorporated in HansaI'd.
Leave granted.
The letter read as follows
AUSTRALIAN LAW COUNCIL
28 January 1981
Senator the Hon. P. D . Durack, QC., Attorney-General, Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600
Dear Senator Durack,
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Bill 1980
The Law Council has now had the opportunity to examine the above Bill.
Whilst it welcomes the establishment of a Federal Appeal Costs Fund, the Law Council is concerned that the amounts prescribed in the Schedule are inadequate.
It is noted that, for example, the maximum prescribed amount under the Victorian scheme is $4,000, while the amount prescribed under the Bill for the Federal Court is only $3,000. In the Law Council's view, many matters before the Federal Court will be of such complexity, that costs incurred will be substantially in excess of those in Supreme Court actions.
The schedule prescribes a maximum amount of $5,000 in relation to the High Court, an amount that is likely to meet only a fraction of most High Court appeals. Because the High Court is the final Court of Appeal in Australia, the costs associated with appearing before it are substantially higher than those incurred when appearing before a State Supreme Court. Further, there are additional costs associated with ap pearing before the High Court now that it is located in Canberra.
In the view of the Law Council there should be no prescribed maximum amount at all, as the parties to the case have incurred costs through no fault of their own. The Coun cil is aware that it is appropriate that there be some control on the amount paid out to litigants, however such control would be best exercised by requiring that payments out of a Federal Appeal Costs Fund be made only after the costs of both par ties have been subject to taxation.
Yours sincerely,
PETER R. CRANSWICK President
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-The Council notes that there must be control of the amounts paid out, but it emphasises its belief that this would be achieved by requiring that payments are made only after the costs of each party have been taxed.

1 0 1 0 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Federal Proceedings (Costs) Bill

I agree with that. The circumstances in which payments can be made are restricted to matters such as decisions involving errors of law so that the costs to revenue will not be great. From the point of view of fairness and also taking a realistic view of legal fees and costs, a substantial case can be made for the abolition of the ceiling in Federal proceedings. The State limits, which are restricted to proceedings emanating from State courts, are fairly generous by comparison.
The amendments which the Minister represent ing the Attorney-General will move will make some improvement in that the prescribed maxi mum will not apply to discontinued hearings on occasions such as when a judge dies or becomes iII or generally when the proceedings are discon tinued through no fault of the party concerned. However, it is perplexing that this matter should have been singled out when an absence of fault is the concept which underpins the whole Bill.
The second amendment is extremely complex in terms of the parliamentary drafting of the whole BiII. However, its effect will be that new trials granted on questions of law in a Federal appeal will be removed from clause 1 8, dealing with the prescribed maximum amount. In other words, when a new trial in a criminal matter is granted the limits wiII not apply. That is meritori ous and we support it, but it does tend to reinforce the inconsistencies which now appear in the Bill.
The Opposition supports all measures which wiII make the cost of litigation cheaper for per sons who come before courts. A right to legal as sistance is one of the most basic legal rights. I referred to this matter last evening in the context of the McInnis case during the human rights debate. We welcome the measure in general. The cost of litigation is a major reason why some people are not in a position to pursue their legal rights. Any thing that can be done to break down the harsh ness of this situation is to be welcomed. I hope that the Government, which has on this issue shown some capacity to compromise, might look again at the submission of the Australian Law Council.
The Opposition will be moving one amendment in relation to the position of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. Under section 44 (5) of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act the Federal Court of Australia can remit an action to the Ad ministrative Appeals Tribunal. It is not clear whether this remission falls within the definition of a new trial. The comments of the Attorney General in the Senate would seem to suggest that it does not. We believe it should. Accordingly, we will be moving an amendment at the Committee

stage to ensure that new trials include re-hearings ordered pursuant to section 44 ( 5 ) of the Admin istrative Appeals Tribunal Act. In that debate in the Senate the Attorney-General promised to keep this matter under review. In view of the lapse of time and the fact that the Government has already made some concessions on the legislation we ask that it accept this proposed amendment.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (5. 1 6) -1 have taken some interest in this matter for a little while. In 1 978 I was instrumental in preparing a submission to the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) on the need to develop in Commonwealth areas a suitor's fund. The procedures for mally adopted in other States involved the establishment of a pool of money from which litigants who might be aided under legislation such as this would be able to have court fees and certain costs paid. The Government has not opted for a scheme which is modelled on the suitor's funds which have operated in State arenas for a long period but has opted for a scheme under which the Commonwealth will pay the costs of certain parties who are involved in proceedings before Federal courts.
I think it is helpful to look at some of the comments that 1 made in a paper which I prepared for the Attorney-General back in 1 978. I told the Attorney-General that suitor's funds then operated in every State except South Australia. The South Australian Government prepared draft legislation creating such a fund. Its introduc tion at that time was problematic. A fund is a pool of moneys made up in varying ways largely from contributions by litigants as a proportion of their court fees together with interest accruing from investment of any sums not immediately required by the fund to meet the claims. The fund could be drawn upon by litigants in certain cases where de cisions are upset on appeal or by proceedings that are rendered abortive. Put broadly, the fund is tantamount to a compUlsory insurance scheme whereby on payment of a premium, for example, court fees, litigants are insured against expenses arising out of certain court proceedings for which they can claim no culpability. I suggested to the Attorney-General that the State Acts adopted as their basic principle that a citizen is entitled to a correct decision on law from the first court to which he resorts. If there is some error on the part of the court, some shortcomings in the legal system or some chance happening not attributable to the fault on his part and he did not receive what was due to him, he should be entitled to be paid out all costs of having the case put right.

Federal Proceedings (Costs) Bill

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 0 1 1

In general, the practice in litigation is that the losing party pays the costs. That principle also applies to costs on appeals. The theory behind the practice is that the possibility of being ordered to pay costs is an effective deterrent to persons who might embark on legal proceedings on insufficient grounds or that, by and large, the practice achieves a rough form of justice. However, when an appeal is taken from a judge's decision and is successful it is reasonable to suggest that it is unjust for the respondent to have to pay for the appeal costs, especially if an appeal is only to settle a point of law that does not go to the culpa bility of the parties. In other words, in such a situation the unsuccessful respondent pays for set tling the law for the benefit of all. The instances of injustice arising from this practice would not be infrequent, as an examination of the various appeal courts' decisions upsetting lower courts' decisions would indicate. In any event, numbers of parties are disadvantaged in Federal courts and have been disadvantaged in the past in Federal courts where there are appeals and where an appeal has been successful. A person who had won in the first instance and who had to defend that was then out of pocket in paying the costs for that appeal. The Federal Proceedings (Costs) Bill will ensure that people are no longer disadvantaged in that way. It will ensure that there are established proceedings.
Whilst the suggestion might be made by some members opposite that the limits that have been placed in this legislation might be disadvan tageous to parties, it ought to be noted that there have been in the past limits in State legislation in relation to the amount of costs that might be paid. This was an appropriate matter to be looked at. But as has been indicated, this is a matter that has been reviewed by the Attorney and those limits are now the subject of review. I think this is very beneficial legislation, very important legislation. It is a very worthwhile reform. It ensures that in those Federal courts to which this Bill applies par ties who might otherwise have been disadvantaged will be given the opportunity to recover some of the costs for which they are out of pocket and which they would have had to meet in full . That is a very worthwhile reform, a very proper reform, and one for which, I believe, the Government needs to be commended.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (5.22)-Very briefly I comment about the Fed eral Proceedings (Costs) Bill. I think the Bill has been amply described by preceding speakers. I cite an example which, in my mind, even alone justifies the reasons for a Bill such as this and the reasons for an extension of this assistance. From

1 975 until very recently a constituent in my former electorate sought compensation as a result of his service in the Royal Australian Air Force. He, as well as myself and a handful of others, know well the very long battle that he had eventually to win justice at the hands of the Commonwealth Employees Compensation Tribunal. He was even subjected to documents being withheld by a department. This matter perhaps provides one of the most glaring examples that I have come across in my I S years as a member of this Parliament where a man's health history, his records which indicated a condition from the early days, were kept away from the eyes of officialdom. That in itself led to incorrect decisions being made as to the reasons his health had suffered.
All that aside, some recent months ago he was very fortunate in that the Administrative Appeals Tribunal came down on his side. He is a man who, because of his health, had very little money. He was delirious with delight that at long last he had WOn justice. Shortly after that, he received notification of the intention of the Commonwealth to appeal against the decision of the Tribunal on a point of law. I do not blame the Commonwealth for one moment for seeking to ensure that an incorrect judgment was not enshrined in law. Indeed, it was the right of the Commonwealth to appeal. Even he did not object to that, but the appeal was to be taken before the Federal Court and he had absolutely no money with which to fight the case. His attitude expressed to me was: 'Well, Don, I have won before the Tribunal. Even if they take it from me on appeal, I am satisfied to call it a victory'. If the appeal by the Commonwealth does not succeed this man is owed a very large amount of compensation but he did not have money with which to fight the case because it was to be before the Federal Court.
I am very pleased that the Commonwealth, only some three years after the establishment of the Federal Court, has quickly realised that in respect to that court, and indeed the High Court and other courts of the federal system, provision must be made to afford assistance under an arrangement which is not unlike that which exists in the States and is given effect through the State suitors fund.
I am sure that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) , who has led the debate on the other side of the chamber, and has intimated that the Opposition does not oppose the Bill, would agree with me that, regardless of which party is in power from time to time, one sees from both sides of this House examples of the exercising of humanity and understanding of the problems of little people.

1 0 1 2 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Federal Proceedings (Costs) Bill

I realise that the legislation will not be retro spective in effect, that the Bill in itself will not assist the former constituent to whom I have referred. Despite the fact that a barrister in Bris bane had offered to represent him free of charge, recently he received a letter from the Attorney General's Department stating that the Commonwealth would finance his representation before the Federal Court in the very near future when the case is heard. I wish to commend the Government upon taking this step and upon making pro vision, which no doubt will be availed of by many a person who hardly has a voice in this place. It will be availed of frequently by many a person who is caught up in a legal wrangle through no fault of his own but simply because of a matter of law rather than the rights or wrongs of the par ticl,llar case.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
III Committee Clauses 1 and 2-by leave-taken together, and agreed to. Clause 3 ( Interpretation) . Mr LIONEL ROWEN (Kingsford-Smith) ( 5.28) -1 move:
Clause 3, page 2, after the definition of 'judgment' insert the following definition:
"new trial" includes a rehearing in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal ordered pursuant to sub-section 44 (5) of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1 975;
In a nutshell, provision is made whereby an appeal can be taken from a decision of the Ad ministrative Appeals Tribunal to the Federal Court, which can then order a rehearing by the Tribunal. It would appear that such rehearing would not, under the Bill, fall within the defini tion of 'judgment'. The amendment seeks to re move any misunderstanding 01' uncertainty in that regard. Honourable members can understand that when a person is put to the trouble and expense of having to contest a rehearing before the Administrative Appeals Tribunal that can be a very ex pensive process. When one has been successful to the point of obtaining a rehearing, obviously the necessary compensation for the cost of taking that step should fall within the ambit of the Bill. The matter was raised in the Senate and the Attorney General (Senator Durack) indicated that he would consider the matter. I appreciate that the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) does not have instructions on the matter so I will not press it to a division. I would simply ask that the Government provide us with a clear understanding as to the way in which it views this

question. Some four 01' five months have passed since the matter was last debated in the Senate.
Amendment negatived. Clause agreed to. Remainder of Bill-by leave-taken as a whole. Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) ( 5 . 3 1 ) -by leave-I move:
Clause 18, page 8, lines 17 to 21 (inclusive), omit sub-clause (3).
Clause 18, page 8, line 23, omit "or (2)".
Clause 18 and the Schedule fix the maximum amounts payable in respect of costs certificates granted pursuant to the Bill. During the debate on the measure in another place a question was raised as to the effect of these limits in the case of retrials. The Government has examined the question further and has come to the view that in the case of retrials special considerations apply. For example, when a trial cannot be completed because of the death of the judge it is not appropri ate that the amount available pursuant to the costs certificate granted in respect of that trial should be subject to the normal limits. Similar considerations apply in respect of ah appellant court when an order is made for a new trial in criminal proceedings. The effect of the proposed amendments, which have been circulated, is to re move the limit on the amount payable pursuant to costs certificates granted in respect of aborted or discontinued proceedings, as well as new trials and criminal proceedings.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (5. 32) -The Opposition supports the amendments because they remove the limitations to which reference has been made. As honourable members will appreciate, no one should be put to extra expense because a judge dies, or because ill ness occurs. The other amendment is of some sig nificance because it also removes the restrictions in what are called criminal appeals. My colleague, the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy), has reminded me of circumstances which involve liti gants in the enormous expense of having to come to Canberra now for the hearing ofappeals before the High Court. I often wonder whether we cen tralise justice too much. There is not much point in having a pretty good mausoleum down on the lake if people cannot afford to litigate matters there. It is important that justice is extended to people in all States. It must be realised that many are put to a great deal of expense in having to fly barristers, senior counsel and solicitors all the way to Canberra, merely to seek leave in certain circumstances. These facts are well known to

Industrial Relations

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 0 1 3

members of the legal profession such as the honourable member for Holt and we would hope that these amendments would go a little of the way towards meeting such exceptional circumstances. But as the Australian Law Council has said, the best safeguard, the best sanction, is that all costs must be taxed. Why not leave it at that and remove restrictions? We support the amendments.
Amendments agreed to. Remainder of Bill, as amended, agreed to. Bill reported with amendments; report-by leave-adopted.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr MOOl'e) -by leave read a third time.
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS Ministerial Statement
Debate resumed. Mr CONNOLLY (Bradfield) (5.35) -Earlier today the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock) presented to this House a statement of considerable importance to the industrial future of this nation. He demonstrated quite conclus ively the undoubted link between high wage costs and a reduction in the hours of work, and the likely impact of both on continued economic growth in Australia. It is not sufficient for the Or ganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development to forecast that economic growth in this country in 198 1 probably will be the highest of all developed economies. The people of Australia all the people-must be prepared to appreciate that we cannot achieve the greatness which this nation can bring to its people by increased stan dards of living, improved lifestyles and so forth unless we are able to make significant improve ment to the rate of productivity within the economy. The unfortunate fact facing this nation is that any significant reduction in the hours of work in the labour force undoubtedly will have major re sults. Employers faced by an increasingly expen sive labour market will have no alternative but to look to greater technology as the means of increasing productivity. We have been told on many occasions in the past by various speakers for the Opposition-troglodytes though some of them may be-that an increased level of techno logical change causes people to lose jobs. This is not the place, nor is it the time, to argue this point, but it is abundantly clear that if the labour force is unproductive and an alternative can be found by management it is in the interests of the economy

and certainly in the interests of individual management to do so.
We have heard in the debate today-I refer specifically to the contribution of the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke ) -a rather interesting dichotomy. I refer the House to the history of the 35-hour campaign. It began when unions in the metal trades industry effectively disrupted the half-yearly national wage case in May of 1 980 before the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. The hearing was :'esumed only after the then President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Mr Bob Hawke-now the honourable member for Wills-told the Commission that the union movement would call off its action. He emphasised that such a campaign would not be supported by the ACTU. At the same time, the Leader of the Op position ( Mr Hayden) made it quite clear that, at least personally, he also had considerable doubts about the introduction of a 35-hour week at this time, given the realities facing the Australian economy in the early 1 980s. Nevertheless, the matter went forward and the honourable member for Wills in his then capacity came up with an interesting formula. He said they would not apply the 35-hour campaign across the board; rather, they would be selective. He came into the House today and told us that some 300 State and Federal agreements involving a 35-hour week have since been consummated. He did not tell the House that the vast majority of those agreements, specifically those between the States, related to the public sector. They did not involve industries that face competition from imports or even within the domestic market-place. In most cases they were statutory corporations protected ultimately by the taxpayers, by the people of Australia with.. out necessarily having to look at factors such as the law of supply and demand. Nevertheless, this is the situation we have inherited.
The Government has taken the firm view rightiy so--that the people of Australia should be given the opportunity to appreciate fully what will happen if we allow the 35-hour week situation to get out of hand at this stage. Obviously it is true that in some industries, and certainly in some companies, it is possible to implement a 35-hour week efficiently and effectively. All honourable members know of examples of that. But to presume that a horizontal arrangement can be applied through all industries, despite what the honourable member for Wills said about the necessity to be specific about which industries this would apply to, runs quite counter to industrial fact that members of one union do work in vir tually every industry sector in Australia. I fail to

1 0 1 4 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Industrial Relations

see how any shop steward could seriously go to his colleagues and say: '] am sorry; I cannot support a 35-hour week in this industry or in the company, but, of course, your colleagues who belong to the same union will be alowed to have that privilege in other areas of the economy'. This nation has enshrined the concept that what is good for Peter is usually good for Paul. To use the argument that all of a sudden the trade union movement will demonstrate a level of responsibility in wage de mands which certainly we have not seen since Federation would, to put it mildly, be begging the realms of possibility.
It is quite clear that we have either a 35-hour week which affects all industries or a 35-hour week which affects some industries; but I would like the industrial relations experts on the other side of the House, those members of the party which when in government brought Australia into more industrial turmoil than we had had for many years, to explain how we can relate that to the situation on the industrial front. The people of Australia and the trade union movement have to face a series of realities. If we care about unemployment-this Government certainly does-we have no choice but to take the view that industries must increase their potential for employment, to increase their capacity for pro ductivity growth and to increase the ability of this nation to trade on international markets in what is becoming an ever more complex and difficult international world scene, especially in economic terms.
I fear that the Australian Labor Party, by sup porting the ACTU, the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and other unions in similar areas, has demonstrated conclusively that it does not really care a damn for the unem ployed. Unfortunately, too many . unions today have only one objective, and that is to have a closed shop. They are quite happy to protect the jobs of the members who are on strength today, but they do not want any competition from out side. They take the simple view: Let the devil take the hindmost. That is not an Australian point of view. It is not a point of view that we can accept today. It is not an attitude of mind which this Government is prepared to accept at any stage. We do not need a selfish trade union arrangement, one of looking for job monopolies or labour con trols on the basis of it being hard luck for those who do not have the same opportunities. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table which relates to the number of hours worked in a series of other economies. The table is on page 27 of a booklet which has already been incorporated today.

Mr Barry Jones-Give the source of the book.

Mr CONNOLLY-It is the Confederation of Australian Industry's Hours of Work publication.

Leave granted.

The table read as follows-

Belgium France . . Luxembourg Norway Philippines USSR Singapore Yugoslavia Bulgaria Czechoslovakia German Democratic Republic Spain Hungary Poland . Portugal Switzerland Federal Republic ofGermany Ireland . . . Italy The Netherlands Romania Japan

40 hours
40 hours 40 hours 40 hours 40 hours 41 hours 42 hours 42 hours 42t hours 421 hours 43t hours
44 hours 44 hours 44 hours 44 hours & 24 mins. 45 hours 48 hours 48 hours 48 hours 48 hours 48 hours 48 hours

Mr CONNOLLY-I have checked the figures in that table with those of the International Labour Organisation, and there is a strong simi larity. The important thing is that not one country referred to in that table has an average working week of less than 40 hours. There is not a single country in the South East Asian region which has any intention of looking at a weekly hour rate of around 35 hours. In terms of Australia's economic growth, this means that we will come into a less competitive position. During the 1 980s Australia has to be prepared to compete with essentially developing countries. They have significantly lower rates of pay than Australian workers and significantly higher hours of work than Australian workers. That is a reality which we have to face. The employers in Australia today are faced with a situation where they are going to be asked to increase the number of personnel on their staff according to the ACTU formula. I n reality, that means that they will look for higher technology and not additional staff, and it will mean ultima tely that we will have more and more competition with these economies, with the very real risk that we will be at the tail end; we will not be out in front. If that situation develops, as I believe it will, and if the 3 5-hour week program obtains univer sal approval throughout Australian industry, it will set us so far back that it has been estimated that it would take ten years increase in pro ductivity growth to realise what is involved in terms of loss to the Australian economy.

Industrial Relations

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 0 1 5

If we look at the statistics, that statement is

even more effective. Each employee will lose five

hours a week on a 35-hour working week. There

ofonreh.,isfostraefvf,ehrye

seven personnel the employer has will lose 3 5 hours. In other words,

for every seven people employed he will have to

look for an additional employee. The reality of

the rate of aggregate growth in the Australian

economy demonstrates quite clearly that unless

that additional eighth person is able to pay his

way, so that the employer can make a profit and

cover all the on-costs involved in the additional

person being employed, that position will remain

vacant. That is what we have seen for so many

years. That is the situation which developed in

1 973 when in the metal trades industry, for

example, because of the record wage hikes and

the 25 per cent tariff reduction across the board,

many companies literally had to close their doors

because they simply could not run at a profit.

We cannot have it both ways. It is not possible to secure increases in pay without significant increases in productivity. The productivity measurement is a contentious issue. However, productivity growth in the late 1 970s and in the early 1 980s to date has been measured at around one per cent to 1 .7 per cent, while averagegrowth, when compared with the 1950s and the 1 960s, was around 3 per cent. If productivity growth is taken as a median, this economy has gone backwards in aggregate terms since the 1 950s. The fact is that if a 35-hour week program gets off the ground it is estimated that labour costs for most employers will rise by between 9 per cent and 14 per cent. In many cases that is a cost which they are simply not able and certainly are not willing to accept.

every person employed in business today involves an on-cost of approximately 25 per cent in ad dition to the actual costs of wages. Of course, this cost is made up of superannuation payments in some cases, long service leave, and various other costs such as insurance and so on, which are built into the wage structure. It is no longer possible to say that Australia is anything except a very high cost and very competitive labour market in terms of the competition between labour and technology.
Those in the Australian Labor Party who come into this House and complain, as they have on so many occasions, that we are encouraging techno logical change, have to realise that they cannot have it both ways. Technological change has to come to keep this country competitive with others, but we want to bring that technological change into the society in such a way that we cre ate and do not destroy job opportunities. The point should be made that the computer industry alone in Australia employs over 60,000 people. In real terms, that means that if that industry did not exist, those people would have to seek employ ment opportunities elsewhere. We are seeing the base of a new age. We are seeing the situation developing where labour costs will become a more contentious issue. Those who say that they reflect the interest of the trade unions movement, those who claim that they respect the views of the rank and file, I think, would do well to go back to the shop floor and ask the people there whether t hey want job security or whether they wish to enter into a situation where they have more pie in the sky, where in theoretical terms they think they can work fewer hours but in fact achieve so little.

It is the workers who have to make the decision. It is the people of Australia who have to be aware of the facts, and I was heartened to see that a public opinion survey which came out this week demonstrated so clearly that the vast majority of Australians are satisfied with a 40-hour working week. Most people know that, in terms of pro ductive hours worked, in very few areas of industry do people work a 40-hour week, even today. If we are going to get down to an official rate of 35 hours a week, the reality is that they will be talk ing about a productive base of around 30 hours, if we are lucky.
Those sorts of results will be catastrophic for Australia. They will do nothing to increase job opportunities and they will do nothing to help the young people coming on to the labour market every year from the schools. They will also do nothing to increase the productivity of Australia, nor will they do anything for the living standards of the Australian people. The simple fact is that

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BARRY JONES ( Lalor) (5.50)-The shallowness of the ministerial statement produced by the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock) is exposed by what it did not say rather than by what it did say. There are many refer ences to productivity but not one reference to technological change. The words 'technology', 'technological innovation', 'the decline of labour intensity', and 'the transition to capital intensity' are nowhere mentioned or examined. If the minis terial statement had been produced at a time of static technology and static outputs, then an advo cacy of static labour inputs might have been intel ligible. But that is not the case. It is the exact reverse of the truth. The 34 years from 1 947-the last time there was a general reduction in working hours in Australia-has been the longest period since the nineteenth century without a change

1016 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Industrial Relations

and, simultaneously, the era with the greatest rate of technological change, a period in which Australia's manufacturing labour force has fallen dramatically.
Mr Cohen-It would have been a good speech, made 1 00 years ago.
Mr BARRY JONES-Exactly. It reached a plateau of 25 per cent in 1 947, stayed there with only a minimal increase until 1 965, when it reached a peak of 27 per cent, and then began to fall slowly until 1 9 7 1 . [t has been falling rapidly ever since, except for a small, short upturn at the end of 1 973 and the beginning of 1 974-a mere hiccup on the graph line. The Minister's key theme is based on a fallacy, and I read from the end of page 9 and the top of page 1 0:
Assuming that the given level of output requires the same total number of hours of labour input, whether standard hours are 40 or 35-in other words that labour productivity is the same-then an employer has to pay out more in wages to purchase the required labour input if standards hours are reduced.
On first reading that seems rational enough, but it is in fact a complete fallacy. The fallacy was also expressed by the honourable member for Diamond Valley (Mr N. A. Brown) , when he said that if working hours were reduced--these were his exact words-'Iess must be produced'. That is absolutely contrary to every lesson of economic history since the Industrial Revolution began in Britain 200 years ago. Of course, the honourable member for Diamond Valley rejected any appeal to history. No, he said, we must concentrate on the stern realities of today. The honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall) said the same thing. They painted a picture of a miserable, depressed Australian society, poverty-stricken, fighting for its economic life. Suggest a move towards the 35-hour week, and we fall into chaos. Yet Mr John Stone, the Secretary to the Treasury, says that at the moment we are experiencing a boom. The Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) and the Treasurer (Mr Howard) say that we are facing a period of economic expansion. The honourable member for Berowra (Dr Edwards) said in the chamber only this afternoon that our economy 'is the envy of the world'.
It is notorious that we have perhaps the largest per capita resource base of any country. Yet, uniquely, we are incapable of following the trend of other technologically advanced nations to reduce the number of working hours. To use the immortal words of Joan Crawford in one of her early films: 'Whom is fooling whom?' The central fallacy is that a reduction in working hours from 40 to 35, that is, a drop of one hour in eight,

necessarily means a one-eighth drop in output, and therefore a 1 2-!- per cent increase or a 14 per cent or 21 per cent increase, depending on how rubbery the figures are-more if overtime is required-to produce the same output as would have been expected before the hours were reduced. But that is not the experience either in Australia or in the rest of the advanced world. I will quote the words of the Economist of 1 9 July 1980:
When negotiations do focus on hours, employers worry about higher costs per unit of output and declining competi tiveness. Unions are keen to reduce hours as a means of creating more jobs or slowing the pace of redundancies. In practice, however, neither expectation is wellfounded. Costs and employment do not rise to the degree expected. if at all. The International Labour Office (ILO) in Geneva has found, for example, that
People can work more intensely for a short time. So, if the worker can vary his pace (i.e., is not tied to the pace of a machine), he may get as much done in less time.
People who work shorter hours tend to take less time offfor sickness or absenteeism.
Reductions in work time usually provoke employers to change (and unions to agree to change) methods of pro duction and materials flow. This increases productivity.
Sometimes the reduction in hours eliminates an inefficient shift (e.g., Saturday morning). or allows the introduction of two day-shifts using capital equipmentmore efficiently.
Shorter hours often mean better morale and an improved climate for industrial relations.
The ILO's assessment of dozens of studies done in various countries is that there is always some increase in productivity after a reduction in working hours. In many cases, the pro ductivity gain exceeds the value of the time lost. The biggest gains occur in cases where a very long week is being reduced. The result is that few new jobs are created.
Those are the words of the London Economist, not a Labor p Ublication. There hrs been a significant change in attitudes to work in Britain since the period between 1 3 December 1 973 and 1 1 March 1 974 when the Conservative Government of Edward Heath imposed a three-day working week as an emergency measure caused by fuel shortages and the national coal strike. It had been expected that the three--day week would cripple British industry, cutting output by 40 per cent and applying irresistable pressure to the strikers to give in. To everyone's surprise it was found at the end of the strike that there was little, if any, fall in production and in some factories output actually increased despite a 40 per cent cut in hours worked. At first that sounds incredible but the reality is there. No economic writer has ever challenged the facts. It is striking that the value of Britain's manufacturing output in 1 980 under the rule of Mrs Thatcher was 5 per cent lower in a five-day week than it was during the three-day week of 1 973-74. That situation has to be looked at very seriously. It has provoked a fun damental rethinking by British trade unionists

Industrial Relatin'1 <

26 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 0 1 7

and, of course, in the European Economic Com munity. There is no direct correlation between hours worked and output, particularly in high volume production.
T direct the attention of the House to a question un notice that I asked the former Minister for Pro ductivity. It appears on pages 452 and 453 of Hansard of 19 August 1 980. It will be refreshing reading for the Minister for Business and Con sumer Affairs (Mr Moore) and the honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall ) . I asked the question on 22 May 1 980. The answer is con tained in the word 'no' although it took three montlis for it to be given. The first part of the question was:
Is he able to state whether the introduction of the 40 hour week in Australia in 1 947-48 had any adverse effects on pro ductivity; ifso, can he state what they were.
The answer was:
No.
The second part of the question was:
Is he further able to state whether the introduction of a 3-day working week by the Heath Government in the United Kingdom as an emergency measure during the national coal strike between November 1 973 and January 1 974, and the resultant 40 per cent fall in hours worked, had any adverse effects on productivity and, if so, what they were.
The answer was:
No.
This amazing Government is determined to fight on the beaches against the 35-hour week. When I asked what happened in Britain when there was a 40 per cent reduction in working hours the answer was: 'Nothing. We are not able to point to any thing'. I imagine that the Government will not tell the metal trades employers that, yet it is absol utely critical. It is central to the whole argument. In high volume productivity there is no corre lation between hours actually worked and output. Output depends on a combination of the kind of work and the technology involved. That is the lesson of economic history since the Industrial Revolution began 200 years ago.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr BARRY JONES-As I was telling an enthralled House before the suspension of the sit ting for dinner, the former Minister for Pro ductivity on 1 9 August 1 980 responded to the questions I had asked him. I asked whether he was able to indicate whether the introduction of the 40-hour working week in Australia in 1 947 and 1 948 had hal any adverse effects on productivity and, if so, whether he could state what they were. The answer was 'No'. Secondly, I asked whether he was able to state whether the introduction of

the 3-day working week by the Heath Govefl l

ment in the United Kingdom between November

1 973 and January 1974 and the resultant 40 pel

cent fall in hours worked had had any adverse

.eCfhfeecatsn

on productivity and, if SWf; . to that, <\gain, was

so, what they were. no. I might say thcl l

it took the Department of Productivity three

months to come up with it and the answer was

'No'.

It is a question of outputs and inputs. Modern technology makes it possible for exponential increases in outputs and for total inputs, including labour, to decrease dramatically. How is the decreased demand for labour to be coped with? There are essentially two alternatives. It can be dealt with either by retrenchment and reduced employment levels generally or by the redistri bution of labour inputs-that is to say, reduced hours of work, a shorter working year or a shorter working lifetime. The position of employers in Australia is that they want the 40-hour working week plus the introduction of labour displacing high technology. No employer has suggested a trade off. No one is saying that if a 40-hour work ing week is maintained there will be a technology moratorium and that the decline in employment in the manufacturing sector will come to an end.

I turn to the question of international competition. It is often argued that we cannot afford a 35-hour working week because of the problem of international competition. I point out to the House that in the areas where we are already internationally competitive-and there are not many of them-in many cases less than a 40-hour week is worked and we will increasingly move towards a 35-hour working week. That is gener ally not a problem in high volume industries with advanced technologies. Hard as it is for the honourable members opposite to grasp the lessons of economic history since the Industrial Revol ution began 200 years ago, there is a declining cor relation between hours worked and the volume of production in high volume industries. Histori cally, increases in productivity have invariably been associated with reductions in working hours. There are no exceptions to this rule. If we impose a graph illustrating productivity growth on a graph indicating hours of work the result is like a St Andrew's cross with one line ascending-that is p roductivity-and with the other line descending-that is hours o fwork. That trend has gone on for 200 years.

It has to be conceded that there may be special problems in areas - of employment which are extremely labour intensive. I concede that there

1 0 1 8 REPRESENTATIVES 2 6 March 1981

Industrial Relations

are problems, for example, in small volume ser Mr BURR (Wilmot) (8.7)-1 have found this

vices and provision of products, such as hairdress debate to be most enlightening. The Minister for

ing, tailoring, personal sales, journalism, cleaning, Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock) this afternoon

maintenance and some kinds of secretarial work. gave us a very good paper on what he saw as the

There is a problem in these areas about a 35-hour dangers of a 35-hour working week. We expected

working week and adjustments may have to be from the Opposition a positive response as to its

made perhaps in terms of a reduction in the work attitudes on the 35-hour working week. In par

ing year or the working lifetime. There is no single ticular, we expected a positive contribution from

formula that will cover every case. That has to be the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke).

recognised.

In fact the honourable member for Wills devoted

But the argument advanced against the 35-hour working week is not just ignorant and woefully misinformed; it sometimes borders on the insane. Opponents seem to be saying: 'It may have been possible for Australia to move from a 44-hour working week to a 40-hour working week in 1 947 at a time when there was less reliance on labour displacing technolgoy, but in 1981 at a time when labour displacing technology is already cutting down our industrial labour force at a rapid rate it

26 minutes of his 27-minute speech to quoting from judgments of the Conciliation and Arbi tration Commission and other arbitral authorities and one minute of his speech to the statement made by the Minister for Industrial Relations. I am not sure whether that is a back-door attempt on the part of the honourable member for Wills to escape from the problems of the -35-hour working week or whether he simply was not listening to the Minister for Industrial Relations.

is impossible to contemplate any cut in working

hours'. That is absurd.

I also found the attitude expressed by the

The country that is the most successful indus trially is Sweden, and there the average working week in the manufacturing industry is 30.2 hours. The advice given by the wise men on the back bench of the Liberal Party and the National Country Party would not go down too well in Sweden because it is contrary to that country's own experience. We must not look at the 35-hour working week in isolation. It is not the only way to redistribute work. But there is a tremendous gap here between attitudes to white collar workers and blue collar workers. The Public Service works a 35-hour week. Take the staff of the Prime Min-

honourable member for Wills most enlightening. The honourable member, during his years with the Australian Council of Trade Unions and since he became a member of this House, has often spoken of the dangers of unemployment in this country. He has put forward certain suggestions to resolve the problems of unemployment. However, not once in his speech today did he mention unemployment. He did not mention the effect the introduction of the 35-hour working week would have on those currently in jobs. The greatest danger of introducing a shorter working week in this country at this stage is increased unemploy

/ i.ster (Mr Malcolm Fraser) . Secretaries on the ment. I can only conclude from the speech that Prime Minister's staff, particularly his Press sec was given by the honourable member for Wills retary, are working their fingers on one hand that either he is not concerned about unemploy

down to the bone on the 35-hour working week ment or he has been purposely trying to deceive

while the other hand reaches out for an overtime the Australian people for years. In fact, he is not

cheque for $26,000 for the year. Ask the Prime in the least concerned about unemployed people

Minister's staff what they think about the 35-hour or those people who currently have jobs and may

working week. If it is all right for them it ought to be thrown on to the dole queues.

be all right for other workers. We have had

exactly the same quality of argument that was put against the reduction of the 56-hour working week in Australia, the abolition of negro slavery in the southern states of the United States and the ending of child labour in Britain. The catch cry is: 'The economy cannot stand it'. We have to recog rUse that we are passing through a time of change and a reduction in working hours is one of the ways to cope with it.

The honourable member for Wills gave a lot of thought to and quoted from judgments that have been given as a result of decisions made in 1 947. I grant that they were interesting quotations. But the honourable member omitted to mention some significant matters when he related the current situation to the situation in 1 947. First of all he assumed from what he quoted that in the present climate we are not faced with widespread compe

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) tition on world markets, and that in itself is fal

Order! The honourable member's time has lacy. To rdate the present situation to what

expired.

existed in 1 947 is totally misleading. In 1 947 the

Industrial Relations

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 0 1 9

world, particularly Europe and Asia, was recover ing from a world war. To say that situation is simi lar to what exists in the world today is totally mis leading. Today Australian producers face widespread competition from Europe and from Asia in particular. In 1 947 that competition did not exist. It was also misleading for the honour able member for Wills to say that the economy of this country could withstand the impact of a 35-hour week or for that matter, any adjustment to working hours. He quoted from a decision of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission in which it said that it saw no dangers in shorter working hours, that the economy could withstand them. But in his speech the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock) said that there were very considerable dangers, particularly in relation to what might happen to inflation and the inflationary impact on this country and its competi tiveness on world markets.
It is probably significant that we look at what happened to the inflation rate in Australia follow ing that decision in 1 947. In 1 947 the inflation rate in Australia was 3.8 per cent. That was the year that the 40-hour week was introduced into this country. In 1 948 that inflation rate had risen to 9 per cent. By 1 949 it had risen to 9.3 per cent; in 1 950 it had risen to 1 0. 3 per cent and by 1 95 1 it had reached 20.7 per cent. That is what happend to Australia's inflation rate at that time, at a time when we did not face very heavy pressure on the world markets from the producers in Europe and Asia. At this point in time we do face that competition, and what is likely to happen to our inflation rate makes the mind boggle. I suggest that with the inflation rate at a starting level of 9.3 per cent, we will be looking to astronomical inflation rates in this country if this proposal gets widespread ac ceptance in this country.
The Minister in his speech suggested three options that employers were likely to adopt if the 35-hour week were introduced across the board in this country. The Minister said that employers might seek to reduce the labour cost by asking employees to work longer hours; in other words, to maintain existing production in a 40-hour week at 35-hour week rates. That is one option available to them. The second option available to the employer is to ask the employees to work more over time, or to put on more employees to cover the shortfall. The third option that the Minister suggested was for the employer simply to reduce his production. All of those options, as the Minister quite rightly said, would increase the unit cost of production to Australian consumers. That is quite true.

What the Minister failed to mention in his syn opsis was a fourth option that is available to employers and manufacturers, and that is to turn more and more to technology. That, in my opinion, as was mentioned by the honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall) , is probably the most obvious solution, and one that employers would adopt. Rather than incur the ex pense of paying employees, of putting on more people, or of paying overtime, employers would simply put in more machines. What the Opposition would do is put more people on the dole queues. That is what the honourable member for Wills wants to do. He thinks it is expedient to put more people on the dole queues because that is the way he thinks he might become leader of the Australian Labor Party and therefore get to be elected Prime Minister.
Mr Hawke-I take a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. I take exception to the prop osition that I want to put people on the dole queues for any purpose, including the one that was suggested. It is objectionable, and I ask the honourable member to withdraw.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-I think under the circumstances the honourable member for Wilmot might well withdraw.
Mr BURR-I ask the honourable member for Wills to indicate under which Standing Order he is taking his objection.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Wills is not obliged to respond to that direct question. The Chair upholds the point of order on the basis that the statement of the honourable member for Wilmot was a personal reflection on the character of the honourable member for Wills.
Mr BURR-I accede to your ruling, Mr Deputy Speaker, and withdraw. I say, then, that if more people were unemployed in this country it may be time that for political expediency that might be useful, in political propaganda terms, to the Australian Labor Party, and more particularly to those people who might aspire to the lead ership of that party. What we on this side of the House are proposing is to protect the jobs of those people who are currently working and to try to create jobs for those people who unfortunately are not working. What honourable members opposite are trying to do by imposing this additional cost on industry, by making our industries less competitive on world markets, is to put people on the dole queues. If inflation is increased there will be more people on the dole queues. If and when that comes about, let the members of the Opposition bear that tag around their necks when the

1 020 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Industrial Relations

next election comes around. How they could live with that I do not honestly know. Honourable members on the opposite side do not care about unemployment. All they want to do is to create more unemployment for political expediency. They have my contempt for taking that attitude. If I may continue--
Mr Hawke-You haven't started yet.

only reach the conclusion that the people who put

forward that view are either naive in the extreme

or they are purposely trying to subvert the Aus

tralian economy. There can be no other alterna

tive. Let the comes into.

Opposition

decide

what

categ-ory

it

Mr Hawke-Which category does the Arbi tration Commission come into?

Mr BURR-I thank the honourable member. The reason this proposal is so dangerous is that, as the Minister pointed out, it increases the per unit wage cost on all those people who are employing workers in their industry. The per unit or per hour wage cost, as the Minister has quite correctly said, will increase by something like 1 4 per cent or, if they use overtime as an equivalent, by up to 2 1 per cent. The Opposition has not addressed itself to that aspect in this debate, but it is a reality. If there are employers who are in that situation, they must do something to obviate that increased de mand on their wage costs. The Minister has mentioned three alternatives available to employers. I have mentioned a fourth one, which I think.is the most obvious-that is the use of technology.

Mr BURR-I am grateful to the honourable member for Wills for mentioning the Arbitration Commission. He was quite right when earlier in the debate he referred to the role of the Arbi tration Commission. As he quite rightly pointed out, basically the role of the Arbitration Commission is to settle industrial disputes. In other words, if an industrial dispute exists, it is the role of the Commission to find a formula to settle that dispute. It is not the appropriate body to deter mine the future economic policies of this country. Its role is to settle disputes. It is totally misleading to say that the Arbitration Commission is the authoritative body to determine the future economy of this country. That is what the honourable member for Wills did, and it is totally misleading.

The other fallacious argument that the Opposition has p u t forwa r d - I find it quite incredible-is that there have been no changes to working hours since 1 947. What a complete misrepresentation of the facts that is. Let us look at the situation since 1 947. In 1 963, annual leave was increased from two -weeks to three weeks. I wonder whether we could call that a change to working hours. In 1 974 annual leave was increased from three weeks to four weeks. I wonder whether that was a change to working hours, or just a bonus paid by employers. In 1 972 an additional paid holiday of eight hours was awarded to the metal trades industry. Good on Halfpenny!
Between 1953 and 1957 long service leave was introduced in the metal trades industry where, generally speaking, none applied previously. The entitlement was 1 3 weeks long service leave after 20 years service. Do we not call that a change in working hours? In 1 963-64 the entitlement was raised to 1 3 weeks after 1 5 years service. Is that a change in working hours or not? The net result of what the opposition is saying is that if the 3 5-hour week were to be introduced at this stage it would change the present situation from employees re ceiving four weeks annual leave to their receiving 1 0 weeks annual leave. That is the sort of impost that the Opposition is proposing to put on the Australian business community. To say that that will not have an impact on our economy and employment opportunities is totally misleading. I can .

If we look at the alternatives facing the Government, it could ask employers to resist the pressure being applied by the union movement and by the Australian Labor Party. I venture to suggest that if this action and, in particular, the reactions by the Altona Petrochemicals Cd. Ltd are to be accepted by other employers-in other words, a sweetheart agreement between the employers and the unions-then it is reasonable for the Government to look at the tariff pr:otec tion being afforded those companies. We cannot expect the Government to give to those companies tariff protection from imported prod ucts and at the same time impose a cost increase on Australian consumers, as. is presently being done. If, for the sake of expediency, employers want to come to a sweetheart agreement with the unions then they will have to pay the costs out of their profits and not increase the cost to the consumers of Australia. I think the Parliament should oppose this measure by every means available to it and completely destroy any theory that this will not affect future employment prospects in this country. This measure will destroy present employees and it will destroy prospects for the future.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Debate (on motion by Mr Cunningham) adjourned.

Defence Personnel

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 02 1

DEFENCE PERSONNEL

to this country, and I invite m y honourable friend

Ministerial Statement
Mr KILLEN ( Moreto n - M i nister for Defence) -by leave-This morning the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) addressed a question to me. Some 1 2 questions reside within that question. I do not offer complaint about these matters, but I observe in passing that I would have regarded the question as being a complete dis grace to parliamentary proceedings. If, in the future I am asked a question of that character I will offer no apology to the House if I turn round and say: 'Very well, I will take up the rest of Ques tion Time answering the questions'. I believe that would be an outrage to all honourable ladies and gentlemen who sit in this chamber. I appeal--
Mr Barry Jones-Many of your colleagues do it; you don't.

to point to one public or private declaration where I have ever used a time scale with reference to a threat against this country. I have sought, quietly and purposefully, although to some people unsuccessfully, to encourage the view that men and women of good will, with an affection for their country, will maintain the security and in tegrity of their country if they are alert to its responsibilities at all times. That has been my charter, and I do not resile from it. My friend in his preface added insult, but not to me. I suppose I should be inured to it, although I confess I am not completely. That ultimate estate is yet to come. Having asked his 12 questions, he turned around and said: 'Is this a credible defence capability for the country? ' I will use his language: 'A credible defence force'. I regard that as a gross gratuitous insult to all those who are involved in maintaining

Mr KILLEN-I have been in this place for a very long time, may I remind the honourable member who interjects with synthetic ferocity.
Mr Barry Jones-No, with sympathy. Mr KILLEN-J am glad to have the sympathy of the honourable member, although I think it

the existing defence capabilities of this country. With respect to the honourable gentleman's misrepresentation against me, I do not ask for his withdrawal. I mention it merely to despise it. I turn now to the 1 2 questions that the honourable gentleman put in his one question.

puts my case at peril. I want to appeal to honour able ladies and gentlemen in this House. Question

Mr Campbell-At last.

Time is for the purpose, albeit embarrassing for one side Or the other, and I am not particularly attracted to that, of eliciting information. I speak in tel'ms of affection and do not seek at all to hurt the feelings of the honourable member.

Mr KILLEN-I was assured when the honour able gentleman came here that he represented a museum of defects. He should not confirm it so readily. The Leader of the Opposition said that because of flying time restrictions the number of

Mr Holding-Not much. Come on, now.

Fi ll crews had been reduced. That simply is not

Mr KILLEN-No, I do not. The Leader of the Opposition carries an enormous burden and responsibility, but when I find my friend using Ques tion - Time in this fashion I voice my complaint. That is the last I will say of that. The preface to his question attributed to me language that I have never used in my life. I do not object to hard argument, however fiercely it may be delivered, but if a person wants to use hard argument let him make certain that he is in command of the facts. Today the Leader of the Opposition started his question by saying:

... facing

on Tut:Sday at Question Time, he no direct threat of invasion in

stthaetendetxhtat1f0aryfer<a:>mrs

Australia faced . . .

true. It is hot because of flying time restrictions that the number of Fi l l crews has been reduced. The manning target has been reduced because of attrition. The number of F I l l aircraft has been reduced from 24 to 20. The honourable gentle man, and a number of others, have said that well over 40 aircraft-I will come to the question of his mathematics later on-have been lost. The flying of operational tactical aircraft is a highly dangerous business, and it has to be done and taken to the ultimate so that in times of operation the crews know what they are about. If we compare civilian flying with what I call the special transport squadron, there has not been one acci dent. If we look at the flying of Hercules and

I apologise for the convoluted style of language, but I was educated in a bush correspondence school.
Mr Holding-It shows. Mr KILLEN-At least it is not the convol

Orion aircraft, there has not been one accident. But when it comes to throwing around the sky at night or in the day a single-engine aircraft such as the Mirage, taking it to its ultimate limit, it is a highly dangerous business. The flying of an F I l l at a speed of 600 knots at a height of 600 or 700

ution that pours from the honourable gentleman metres above the ground is a highly dangerous

from Victoria. I have never used the words ' 1 0 business. To do a terrain-following, I guarantee,

years', 'five years' o r ' 1 5 years' in terms o fa threat would convert a raging agnostic into an instant

1 022 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Defence Personnel

Christian. It is a highly dangerous business. T o operate a single-engine helicopter under all sorts of conditions, again, is a highly dangerous business.
The premier strike base of the Royal Australian Air Force, Amberley, is in the honourable gentle man's electorate. He should know better, although I am bound to say to him in no churlish way that he commanded at the last Federal election 26 per cent of the vote there. If it had not been for the donkey vote he would have lost his deposit. Why does not the honourable member go to the base and talk to the crews? He would be told quite candidly why there are fewer FI l l crews today. The honourable gentleman knows, because I have told the House, that four replace ment F I l l aircraft will arrive in this country. As a consequence there will be more crews. The honourable gentleman knows perfectly well that 20 F I l l aircraft are never at full operational con dition and character at the one time. They go through various stages of maintenance.

adjustments will be made. Thirteen operational crews are available-two staff crews and another two crews undergoing specialised training. That training will be completed about the middle of this year.
1 turn to the fourth charge which my friend made, this one about submarines. He stated that we are 2icrews short for our six submarines, This is simply not true. [ should not use the word 'true'. I do not wish to be polemical. It is not correct In peace time only of the order of four submarines are operational at any one time. The other two are undergoing refits. If the honourable gentlemen or ladies opposite are interested in what is involved in a submarine refit, ] would be happy to arrange for them to see a submarine undergoing a refit. It is not something that takes place in a matter of a few weeks. It is a most exhaustive and elaborate undertaking, calling for high skills, which my honourable friend who represents the seat of Melbourne understands.

I know that my friend will understand my sense of indignation. He disappoints me enormously. He asked, in his second question, whether',the overall squadron fiying time was at a level below that required for efficiency. It is no wonder that we have difficulties making arrests in the community. There is no evidence to support that at all. On the authority of the Chief of Air Staff I say to the honourable member that it is not true. Air Marshal McNamara has no reason, after a dis tinguished record in war and peace, to mislead this Government. He served the Labor Government. I say to my friend that what he says is not true. Why should my friend use such a mean and dishevelled argument?
1 now turn to his third question which was put in the following propositional form 'that we have 20 Orion aircraft but only 1 5 crews'. What is so re markable about that? The fact is that at any one time we do not have the 20 aircraft fiying. If my friends opposite have any doubt about this 1 would be quite happy for them--
Mr Beazley-It is usual to have more crews than aircraft.
Mr KILLEN-I will come to the question of 'the relationship of crews to aircraft in a moment. ] ask the honourable member to try to contain his argument. J will be quite happy to listen to it. If he would like to go to Edinburgh and talk to the crews there-if any of my friends opposite wish to do so-I would be happy to facilitate that. At any one time there would be of the order of 1 0 Orion surveillance aircraft at full operational capacity. Twenty crews are not needed for that purpose. In the event of hostilities emerging then, of course,

Mr Holding-The member for M elbourne Ports understands too.
Mr KILLEN-I am sorry. I do not wish to in sult either of them. The Leader of Opposition stated that one-quarter of our Mirage aircraft still existing are not operational. [ do not know from where he got that information. It is not correct. There are 85 Mirage aircraft in the RAAF inven tory. A total of 84 of the aircraft are operational. The remaining one, a dual-seat trainer, is held in long term storage. It is regarded as non operational. Is that a crime? What is my friend getting at? If he wants some information on this matter I would be quite happy without let or hin drance for appropriate officers to brief him. All these aircraft, as the House will appreciate, at some stage require routine maintenance, but they can be made operational, if needs be, at very short notice.
The honourable gentleman said that well over 40 military aircraft have been lost during my min istry. I will not weary the House about this. My friend has put out a statement in which that figure has gone to 50.
Mr Hayden-That is right, the latest one this morning at 1 1 . 30.
Mr KILLEN-With great respect to my friend, he is wrong. The 40, he says, has gone to 50. I have explained to the House the circumstances under which the RAAF operates oper ational aircraft. [ am talking about fighters, inter ceptors, strike aircraft and helicopters operating under difficult circumstances. The record of the RAAF in operating both in war and in peace time is second to none. Some time ago the Deputy

Defence Personnel

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1023

Chief of Air Staff, Air Vice Marshal Barnes, a disflown by Mirages are fewer than even the mini-

tinguished airman, in a letter to the Australian mum required. Which judgment does this House

replied to what can be described only as some and the country prefer-that of Her Majesty's

grievous nonsense about aircraft losses. Many of Leader of the Opposition who is untutored in

these aircraft must be pushed to their ultimate. As these matters or that of the Chief of the Air Staff,

a consequence, there is a grave danger. I am sorry a distinguished Australian airman? I would be

the honourable gentleman referred to that interested to hear whether the honourable gentle-

aircraft.

man proposes to impale the integrity, the opinion,

Then he turned to HMAS Melbourne, I of Air Marshal McNamara.

thought with synthetic affection for the aircraft Again, the Leader of the Opposition said that

carrier. I did not know my friend was so devoted there was an insufficient number of Mirage servic-

to having a replacement for HMAS Melbourne, ing crews. The same answer that I gave to his pre-

but I suppose, like Saul of Tarsus on the road to vious question is applicable to this. Then the

Damascus, conversion comes in a great variety of Leader of the Opposition turned around and

ways. The honourable gentleman said that referred to the event of war. How on earth did Mr

Skyhawk strike aircraft from the aircraft carrier Speaker-he was in a splendidly indulgent mood

Melbourne cannot be catapulted. That is not true. this morning-allow 12 questions? I am talking

If the honourable gentleman doubts it we will now about expansion of the air forces. It would be

arrange tomorrow for him to be catapulted off the difficult because no trained personnel could be

aircraft carrier Melbourne.

released for training. I admit to my honourable

Mr Armitage-He has been.

friend, to all those who take an interest in these matters, to the honourable member for St George

Mr KILLEN-He has. I do not disguise for one moment the interest that the honourable gentleman takes in the Services. My regret is that he does not seem to soak up what he is told. At present the catapult can be used, but certain modifications are underway. I told my friend that, not in a statement that I gave to him but in

(Mr Morrison), that there is no ready answer to this sort of question whatsoever. Any expansion of military strength from peacetime to war would depend entirely upon what sort of conflict we were involved in. This was precisely what I was seeking to encourage the House to accept on Tuseday. This country by dint of its geography, its

answers to questions. I will not weary the House circumstances-economic, cultural and social-

with it.

must be prepared to accept a wide range of con-

tingencies. I will not stay here, I assure the House,

He made another charge about the Melbourne. .for another quarter of a century. But I have got to

He said that two years will go by, crippling the the stage when I value the fact that I have had the

main strike weapon of our major surface vessel. I opportunity of serving in this Parliament for so

say no more than that I am astonished that the long. I certainly will not sully what record I may

honourable gentleman now is such a vigorous supor may not have by misleading this Parliament. I

porter of aircraft carriers. I am surprised that he gave this Parliament what I believed to be the

did not at least acknowledge that the Melbourne facts. I believe that this Parliament and the

today still operates despite temporary restrictions country must understand that we do face a wide

on the operation of Skyhawk aircraft. It still operspread of contingencies. Some of them may seem

ates tracker aircraft and helicopter aircraft. This distant and unreal but we must be prepared for

House was informed by me a few months ago that them. It is in precisely that manner that I spoke to

it was the proposal of the Government to replace the House in reply to a question on Tuesday. The

the Melbourne with a helicopter aircraft carrier, last question that my honourable friend addressed

and not one peep of protest came from my friend to me was to this effect:

the Leader of the Opposition. Is he complaining about the new, albeit temporary, role of the HMAS Melbourne today? Why did he not com-

. . . I ask the Minister whether he regards the situation as being consistent with a credible Defence Force capable of responding to Australia's needs in the light of the grim scen-

plain about the announcement when I made it ario that he has outlined as potentially threatening Australia.

some time ago?

I outlined a grim scenario for the whole of man-

I turn to the ninth 'question' in his one question. kind. I implore this House: Do not turn away

He said that the hours flown by Mirages are fewer from that scenario. The supreme test to contem-

than even the minimum required. I spoke to the porary politics today, be it in this country or in

Chief of the Air Staff, Air Marshal Sir Neville any country anywhere in the world, is to under-

McNamara, about this matter. My reply is: He stand the potential holocaust that can engulf the

has advised me that it is not correct that the hours whole of mankind. When I refer to that I refer to

1 024 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Defence Personnel

it with the utmost seriousness. All men and have spent a very long time together in this Parlia

women of good will in the name of consciousness ment. We have not always agreed; I find no cause

surely must be beckoned toward finding a solution to complain about that. I have sought during the

to that problem. I examined all of the contingen time that I have been Minister for Defence to en

cies. If my honourable friend will not accept my courage a bipartisan approach to defence matters.

view on these matters let me then invoke the auth For what reason? I say bluntly-I have said it

ority of three people not influenced by my politi before-no orthodox political party in this coun

cal persuasion as to whether this country has try commands a monopoly ofpatriotism. Defence

developed a reasonable and a proper defence is too expensive, too complex, too important for it

capability. The first authority I invoke is that of to be exposed to the pettiness of trivial political

Her Majesty's Deputy Leader of the Opposition conflict. Despite the fact that I have met with

in this Parliament (Mr Lionel Bowen) . Speaking some discouragement in my quest for a genuine

on Tuesday of this week-the day that I was sup bipartisan policy on defence, I will continue. I

posed to have sinned so grievouslyhe said:

appeal to my friend. He is the possessor of some of

We are contributing substantially to the ANZUS alliance.
Was that asseveration made lightly? Did my friend, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, merely churn out those words as some expression of persiflage? Were those words not meant? If we are contributing to the ANZUS alliance substantially, in what way, in what manner, in what form are we making that contribution? Again, my honourable friend the Deputy Leader of the Opposition said:
We are in the process of becoming a major power in South East Asia-we already are a major power in the South

the most sensitive secrets this country holds. I hope that he would seek to ensure that he would not betray those to his own party and to the nation because there is such a thing as the national interest. I hope that he is prepared to work for it, to speak for it vigorously but to do so with a sense of genuine patriotism. I present the following paper:
Defence Force-Operational capacity-Ministerial Statement, 26 March 1981 .
M otion (by M r Fife) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.

Pacific . . .

Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Oppo

Does the Leader of the Opposition impugn the opinion, the views, of his Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we are this substantial power? If so, then please-candour commands its own sense of grace-he should turn around and say to him: 'You were in error along with Killen'. The second authority I invoke is Mr Peter Robinson of the Australian Financial Review.
Opposition members interjecting- --

sition) (8.49)-We have all been numbed by the full impact of the precision guided hot air blast coming from the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen). It was largely irrelevant to the issues which were raised at Question Time today. We do not want histrionics; we want performance. We want substance. We want explanation. We want justification for the shambles the defence policy is in today. The Minister for Defence is responsible. He has spent five years administering that port

Mr KILLEN-He has been an unsparing critic folio and in that five years there has been a re

of me. Listen to what he had to say. Writing in the markable run down in the capacity, the readiness

Defence 81 supplement ofMarch 1 6 he wrote:

of our defence forces and a run down in the mor

The key about Australia's present defences is that, in a re gional context they are quite formidable.
We pack a powerful punch. Because this punch is com posed of a very complex skein of interacting institutions, skills, weapons systems, production capabilities, public atti

ale, the elan of the members of the armed Ser cices. They are fine people but people abused and misused-they believe that-by a government that is cynical. It is cynical because it resorts to rhetoric but does not back it up with perform

tudes and strategic purposes, its real strength often tcnds to be obscured by the endless debate on defencc.

ance. The Minister for Defence is proud that he is a product of the education of the bush correspon

Thirdly and finally I refer to the views offered by dence school. What is quite evident from his per

Mr Harold Brown, the former Secretary of De formance tonight is that quite a number of his

fence in the Carter Administration. In his annual lessons went astray in the mail.

report for the fiscal year 1 982 Mr Brown states:

He says that he will arrange for me to be

Australia and New Zealand maintain high quality armed catapulted from HMAS Melbourne. I hope that

forces which are capable ofdealing with most regional threats they might face.

he can do better than he did the last time he issued a similar invitation to a member on this side of the

Was that some political exuberance by Mr Brown House. Last year the honourable member for

shortly before he relinquished his high office? I Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) raised queries about

say to my friend the Leader of the Opposition: We Bofors armaments some 35 years of age, of World

Defence Personnel

26 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1025

War II vintage and totally antiquated being in stalled on our most modern patrol vessels. The Minister said: 'I would like to shoot a round from a Bofors up your bracket'. Everyone on the Government side said, 'Ha, ha; he, he'; dutifully responding. After all, humour, burlesque, cheap vaudeville, is far better than facing the grist of real defence policy.
The honourable member for Fremantle went out on the patrol vessel, and what do you know? The Bofors would not work; it jammed. It is a pity that some of the Minister's rhetoric would not work, would jam. We would get down to hard facts. From the Minister's performance tonight, when honourable members look at the document that he has tabled, they will see that he has con firmed the points that I have made. What he has done is not offer explanations of the deficiencies that I have raised but rather to indulge in rhetori cal histrionics, which is irrelevant. That is not the performance that we want to see. It is a flimsy cover-up and is unconvincing.
Today the defence policy of this country is in a shambles. Australia, under Defence Minister Killen, is naked and disabled. It is all very well for him to engage in the purple rhetoric of the global threat of world communism, but at home, if I can adapt a rather clumsy metaphor that was used by a spokesman on defence matters for a former Op position, the defence forces, because of the way in which theyhavebeen impaired under his administration, could not repel a Lion's Club picnic at Cribb Island on an overcast weekend.
Let us examine some of the facts. The Minister casts doubt on my assertion that flying time re strictions have been imposed in regard to F l Us and that, in consequence, crews have been reduced. The Minister says that that is not correct. Let me tell him the facts. Amberley is in my electorate. I am well informed by friends of mine at Amberley as to what is happening there, as to the general disillusionment with his administra tion. The Queensland Times, the daily newspaper of Ipswich which services the Amberley base, stated on 1 7 March:
Air Commodore Coy-
He happens to be the officer commanding Ambrley-
-told Mr Fraser the number of Fi l l crews had recently been reduced because the squadron was fiying only 45 sorties a week.
'This is less than we would like and we have recently reduced the number ofcrews', he said.
The Minister said that it is because the total number of planes available has been reduced. That is sheer hyprocrisy. The Minister knows that

it is common practice in America for two air crews to operate from the same F I l l aircraft in order to maximise their operational capacity and contribution.
Let us examine what else Air Commodore Coy said, since the Minister stated that there was no deficiency, no run-down, no rusting of the works of the defence Services. The report in the Queensland Times continues:
Air Commodore Coy said No. 2-the Canberra squadron had nine aircraft '28 years old, which are still doing a good job but are becoming expensive to maintain because of their age',
It reminds us of a bit of the Minister's rhetoric, which I heard for more than 20 years. It does not change. The report continues:
He said No. 12 Squadron had eight Chinooks operational, one at the depot undergoing extensive maintenance and 'three more in long term storage'.
They ought to put the Minister for Defence in long term storage in view of the nonsense that he has gone on with tonight.
The overall flying time is at a level below that required for efficiency. I assert that as a statement of fact, as someone who keeps in close personal contact with the people in my electorate, some of whom happen to be the members of the air crew flying F I l ls. We have 20 Orion aircraft and only 1 5 crews. The Minister confirmed that tonight and tried to argue that it was sufficient for 20 air craft to have only 1 0 aircrews. On any formula as to what is required in terms of maintenance, pull ing aircraft out of operational capacity, I can tell honourable members that you do not put 50 per cent of your total operational force into a state of inactivity in order to perform maintenance. The Minister knows that that is not true. Anyone who is connected with the Air Force will tell him that that is totally dishonest. I am not suggesting that the Minister is being dishonest, but the people who rushed around so feverishly fabricating this flimsy defence have misled him. I say to him: 'Do more hard work yourself and know what is happening in your Department'.
Let us hear now from Dr O'Neill who is a well known expert in this field. He is an academic, a former Rhodes scholar. If that is not two strikes against him he is a former military officer as well. In a newspaper article he is reported as having said:
20 Orion aircraft don't have 20 crews at the moment. They have 1 5 or 1 6, and they need two or three crews per aircra,ft to operate around the clock.
They cannot even get half way around the clock with this Minister for Defence. It is sheer non sense for him to fabricate the sorts of flimsy prop ositions that he has put here tonight, to try to cover it all over with the sort of florid rhetoric to

1 026 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Defence Personnel

which he likes to resort. It is entertaining, but we for Defence, with a stack of experts behind him,

are not attending vaudeville. We are talking about and has one area of responsibility only. He should

the protection and security of this country.

have read, or received a briefing on, what Admiral

I agree that no one has a monopoly on patriot ism, but on the Minister's performance tonight he is least able to raise questions about anyone else's monopoly. He reminded me today, in a rather sen tentious manner, that he at least had served his country in his country's uniform. What he did not tell us was that in the last six weeks of the 1 945 period, before the war ended, he served as chief drink waiter in the air gunners' mess. The Navy is two and a half crews short for six submarines. The Minister raises questions about my integrity in relation to that statement and asks where I got my information. I will tell him. It came right from the horse's mouth, as they say. It came from Admiral Synnot, Chief of Defence Force Staff. Admiral Synnot said last week, in his evidence to the Joint

Synnot told that Committee. He said very simply-I am quoting from reliable notes taken by a witness to what took place-that there are two Mirage fighter squadrons in Malaysia that are operational, there is one in Australia. Is it not re markable? The Minister for Defence is prepared to provide twice the fighter defence capacity for Malaysia that he is prepared to provide for Australia. In fact that represents a total of only 54 aircraft. One need only do a few sums.
Admiral Synnot said that the remaining 2 1 are therefore presumed to be undergoing maintenance and repairs. That is remarkable. The best that the Chief of Defence Force Staff can say is that it is presumed that that is happening. They might have disappeared. Someone might have

Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, that gone off on a jaunt in them with a girlfriend or

at present four submarines are fully manned, and whatever. He is talking about 21 of a total of 87. It

two-one entering refit and one coming out of is simple arithmetic, my friend. I do not know how

refit-possess skeleton crews; that the Navy likes well the Minister did at law . They tell me that the

to have a spare crew for a submarine on shore at gaolers at Boggo Road liked him when he was be

all times to conduct routine maintenance on sub fore the bar. He kept them in business. Twenty

marines in refit. It is true that I do maintain a keen one out of 87 means that one-quarter of those air

interest in defence matters and I know that, apart craft are not operational.

from the fact that some submariners are very un happy with their conditions of service, they are fine and dedicated people--

I raised the question of the 40 military aircraft which have been lost during the time of his minis try. The figures have been collated not by me but

Mr Kerin-That's right. How many torpedoes
have they got?

by the defence research section of the Parliamentary Library. Tonight it came up with the latest figures, which show that on the latest calculations

Mr HAYDEN-Some of them live in the elec 50 aircraft have been lost. The latest aircraft to hit torate of the honourable member for Werriwa the ground, to fall out of the air - an Iroquois heli

(Mr Kerin) , who would know about this. I know that, in regard to those two submarines-one is going into refit and one is coming out-with skel eton crews, the total would not equal half a sub

copter at the naval air base -did so at 1 1 .30 this morning. Fifty aircraft have been lost, destroyed, including four F I l ls, 1 2 Mirages, 6 Skyhawks and 6 Iroquois helicopters. I estimate conservatively

marine crew. So we have four and a half submar somewhere between $250m and $300m has gone

ine crews for six submarines when Admiral Synnot says that we should have seven crews. That is where we get the difference. It is simple ar ithmetic, my friend. The statement is made that a

down the drain. It is all very well for the Minister for Defence in cavalier fashion to brush it ofr as though it is not significant. It is a lot of money and a lot of aircraft, and it should never have

number of experienced submariners serving else happened.

where could be called back to serve in submarines in an emergency. Thus, the Minister is prepared to punch holes in other parts of the defence structure to try to fill that hole. That is totally non-credible.

During the time of the Labor Government we lost one F I l l because a bird went through the cockpit canopy. The Americans had already made modifications to make sure that did not happen. We lost another F I l l in New Zealand because

The Minister casts doubts on the assertion that the nose wheel threw up water into the air intake,

one-quarter of our Mirages still existing are not which extinguished the jet flame. The Americans

operational. He asks where I got the evidence of already had carried out modifications to make

that. I wish that he would do a fraction of the sure that did not happen. This penny-pinching

work on defence matters that I do. I am the Government is prepared to write off $ 1 5m air

Leader of the Opposition and have to cover a craft, just like that, and say how clever it is as an

wide range of responsibilities. He is the Minister economic manager. In the meantime, it exposes

Defence Personnel

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 027

the defence preparedness and capacity of this

country. I referred to the fact that since

November 1 980 Navy Skyhawk aircraft from the

aircraft carrier HMAS Melbourne have not been

able to be catapulted. The Minister said it is not

correct to say they cannot be catapulted, but he

went on to say that it has been decided to shore

base the Skyhawks until Melbourne begins its

next planned refit early in 1 982. For good

measure, he added that the disembarked

Skyhawks are maintaining a concentrated train

ing program from Nowra, including touch and go

landings from Melbourne. Someone should ex

plain to the Minister what a touch and go landing

is. It does not involve a catapult or an arrester at

all. On all the evidence available, including his

answer to my question, the fact is that Melbourne

will be unable to provide a strike capacity for the

Navy, to my

weihgihcthhisqsuuepsptioosne.dItombuestitcsormolper. eIsnsotwhi.Srebfeer

cause I have only about a quarter of the time

made available to the Minister. Perhaps he will

extend my time?

Mr Killen-Yes, most decidedly.

Mr Groom-We can go all night.

Mr N. A. Brown-If we can stay awake that long.

Mr HAYDEN-It is very hard to distinguish the difference. My eighth question referred to the fact that the Navy Skyhawk aircraft would not be based on Melbourne for another two years. The Minister said that Skyhawks will not be embarked on Melbourne from November 1 980 to November 1 982. He is bad on simple arithmetic. November 1 980 to November 1 982 is two years, so the assertion of fact implicit in my question is entirely correct. For good measure, the Minister added, and there is no doubt that it is totally misleading, that 'some surface strike capabilities' will remain with the Melbourne until she enters her planned refit. What sort of strike capabilities will we have with a Tracker lumbering down the flight deck of the Melbourne? Its exclusive role is anti submarine warfare work, as is that of a helicopter. The only aircraft associated with the Melbourne that have a strike capacity are the Skyhawks. The Minister is trying to deceive and mislead, not in tentionally but because of the people who have been giving him advice on these matters, their flimsy and frantic efforts to try to cover up what is a national scandal.

I suggested that the number of hours flown by Mirage aircraft is less than even the minimum requirement. I also suggested that there was an insufficient number of Mirage servicing crews, and there were a couple of other matters. Let me

quote a couple ' of sources which have available. (Extension of time granted).

bLecaounnce

Oakes, whois well known as a man who can pick

up documents from the backs of trucks in this

city, said in the Age of Wednesday, 5 March:

But it is the detailed minute paper from Air Marshal McNamara which brings home most vividly the way tight spending clamps have affected the services.

Among other things, it shows that-

This is the minute paper of the Chief of the Air Staff-

the RAAF is so undermanned that its commander regards it as operating on the basis of a 5-day onc-shift-a-day week

That is a bit more than they get out of their Minister. The minute continues:

Air crews have not become fuIly proficient in their oper ational roles because ofcutbacks in flying time.

A shortage of maintenance personnel and supervisors has badly affected the efficiency and availability of Mirage fighters and Canberra bornbers.

The manpower shortage has meant that there has been little or no time for RAAFpersonnel to cngage in physical training, weapons practice and other general service training which all servicemen are supposed to undergo.

The newspaper article later stated:

Air Marshal McNamara said in the memo that, because of
restrictions on the RAAF's manpower, 'on-going tasks cannot be satisfied by present or prospective manning levels.'

I have a stack of additional quotes. If anyone

doubts them, with their concurrence I will have

them incorporated in Hansard. That is a searing

indictment of the shortcomings, the deficiencies,

in defence preparedness under the administration

of the Minister for Defence. I n my question I said

that in the event of war, expansion of the Air

Force would be difficult because no trained per

sonnel could be released for training. Again, that

matter was included in the sources to which I have

resorted for these quotes. If necessary, I will go

back and dig it out, but one does have a limitation

of time. I raise the matter of the Mirage aircraft,

ano refer to something I could have said but did

not because there were so many matters to be

raised and I raised sufficient to make the point.

There are inadequate supplies of several types of

30 millimetre ammunition for the Mirage aircraft,

and the airframes of the Mirages are so suspect

that the aircraft is subject to such severe

manoeuvring restrictions that it cannot fly on re

alistic operations for adequate training in air to air

combat. We are running a sort of broomstick

army which the Minister is trying to get airborne.

I can quote from more of those sources, but I want

to get on with other. matters in the limited time

taivoauislasbtaletetmo.emnet .hFeirneaflelyrr, eind

the Minister's to Mr Harold

senten Brown ,

the former United States Secretary of Defence,

who stated:

1 028 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Defence Personnel

Australia and New Zealand maintain high quality armed forces which are capable of dealing with most-

on equipment alone. I repeat, $ 1 ,OOOm on equip ment alone. So the recycled five-year defence

I wonder what the others are-

program lives up to the record of its predecessor.

regio,nal threats they might face.

We can say that under the present Minister for

H was generous of Mr Brown to concede that, but on the basis of the advice available to the United States administration, which would be advice sent on from Australia, there are no threats portending for Australia. Very simply, he is saying that in spite of the massive mess our defence forces are in, the shambles of our defence policy and our inca pacity to mount any real defensive punching force, it does not matter because there is no threat and therefore our forces are capable of dealing with most regional threats. Let me quote as an authority the Sydney Morning Herald of 1 9 March, and this can be confirmed by a number of people who were present when the evidence was given. It stated:

Defence, defence spending on equipment for the period 1 976 to 1 985 fell short of target by well over $2,OOOm. That is the record of the Minister, for all of his purple rhetoric. That is the substance that he does not want to attend to. That is why he does his soft shoe shuffle around here like a vaudeville actor on half pay. I will tell honourable members the conditions of our armed Services. I could not do better than to quote our spokesman on defence matters, the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) . In this Parliament last December he said:
We are now no better prepared administratively or tech nically in the defence area than we were when Menzies was sacked for incompetence in 1 941 when Australia was in a de fence situation. Deferment and delay in the ordering of De

There was no threat of a major land assault on Australia or of an air attack on south-eastern Australian cities, the Chiefof

fence equipment has occurred ever since this Government came to Office. It is a talk Government.

the Defence Force Staff, Sir Anthony Synnot said yester day . . . with the exception of the United States, he did not believe any country in the world was capable of launching an invasion of Australia.
'We do not identify one single threat', he said. Australia was a long way from the centre of superpower rivalry and a super power like the USSR did not have sufficient amphibious

I do not have time to cite the figures, but the only time that new capital expediture commitments were made-this Government is living off the fat of them-that started to lift the equipment avail ability to the defence forces, was when the honourable member for S t George (Mr

forces.

Morrison) was the Defence Minister for this

'It would be ridiculous of the two superpowers to think of a country. He was one of the most thoughtful and

major invasion', Sir Anthony said.

constructive Ministers. The present Minister de

We would not believe that if we listened to the serves to be repudiated, rejected and condemned.

Minister for Defence. It is Apocalypse Now for Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)

him. I do not know what sort of role he wants to Order! The honourable member's time has play in all of that, but the fact is, if we listen to expired.

him at Question Time, that there is impending the real dark threat of world communism which is about to thunder down on the pristine virtue of

Motion (by Mr Hodges) proposed:
That the debate be now adjourned.

this marvellous country of ours. It might not hap Mr Dawkins-Where is your threadbare uni

pen tomorrow, but maybe next week. However, form? You are a phoney, Killen.

when we ask him a question about it, it turns out Mr Bourchier-Y o u are a communist that he does not even mean this decade. What sympathiser.

does he mean? What is he doing to our defence forces, apart from paralysing them, creating a total incapacity to meet the requirements of this country? This Minister lives on recycled five-year defence programs. He brought in one in 1 976 and four years later it was behind target by $ 1 ,500m.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fremantle will remain silent. The honourable member for Bendigo will remain silent.
Question put:

In capital spending alone it was behind target by The House divided.

$900m.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

The Parliamentary Library research section charged with the responsibility of defence matters has carried out some calculations. Its calculation

Ayes Noes

61 47

is that on the basis of information available commitments which have been declared for new

Majority

14

equipment, as against equipment which will be unavoidably required in that five-year period there will be a shortfall well in excess of $ l ,OOOm

Adermann) A. E. Baumc, M. E.

AYES

Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M.

Defence Personnel

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 029

AYES
Birney, R . I. Rourchier. 1. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N. A. Burr, M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Came.fOn, fan
Carlton, I. I.
Chapman, H. G. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, II. R . Falconer, P. D. Fife, W. C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groorn, R . J . Hall, Steele Harris , G . MeD. Hicks, N . J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M . Howard , J . W.

Jarman, A. W. Jull, D.F. Katter, R. C. KilJen, D.J. Lloyd, B . Lusher, S. A . Lynch, Sir PhilJip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Moore, 1. C. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, 1. R. Robinson, [an Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M . Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M . Tambling, G. E. J. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N . D.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K . C. Blewett, N . Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell, G. Cass, M . H . Charles, D. E . Child, J. Cohen, B. Cross, M . D. Cunningham, B . T. Darling, E. E . Dawkins, J . S. Duffy, M . J. Everingham, D. N. Frec, R . V. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A . C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B . C. (Teller) Hurford , C. J. Innes, D. E.

Jacobi R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Los (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones. Charles Kelly, R. J. Kent, L. Kerin, J. e. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton, P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Dren, T. Wallis, L. G. West, S. J. Willis, R. Young, M . J .

PAIRS

A nthony, J. D . Thomson, D. S.

Fry, K. Klugman, R. C.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr Dawkins-Mr Deputy Speaker, [ raise a point of order. When I was making some very measured comments about the Minister for Defence and the threadbare nature of his uni form, the honourable member for Bendigo indicated that I was a communist sympathiser. That is not true. I resent the remark. I demand that the honourable member withdraw it.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIIar) Honourable members will appreciate that in the

disorderliness at the time the Chair was denied the opportunity to hear the remark at first hand. However, the honourable member for Bendigo is called upon to withdraw the remark on the prem ise that the assertion of the honourable member for Fremantle is correct.
Mr Bourchier-} withdraw. [ do not cast aspersions on the Queen's uniform as do people who are not supporters of this country but sympathisers of foreign countries.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Bendigo is required to withdraw without qualification.
Mr Bourchier-Without qualification-and l swallow hard-l withdraw.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member tests the patience of the Chair. 1 warn him against dealing frivolously with a request from the Chair.
GOVERNOR-GENERAVS SPEECH
Address-in-Reply
Debate resumed from 5 March, on motion by Mr Spender:
That the following Address-in-Reply to the Speech of His Excellency the Governor-General be agreed to:
May it pleaseYour Excellency:
We, the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled, desire to express our loyalty to Our Most Gracious Sovereign, and to thank Your Excellency for the Speech which you have been pleased to address to Parliament.
Upon which Mr Kent had moved by way of amendment:
That the following words be added to the Address: " but note that the Government:
( 1 ) has failed to adequatelyrespond to (a) record unemployment; (b) a high and worsening level of inflation; (c) reduced and falling family livingstandards, and (d) the highest taxation burden in the nation's history;
(2) allows unsatisfactory administration of foreign investment guidelines which permit an uncritical and open door policy to the takeover of Australian industry and resources to continue, and
(3) makes no long-term provision for assistance to manufacturing industry and farming industries, which are likely to be severely disadvantaged as a result of suc cessive exchange rate revaluations and substantially increased imports in the context of resources development'.
Mr COHEN (Robertson) (9.22)-1 am not sure whether I should make this speech after the events of the last hour because as honourable members will hear it is a little in conflict with the sort of debate we have just had. In the first two weeks of this Parliament we found ourselves sadly eulogising the passing of two of our colleagues,

1 030 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Governor-General 's Speech

both of them tragically dying at a very young age. During those eulogies I was very moved by the depth of feeling that members and senators ex pressed. I have been a member of the Parliament for nearly 1 2 years. Not many members have been here longer than I have. In that time. I cannot re call an occasion when the Parliament was more united than on those solemn occasions. There was genuine grief. We all recognised, despite our political differences, that he had lost not just two par liamentarians but two good friends and that the nation was the poorer for their passing. The praise for their telents was not manufactured for the occasion. People expressed the same views in the lobby, the dining room and wherever they met.
I left the Parliament after the second week un able to get the thought out of my mind that if we as parliamentarians can come together in this way to pay tribute to two of our colleagues who have died why is it so difficult for us to unite on other occasions? I am not suggesting that politics should be a mutual admiration society. However, I believe that politics need not necessarily be the knock-down, blood and guts affair we constantly make it. There is a wide gulf between the basic philosophies of the two major groupings of Labor and non-Labor in the Parliament and a continual, vigorous and healthy debate. That does not mean that we have to go for the jugUlar at every opportunity. It does not mean that the Government should reject out of hand every suggestion the Op position makes nor that the Opposition should seek every opportunity to attack the Government. Unfortunately, for many Opposition members there are still bitter memories of 1 975. Those scars are still there. The conservatives have a lot to answer for. It is also true that the major issue of the problem, the supremacy of the House of Representatives, has not yet been resolved
Before there can be a genuine spirit of cooperation in the Parliament, the Australian Labor Party will want to see some significant action by the Liberal and National Country Party Government to change the Constitution to ensure that the co-operation and bipartisanship to which I am referring occurs not only when those parties are in government. The behaviour of the Liberal and National Country parties during the years 1 9 72 to 1 975, when they used, quite frankly, every trick in the book and a few new ones they invented themselves, will remain forever a very black page in Australia's political history. Although we will not forget those events, I believe that during the past three years we have not allowed ourselves to be distracted from the task confronting us in criticis ing the Government and putting forward alterna tive policies to the people. We will continue to do

that as is our rightful role as Her Majesty's Opposition. But, if we perceive a change in attitude by the Government, I believe we can play an even more significant role in improving the quality of life of every Australian.
This is a great country, not in the military sense, nor even perhaps in the cultural artistic or economic sense, but it is a great country because, as is probably obvious to most of its 1 4 million citizens, it has one of the highest standards of living in the world. This country, despite the events of a few years ago, has a long history of political stability. The greatest danger to health for the majority of citizens is likely to come from overindulgence. Despite the control of the media being in fewer and fewer hands, and some grossly biased elec toral practices, we enjoy basic freedom of the PreDs, freedom of association, the right to strike and free elections. This country is one of the best countries in the world in which to live. It can be better for all its citizens with the enormous poten tial wealth from its resources. Our job as parlia mentarians is to ensure that we maintain and strengthen what we have so that the abuses that exist are eliminated and the wealth that the country generates in the years ahead is shared equitably by all Australians.
I believe the average Australian, whilst recog nising there are genuine and deep differences in the political philosophies of the two major group ings in the Parliament, wants to see an end to or at least a diminution of the constant abuse, vilifica tion and confrontation that occurs in the Parliament. We should all seek to work together for the benefit of the nation as a whole. I believe there are many areas in which, if we cannot get bipar tisanship, we can reach a degree of agreement. A couple of weeks ago the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) , who is trying to inter ject at the moment and who is the shadow Minister for immigration, called for a bipartisan immi gration policy. I believe he was right. [ commend him. I also commend the Minister for Immi gration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr MacKellar) for responding as he did.
I have had some discussions with the Minister. I am impressed with his attitude and approach to a very sensitive and difficult problem. I believe he is one of th most genuinely humane and unpreju diced Ministers for immigration that this country has ever had. We will have an equally good Minister when the honourable member for Port Adelaide becomes the Minister for Immigration. It is my view that if we work hard at it we can de velop a bipartisan foreign policy. However for that to occur the Government must listen to the views of the Opposition and not simply demand

Governor-General 's Speech

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 03 1

that the Opposition go along with its expressed policy. It is a long time since foreign policy was a major issue in Australian politics. It has not been a major issue since the dark days of the 1 960s when Australians were deeply divided about our role in Vietnam and conscription. A foreign policy like that will never bring about bipartisanship.
El Salvador has the potential of being another Vietnam, for both the United States and Australia, if the appropriate policies are not for mulated by both countries. Let me explain what I mean: The Australian Labor Party has no wish to see a totalitarian communist regime set up in El Salvador. We are totally opposed to the re pression of human rights that occurs in every communist country and the brutal means by which communist regimes obtain and retain power. Equally, however, we would deplore and oppose any right-wing military junta which attempted to maintain in power a handful of wealthy landowners who had exploited the over whelming majority of peasants and workers for over a century. There is only one possible solution to the problems of El Salvador, as there is for so many similar countries; that is, a political sol ution, a solution which brings about genuine land reform, human rights and a democratic government that has the support of the majority of the people.
Recently I read newspaper reports of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) having stated pri vately to the United States of America that he preferred a political solution to a military one. If he was reported correctly, and I sincerely hope he was, he would have our complete support. He should make it clear to President Reagan that any attempt to maintain a wealthy elite at home, backed by a military junta, will not have the support of the Australian people and their Government. A government, popularly elected, with a program of genuine reform, may need military support to put down the maniacs of the Left and the Right. Any other type of government should receive no assistance. I have read, as I am sure many honourable members have read, articles on El Salvador indicating that the majority of the people of El Salvador want a moderate demo cratic government. Let us ensure that we do not support the United States in bringing about another unholy mess in Central America similar to the chaos and destruction that enveloped Viet nam, Laos and Cambodia.
Unemployment is a matter of major concern to the Australian Labor Party. Over and over again we have offered to work with the Government to help to solve that horrific social problem which, according to official figures alone, prevents some

400,000 to 500,000 Australians from working. One of the recommendations we made was that a select committee on unemployment and technological change should be established. We have made many other suggestions. Time and again the honourable member for Port Adelaide offered to work with the Government.
In 1 977 J worked for nearly nine months on a paper on the Regional Employment and Development scheme, pointing out the errors of the original scheme and making 1 8 recommendations on how it could be improved. I had more experience of the RED scheme than any other member of parliament and I felt I was in an excellent position to reassess the scheme's strengths and weaknesses and to suggest ways in which it could be rein troduced without 99 per cent of its original problems. We were honest enough to admit that the original scheme had flaws but we felt that, despite those flaws, it was still the best method of al leviating unemployment in areas where the level of unemployment was exceptionally high. Such a scheme is not and never should be regarded as being the panacea for unemployment. Unemploy ment can be alleviated only by means of a general pick-up in' the economy.
I went to see the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, who at the time was the present Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street). 1 talked to him. I went through the paper with him. I wanted to help. I wanted to see people back in jobs. I did not go to see the Minister to attack him; I wanted to show ways in which we as an oppo sition could work with the Government to im prove the scheme. The Minister said that it was an excellent paper, but nothing ever came of it.
The Government claims that employment is picking up, but unfortunately we have too much evidence to show that that is not correct. There are few signs of any significant improvement in employment. This Government has been in office for five and a half years. I am afraid that after all these years it is wearing a bit thin for the Government to say: 'It will happen this year or next year'. My colleague the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) has repeatedly called attention to the fact that the traditional methods of combat ing unemployment will not work because of the changing nature of work itself. The silicon chip has ensured that hundreds of thousands of jobs will disappear each year as computers move into one area after another and replace traditional forms of work. Positions in banks, insurance offices, clerical positions, sales staff positions traditional areas of employment for hundreds and

1 032 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

thousands of white collar workerswill disap

pear more

absustihneescsehsip. '

become

available

to

more

and

The resources boom is the latest solution to our employment problem which is put forward by the Government. It will help, but only marginally. Certainly it will create jobs at both the construc tion and the operational stages. But, because of the capital intensive nature of mining these days, it will not create anywhere near the number of jobs required. There will be spin-offs from the multiplier effect of the resources boom, but again it probably will be only marginally effective in creating new jobs. As the Labor Party, many economists and the Treasury have stated repeat edly, the boom has many benefits but some costs and potenti'll problems are associated with it also. Infrastructure costs associated with facilities such as roads, railways, port facilities, power and new community facilitiesas my colleague the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert Brown) will be well awareschools and hospitals must mean that there will be a dimunition in the funds available to existing areas. Much of the necessary capital will be raised locally, so money for homes and other investments will be expens ive. If that is not watched carefully the inflation rate could easily go through the roof.

Increased exports must mean a more favour able balance of trade and pressure for Australia to purchase more manufactured goods. The area in which that is likely to occur is in the footwear, clothing, textiles, automobiles, et cetera, area. All those will put considerable strain on the manufc turing sector. We will be under pressure to re value, with a possible result of loss of markets for our rural sector.

Mr Barry JonesOr even a de facto revaluation.

Mr COHENExactly. I do not mean to paint a picture of gloom as some have done. We as a nation cannot possibly be worse off by selling our resources at world parity prices if the market is reasonably buoyant. What we are saying is: 'Stop overselling the boom. Recognise that there is some cause for genuine concern. Listen to what the Op position has to say. Take note of those comments and let us plan together to ensure that the benefits of the boom far outweigh the costs and that all Australians can share equally in the rewards'.

J believe there are three areas in which there is room for general agreement ifit is a very big 'if'the Government takes the Opposition into its confidence, accepts that all wisdom is not on the Government side and thatsomeideas do come from the Opposition. We need have no fear that

Australian politics will ever become a game of 'kiss in the ring'; there is too wide a gulf between the two major political philosophies for that ever to occur. However, [ believe that the overwhelming majority of Australian people would applaud parliamentarians on both sides of politics for put ting the national interest above party political point scoring in as many areas as possible.
In the time. I have left to speakit is not very 10ng1 shall deal briefly with the three years 1 spent as shadow Minister for the environment, for sport and recreation and for tourism. I found that experience very rewarding. When I was asked by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) to take responsibility for those portfolios my reac tions were mixed. I was quite happy about accept ing responsibility for sport, recreation and tour ism. Naturally, I was delighted to do that because I had been involved in those areas ever since I had entered Parliament, which I did some 1 2 years ago. As I said earlier, before the 1 972 general election I drafted both the tourism and sport and rec reation policies for the Opposition. Many aspects of those policies were introduced during the term of the Labor Government. Much was left undone because of the sudden termination of our term in office. Naturally I was delighted to pursue an interest in areas which were dear to my heart and to take up where the late Frank Stewart had left off.
I enjoyed immensely the challenge of designing the policies of the party and having them tested within the various forums of the Labor Party and in the public arena. I talked to hundreds of people in the sport and recreation and tourism industries, listening to their views, testing my theories, draft ing green papers for discussion and criticism and, finally, putting together a pa'ckage that, generally speaking, had the support of the party and the industry concerned.
Mr MildrenVery wide support. Mr COHENI thank the honourable member. The most gratifying aspect of drafting the policies was how much of them was adopted by the Government. The Government adopted one by one the proposals put forward in the tour ism Green Paper. I refer to proposals such as the 2-!- per cent depreciation allowance, the change in status of Hobart and Townsville airports to international standard and the increase in funds to pro mote Australia overseas. In sport the Government, after pouring scorn on our sports policy released in August of last year, decided to incorporate in its own policy the concept of a national games to be held in 1 981 The then Minister in charge of sport, Mr Ellicott,

Governor-General's Speech

26 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 033

attacked the Labor Party for being big spenders politician and we can be thankful for that. How

after I announced that the cost of our proposals ever, those of us who follow this course must feel

would be about $ 1 4m a year. After the editorial in proud that we have been chosen by our constitu

the Sydney Morning Herald praised the Labor ents to represent them in the Federal Parliament

Party's sports policy, the then Minister in a hastily and grateful that we have been given the chance

thought up counter put forward a series of sports to play a part in the affairs and the future of

facilities costing $36m. And we were called the big Australia. I take this, the most public of oppor

spenders! One included the proposition that Can tunities, to thank the people of McPherson for

berra should have its own speedway. A number of their confidence in me. I undertake in return to

the others were clearly to pay off those sports represent them to the best of my ability.

which supported the Government's disgraceful Olympic boycott.

I wish to pay a tribute to my predecessor in this Parliament, the late Eric Robinson. He was a man

The Australian Institute of Sport has been claimed by the Government as its own brilliant concept. Those historians who care for truth may care to read the sports policy I put forward before the 1 972 election and later adopted by Frank Stewart when he became Minister. Frank set up a study group that recommended that the Australian Sport Institute be set up in Canberra. That prospect was in the pipeline when the Whitlam Government was dismissed. It, along with the rest of the Labor Party's innovations in sport, was decimated when the Fraser Government was elected. Only during the last 1 2 months have many of the Labor schemes been included in the present Government's policy.

of ability and integrity. He gave freely of his tal ents and his energies to his electorate, his State, his country, the Liberal Party and his family and friends. To my knowledge he never flinched, no matter how great the demands, regardless of how rough it became, and despite the fact that he was SUbjected to some vicious and entirely unwar ranted assaults on his name and character by political allies and political foes alike. He maintained his loyalties, his integrity and his sense of humour. It is a great tragedy that Eric Robinson did not live to serve out his productive years for the benefit of Australia and then enjoy the peace of a well-earned retirement. I pay my tribute to him as a former colleague and friend.

I applaud the fact that the Government has realised that what we were trying to achieve was what was wanted and needed. I hope that it may be big enough to recognise the fantastic job done by Frank Stewart in being the first Minister in the history of parliament really to do something about sport at the national level and name the new in door stadium the Stewart Stadium. I put forward that recommendation to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson ) . Unfor tunately I will not be able to say very much more because of time restrictions. I take this opportunity to congratulate the many honourable members who have made their maiden speeches

As well as representing my electorate, I look forward to playing my part in the broader spec trum of national affairs. Tonight we had a debate on defence and I wish to say something on that subject. As a former regular serviceman of some 20 years I welcome the opportunity to be able to contribute to discussions on defence matters. I can well remember the despair with which I and so many others regarded the defence policies of the L abor Government in the years 1972 to 1 975. I re gret to say that I have seen nothing since 1975 to indicate to me that Labor Party policies might be more realistic. Indeed, in my short time in this House the only consistent themes which the Labor Party has projected have been dislike and

and to wish the new honourable member for McPherson (Mr White) all the very best in his parliamentary career.

suspicion of our American allies and its apparent sympathy for some countries whose stated objective is to overthrow all the principles on which we

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-I call the honourable member for McPherson. I draw the attention of honourable members to the fact that this is the honourable member's maiden speech. I remind them that the custom and practice of this place is that the honourable member be heard in silence.

in Australia base our way of life. As an example of this we need only look at the remarks of Labor leaders during their tour of United States instal lations in Australia last week, during the debate on the B52 aircraft issue the week before, during the debate on foreign affairs two days ago and during the debate tonight.
I find it disturbing that the Labor Party appears

Mr WHITE (McPherson) (9.43) -Thank to have no idea of principles which make for a co

you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I rise tonight to make herent defence policy and for effective defence

my maiden speech in this House feeling both forces-clear objectives, consistency in planning,

proud and grateful. Not everyone wishes to be a modern weapons, reliable allies and, above all, the

1 034 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 198 1

Governor-General's Speech

support of Australian servicemen by Australian There is also an urgent necessity to reduce the

politicians. In this regard there are hundreds of long wait for hearings before the Repatriation Re

thousands of Australians-I am one of them who view Tribunal. rt is not satisfactory, I regret to

will never forget the constant criticism by the say, to have over 6,000 appeals outstanding in

Labor Party of Australian servicemen during the June 1 980, 1 2 months after the Tribunal commen

Vietnam War. There are few who will forget the ced its operations. In saying this I do not reflect in

activities of Dr Cairns. He invited representatives any way on the Tribunal which has worked hard

of the revolutionary government of South Viet and effectively. It simply needs more support.

nam to Austraiia in 1970 when Australian troops were still fighting in that country and then, as Minister for Overseas Trade in April 1973, he publicly entertained senior North Vietnamese officials in Australia three months after the last Australians were withdrawn from Vietnam and while our allies were still fighting in that country.

Urgent action is also needed to counteract thelong delay being experienced by veterans in re ceiving a service housing grant. A wait of 1 0 months creates great difficulties for many vet erans. If the entitlement exists, the loan should be forthcoming within a reasonable time. [ ask the Government to look closely at this matter during

Australian servicemen have never failed to the coming Budget discussions. Another matter

serve this country well. [ take th;s opportunity to which I believe must be decided is the claim by

speak on their behalf. There is no more honour merchant seamen who served in war zones to

able profession than to serve in the defence forces have their service recognised as an entitlement to

of one's country and those men and women who repatriation benefits. They have my support and,

choose to do so deserve the full support of all that I believe, the support of many members of this

country's politicians. It is an appropriate time to support the call by the Minister for Defence (Mr

House. [ believe it is a just overdue for recognition.

claim

a. nd

one

which

is

Killen) for a move towards a bipartisan political
approach to defence matters.

The last point J wish to make regarding vet erans concerns the important issue of the effect of

I wish also to speak on behalf of the war vet service in Vietnam. Some 45,000 servicemen and

erans of this country. Australia has a proud record women and civilians served in that country. I be

in looking after its veterans, but there are clear lieve it is unfortunate that the inquiry into these

signs that as the years pass and the veterans' problems was slow to begin. Nevertheless, it is

numbers decrease the recognition of these men now under way. In the meantime, I urge ser

and women is diminishing at the very time they vicemen who served in Vietnam to take up the

need help most. I relate a story to illustrate this Government's offer of urgent treatment and

point. This story was told to me by a World War counselling. Of course, any Vietnam veteran is

II veteran who had been taken prisoner by the fully entitled to apply for repatriation benefits for

Japanese in Singapore and had subsequently been injuries which are clearly caused by war service. I

sent to work on the Thai railway. He recently have spoken to the Minister about these matters,

went to see a doctor-not, I might add, a depart and [ know that he is taking action to overcome

mental doctor-about various ailments he the problems.

thought may have been caused by war service. The doctor told the returned serviceman that he should count himself lucky that he had been a prisoner for 3t years because it had removed him from the temptations of a soft civilised life. That is the sort of attitude which veterans find totally un acceptable and impossible to understand. I cite an extreme example, but I cite it to indicate the ig norance and apathy that exists.

One of the great problems that have beset Australia in recent years is the high rate of unemployment. It is heartening to see the potential for the reduction of the numbers of unemployed in an increasingly bouyant economy, providing that that potential is not destroyed by militant industrial action and unrealistic union demands, such as the 35-hour week. Governments, unions, insti tutions and individuals have to play their part

Many veterans are being interviewed and with logical analysis, financial support, and pri

treated by people who have no understanding-it vate initiative. The education system has a par

is not their fault-of the problems involved. I ask ticularly important role to play. Government

the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator needs to scrutinise carefully their school

Messner) to set up a departmental counselling curriculums-I refer to State governments-and

service with personnel who have had war service their trade training institutions to ensure that

in order to provide more effective support for war young people are being given the opportunity to

veterans. There would be no better way in 1981 to develop skills and trades to fit them for the

help those who need it most.

increasing technical employment opportunities

Governor-General's Speech

26 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 03 5

that are arising in the 1 980s. There is some evi I turn now to some local matters which are of

dence, such as the Secondary to Tertiary Edu particular importance to the people of McPher

cation Program report on Victorian education of son. Visitors to my electorate are always impres

May 1 979, to indicate that the swing away from sed by the diversity, growth and vitality of that

mathematics and the sciences will leave us in a area, and rightly so. It is the fastest growing area

position where we are unable to take advantage of in Australia and, I believe, probably the finest

the opportunities being presented to us in the example of the private enterprise approach to the

coming years. There are too many grade 12 school development of a nation and a community.

children who do not take mathematics-perhaps Nevertheless, it has its problems, and these are

some 60 per cent of girls and 40 per cent of boys. caused principally by its success and rapid growth.

That is a frightening percentage, and it has serious Many of the services necessary for balanced

implications for the future. I think it can be development are falling behind. I refer particu

reasonably assumed that what is happening in larly to the telephone system, road development,

Victoria is indicative of what is happening in other television services, health care, and so on. The

States.

Gold Coast area of McPherson in particular is

While the provision of technical and trade training opportunities is a matter of concern to the Government, the Government is to be congra tulated on its positive approach to apprenticeship training and its concerted action, with the States and industry, in identifying those areas where there are likely to be labour shortages and taking action to overcome the problem. I believe that the Government is to be particularly congratulated on its announcement a few days ago of its support for the establishment of a microelectronics indus

feeling the effects. No longer can this city of 1 20,000 people be regarded as an appendage of Brisbane. It is a city in its own right and must be regarded as such. It is not satisfactory to deter mine the number of hospital beds or nursing home beds on the basis of the population of the whole Moreton region. It is the McPherson region which must be considered, particularly because it has a significant aged population. Approval for a nurs ing home in Brisbane has no relevance to the Gold Coast.

try in Canberra. Such encouragement for high Telephone services are a particular bone of

technology industry is a necessity for the future. contention. It is appreciated that the fast expan

I turn now to the question of personal taxation. For some months the Government has been undertaking a review of the taxation system with a stated aim of achieving a reduction in personal tax. This review is welcomed everywhere. Unfor tunately, it now appears that most of the options that would have allowed a reduction in personal tax have been found unacceptable. The one immediate option left open is a substantial reduction in government spending, both at federal and State levels and I full y support this approach. I sincerely hope that the statement of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) of 1 2 March is the start of a constructive tax debate, and not the end of the matter. Personal taxation in this country is too

sion of the area is causing the problem. For example, in the month of February there were 1 ,300 applications for telephone connections as against less than 700 in February 1 979, and 1979 was regarded as a substantial growth year. Never theless, the required equipment and staff must be provided to avoid inhibiting residential business and industrial development, especially when so much government effort has been expended civer the last five years to get this country moving again. I particularly ask the Government to approve the short and long term loan requirements of Telecom Australia to enable it to provide the services required in McPherson and elsewhere.

high, and a reduction of personal taxation will be Tourism remains the principal industry of the

instrumental in encouraging Australians to take McPherson electorate. Estimates vary as to the

advantage of the opportunities of the 1 980s. It is expected number of visitors during 1981 , but the

also an appropriate time, I believe, to mention figure will certainly exceed two million. It is well

also the plight of pensioners and to ask the recognised that the tourist industry has the poten

Government to review the maximum allowable tial to become the great growth industry of the

extra income that pensioners can receive without 1 980s, and the Gold Coast is well placed to take

loss of pension or benefits. This extra income has advantage of this growth. There is no doubt that

been pegged since 1 972, and in the interests of the Government's recognition of the value of the

relieving hardship and in the cause of social jus tourist industry in the 1 979 Budget was a mile

tice should be increased substantially. We all stone in its development. However, the industry

embrace to some degree the principle of indexa does require further assistance if it is to realise its

tion, and that same principle should be applied to full potential. It is important that this assistance is

this allowable extra income.

provided, for many reasons, one of which is the

1 036 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Governor-General 's Speech

great part this industry can play in increasing employment opportunities.

The assistance the industry requires is in the

: area of investment and depreciation allowances
the funding of roads, particularly tourist roads

the development of hospitality training courses,

and the developments of airports and air services.

In regard to air services, the review of air policy to

be carried out this year by Transport Australia

will provide the opportunity for the development

of Coolangatta Airport to international standard.

In 1 980 the Coolangatta Airport serviced some

600,000 passengers, the seventh largest number of

passengers in Australia. But the significant thing is

that the growth rate of passenger movements at

Coolangatta was 27 per cent over growth is expected to continue.

1

979'

and

that

I conclude this speech by paying tribute to the coalition Government, which has worked success fully to rescue this country from the course it was taking in 1 975. The reduction in the inflation rate has given all people the encouragement to invest and develop again. The 1 980s could prove to be the most adventurous and challenging period that Australia has ever faced. Whilst this period will bring its problems Australia, of all the countries in the world, should be facing the future with con fidence and a determination to ensure that the potential of our country and the welfare of all Australians are fully realised.

Mr WALLIS (Grey) ( 1 0. 1 ) -1 would like to

convey my congratulations to the honourable

member -for McPherson (Mr White) and to all

other honourable members who have made their

maiden speeches during this Address-in-Reply de

bate. 1 support the amendment that has been

moved by the Opposition. I am sure that it will get

support from this side of the House. There are

many isolated areas and towns in the large elec

torate of Grey. Tonight 1 want to say a few words

: about Coober Pedy, one of those isolated towns
approximately 500 miles north-west of Adelaide

It is in the centre of South Australia and is in very

inhospitable territory. It is an extremely hot and

uncomfortable place in the summer. It is one of

three opal mining towns within the Grey elector

ate. They produce about 95 per cent of Australia's

opals which attract world-wide sales.

,R lI.CItyecbeenctaluysCe tohoeboerpaPlemd!m, errescedievceiddead

bit of pub to take cer

tain action to draw attention to the problems in

that town. For quite some time the town has been

faced with a bad situation. Prices for opals have

dropped considerably and are at 1 974 levels. Not

much opal is being mined, with the result that

many people are pretty destitute. These people

have endeavoured to obtain the unemployment

 lWbahInIeCdfhiot pwbrnuothbI.YhbaI.ttvhseeorpDuaenlpmaurpitnmaergesanitwnoshtfotShaoerceiraeclslaStrseiscceutdiroinatyss

 self-employed from receiving the employment
bene . Many people are struggling under harsh

choanrsdhItclOlI.nms aatned.

are trying to eke out a living in They are not getting opal and

that can

fnaoctm. ogbtaainprtehtetyudneesmpperloaytemesintut abteionne.fitM. Manaynywaerree

advised to apply for the uncmployment benefit.

? OmOrInteyeroscfamtlhlueesdtphraoabvpleeetrmwmsoittahutaotthtophrreiotysiepsset;rcfitkiresftoilsry,thpanaretacouioptuhasl
SstUItnaebsleapnIe,cseeocfolnadnldy,fotrheopaaultmhoinriitnyg.to peg out a

noQhlm:litge

faromnumthbeIrr

of these people are getting claims. Many have let their

claIms go but have retained their permit to

prospect. That means that they can go around and

pthrm?skpemcigfhotrhaavseuoitpaabll.eIfptiehceey

of land which they find a suitable piece

of land they peg it, register it and then work it.

aOrnecreetqhUIyrehdavtoe

registered that piece of land they work a certain number of hours

each week on that claim. Those people are not eli

gible for the unemployment benefit because they

are not available for full time work. A problem

arose from the question of the permit to prospect.

To my way of thinking, it is a very harsh restric

tion. The position would be the same if a person

who had a licence to drive a l O-ton truck lost his

job. While a person holds a licence to drive a

10-ton truck he is not entitled to the unemploy

ment benefit.

1 took up this matter with the then Minister for

Social Security. The Minister's reply was a little

ambiguous, considering the previous attitude of

the Department of Social Security. As a result
t further discussions took place. I understand tha  the epartment of Social Security now accepts  that I a person has only a permit to prospect that

permit does not disqualify him or her from unem

ployment benefit. I hope that the acceptance by

the Department will help quite a few people in

the town. There will be nothing for the people

dwnI.ohsqtohuma.alrigfeiedwb.eoTcrhkaiiusnsigseatnhtheisieorylagtueadtrsearoeauaut.

and getting tomatically Many people

hItaavlIacnos.mEevferroymnEautiroonpein-EGurreoepkes,

Yugoslavs and is represented.

Many people have settled and have raised families

 and cannot leave the place. They have nowhere to
gVanI:ocma.eIms.laefgbcoalroeutrhmetehCttahotoweowbntohe. wircPnhe,idsinythsisoamitscoeolawntneaedyc,tthpeerdoowvniidltyehswosoperirkd

Governor-General's Speech

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 03 7

We have been able to get some relief for those people, but the fact remains that many people are working for bedrock income. I am told that credit in the town is very tight at present and many people are very close to destitution. About three weeks ago a chap came into my office. I was able to give him a lift to Whyalla where he might get a job. I checked his background and discovered that he had just come out of hospital. He had collapsed and was taken to hospital where it was discovered that he was suffering from malnutrition. He had not had food for many days and had collapsed from sheer exhaustion. That sort of situation exists in many of these areas. The present situation in Coober Pedy is not very good. It is some thing at which State and Federal governments should look to see whether something can be done. The Government bends the rules to assist farmers when they have been going bad. A couple of years ago, during the bad drought, farmers were made eligible for the unemployment benefit and something along those same lines should be worked out for the people at Coobcr Pedy. I urge this Government to look at that problem. Many people are not receiving any assistance. Opal miners are like gold miners. The next hole might be the one in which they make their big strike. Many of them keep going, in the forlorn hope that they will make that strike.

Dear Sir,
Coober Pedy is facing a crisis. The opal industry is in de cline. The high costs of diesel fuel and explosives have made opal mining an extremely expensive enterprise. M any miners are being forced out of the industry because their expenses are too high and not commensurate with their efforts and present prices ofopal.
Because of the exorbitant prices, demand for both dieseline and explosives has fallen in the past year. Mining equipment; h"lldozers, blowers, tunnelling machines etc. are lying idle
Jughout the town and fields. Urgent action is needed!
Two areas are of utmost concern.
Fuel prices The Federal Government's fuel Parity Policy is the single
most important reason we are paying such exhorbitant prices for our dieseline. We request the Government to urgently re view the parity policy with reference to the opal industry. And then reduce fuel prices by means ofsubsidy.
The rise in the price per litre of diesel sold in Coober Pedy is illustrated by the following table.
The submission then sets out a table which shows how the price of dieseline has moved over the years. I seek leave to incorporate that in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

Year

Cents/litre (Road Tax 44 gal./
exempt) 200 litre

1 was listening to the AM program the other day when representatives of the opal miners at Coober Pedy were interviewed. It was obvious that the miners decided to take matters into their own hands. They had a meeting and decided to establish a road block on the north-south high way. Whether honourable members agree with the setting up of the road block, it certainly ex pressed the dissatisfaction of the miners and not only with the things that I have mentioned but also other matters such as the cost of fuel and the cost of explosives which make it doubly hard for the miners to keep going. I understand that they removed the road block on the north-south high way today. They put in a submission to the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Carrick) to which the Minister replied that he would give a detailed reply later. Many of the miners are facing big increases in the costs of running their operations and they are getting only 1 974 prices for their opal.
The Coober Pedy Progress and Miners Association has written to me and to quite a number of other people. I will quote from its submission to me:

June 1 973 September 1 974 September 1 976 May 1 977 November 1978 May 1 979 Decemher 1 980

$ 5

6

1 1 .00

12

13

15

29.50

16

30 60.00

Mr WALLIS The report goes on to say:
The opal industry, structured as it is, with no control over its international markets cannot absorb such increases.
That is, the increases as shown in the table which [ have incorporated. The report continues:
The local Caltex supplier, who in 1 979 was the largest dis tributor of diesel in the State, reports a 45% drop in sales he tween March-November 1 979 and March-November 1 980.
The Golden Fleece agent reports a 33% drop in sales between 1979 and 1 980. The figure for 1981-so far show a further 30% drop from the equivalent period in 1 980. The drop in sales is indicative of the effect that fuel price increases have had on mining activity in Coober Pedy.
Explosives The retail price of explosives has risen dramatically in the
last few years. This too, has had an adverse effect on many opal miners.
The following figures show the price increases that have occurred.

1038 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

The figures refer to the cost of nitropril, cordex, which is a detonating cord, fuse and detonating caps. I seek leave to incorporate the table in Hansard.
Leave granted. The table read as follows-

Year

$

Nitropril 1974
September, 1978 March, 1981
CordtexDetonating cord 1 974 1976 1978 March, 1981
Fuse1 974
June, 1 979 March, 1981
Detonating Cap-
Nobel No. 8 1974 1978
March, 1981

8.40 40 kgbag 1 5.00 25.00
36.60 per roll 6 1 .5 0 80.00 105.00
14.50 per roll 27.00 35.60
3.90 box 100 8.50 1 2.95

Mr WALLIS-The report went on to say:
Those figuresfor fuel and explosive prices show that it costs almost twice as much to mine in Coober Pedy as it did two years ago. The price for opal has not risen since 1974 yet the value of production has increased many times.
Opal mining has been an efficient industry.
We would like the Government to look into the high cost of explosives with a view to granting subsidies, or take action to reduce these costs.
The submission then quoted information regard ing the opal mining industry and its value. The report of the South Australian Department of Mines states:
In recent years, opal mining has become a majorindustry in South Australia, employing over 1 ,200 full time, and many part time miners. In 1978, an estimated $41.75m worth of precious opalwas produced, approximately 80 per cent of the total Australian output and 25 per cent of total mineral pro duction in South Australia.
Coober Pedy continues to be the major source of precious opal, with Mintabie, for the first time in 1978, replacing Andamooka as the second largest producer.
The report cites figures on data production for 1 979. Coober Pedy had a value of production of $32.67m. Mintabie had a value of production of $6. l 0m and Andamooka had a production value of $4. 52m, a total of .$43.29m. The report continued:
The above data gives an indication of the importance of the opal mining industry to the Australian economy. Apart from the overseas revenue earned from the export of opal and the employment of some 1 ,300 full time miners, very important consideration must be given to the amount miners have re invested in the industry.

The Government should institute an impact study of the parity pricing policy and its effects on this industry. Primarily because of increases in prospecting and mining expenses the existence of Coober Pedy, a town of some 5,000 people, is in the balance.
I do suggest that this matter be given some consideration by the Government. Whilst the Federal Government has no say over the price control of explosives, it is a fact that the figures show, to pun a phrase, an explosion in the price of explosives and associated articles. The Government's fuel parity pricing policy has had a bad effect on this industry. The Minister for National Development and Energy, Senator Carrick, has stated that he will give a detailed reply to this question at a later date. I hope that he will at least give the matter a sympathetic hearing and be able to come up with something that will assist this industry.
In the few minutes which I have left to speak I would like to raise a couple of other matters. We have heard for quite some time now that there is a shortage of tradesmen in Australia. There is a shortage of tradesmen. Perhaps we can look at why this is so. In the areas in which I usually move around there are a great number of tradesmen who are not working at their trade. We know that much has been said about the resources boom and how we will need tradesmen to be able to handle it. We have heard that we cannot supply them from Australia. I have often wondered whether a survey has been carried out throughout Australia to establish how many tradesmen are not working at their trade. I know that you, Mr Deputy Speaker, and I are both boilermakers and we are not at ours. I suppose we can be excused. Many tradesmen are not working at their trade. Perhaps we can wonder why it is that we are short of tradesmen.
For many years the metal tradesmen in particu lar became the yardstick for wages. It was felt that in order to keep everybody else's wages down we had to keep the tradesmen's wages down. This was the attitude taken by governments and private employers-get the wages of tradesmen down to keep everyone else's wages down. I wonder whether a survey has ever been con ducted. A figure of about 400,000 was mentioned the other day as being the number of tradesmen not working at their trade. If that is the case, per haps if we could offer decent rates to those people they would come back to their trade and make a contribution to the resources boom which we hear everyone talk about. I know a number of people who have become engine drivers on the railways, truck drivers, bus drivers and small businessmen.
Mr Young-Do any of them go shearing?

GovernOl'-Genel'al's Speech

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 039

Mr WALLIS-I do not know of any shearers. I am sure these people are doing the jobs which they are doing because the rates which are paid to tradesmen are not good enough to encourage them back to their trade. Quite recently I read an advertisement for a number of tradesmen to be employed by a Commonwealth Government in strumentality. The rate offered for a fitter was $4 a week less than was the rate offered for a driver of a three-ton truck, as was indicated in an adver tisement for the driver of a three-ton truck. We are talking about getting migrant tradesmen from overseas to help us out of our problems. I feel that if we give our own tradesmen a fair go they will go back to their trade.
I wish to refer to a matter raised by the honour able member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) in his contribution to this debate. I was intrigued by what he said. Today we heard that a number of new jobs have been created by this Government. In his contribution the honourable member said that most of those positions are occupied by part time employees. This is a fact. The Government may say that a person has a job but if that person is working only 20 hours a week he or she is not earning sufficient to give him or her a decent wage but they are getting too much to allow them to re ceive the unemployment benefit. That is just another statistic out of the road. This practice has become more general throughout Australia re_ cently. It is something that we should somehow try to overcome. It seems to me that there is a strong trend in the retail trade to employ part time staff instead of employing full time staff. I know that the union officials from the Shop, Dis tributive and Allied Employees Association in my area have shown a great deal of concern about what is taking place in the employment of part time staff.
Quite recently a large retail outlet was opened in my electorate. I am informed that working there, apart from the managers and so on, are 1 4 full time staff and 140 part time staff. Many of these part time staffare children who are working during their spare hours from school and many are from the unemployed around the town. Those people, instead of receiving money from the un employment benefit, get a part time job. The point is that they are placed in a situation where they are not getting a decent rate but they are get ting too much to receive the unemployment benefit. It is a very nasty trend which has crept into our society. It is one that we should try to overcome. Instead of quoting figures we should create new jobs. Allowing people to work for only 20 hours a week is not to the advantage of young Australians.

It also produces other problems. Some of these young kids, particularly those working in small shops, are frightened to join a union. If they are underpaid or if they work outside normal hours and should be getting a penalty rate but are not being paid that penalty rate, they become so frightened that they will not go to a union official or an adult to ask for assistance. They would sooner take what they get and say nothing about it. I know of one chap who mentioned to me the case of his daughter.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MacKENZIE (Calare) ( 1 0.21 )-ln the time available to me I would like to raise two issues of concern to people in my electorate. As honourable members may know the electorate of Calare contains within it a very significant pro portion of the horticultural industry in New South Wales. In particular, Orange is a very large apple growing area producing very high quality fruit mainly for the domestic market. The value of an apple crop in the Orange district each year is in the vicinity of $20m. For the few weeks that har vest occurs there is additional employment for well over 1 ,000 casual and contract apple pickers. It is, of coursc, the time of year when horticul turalists and orchardists gain their sole income. So these few weeks of the year arc critical in terms of the income not only for apple pickers but also for the orchardists. The horticultural industry is a hazardous occupation. The entire crop can be wiped out by bad weather conditions hail and drought-as we have seen in recent years. Again [ emphasise that this is a quite critical period.
A long-standing source of contention is whether orchardists should have to deduct from casual pickers' wages the taxation instalments that they are obliged to deduct under the law. We have had situations not only in myarea but also in the Goulburn valley and many other areas in Victoria where we have had to place great reliance on casual and contract harvesters of fruit. I am speaking of the situation where a controversy arises. 1 do not object to the principle, of course, that casual pickers pay tax at least at the base rate of taxation for the additional income that they earn. What I object to are the methods being used by the taxation officials in collecting that tax and in insisting that growers have to deduct it. That has happened this year in particular in the Orange district. Without any prior warning, without any consultation that 1 am aware of with growers in that area, taxation officials have moved in to blitz the industry, as it were, demanding that instal ments be paid. Yet, for the last 12 years it has

1 040 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

been a situation of more or less letting sleeping dogs lie.
The Commissioner of Taxation quite rightly has pointed out to me that he has a statutory responsibility delegated to him to administer the income tax laws enacted by the Parliament. He therefore has indicated to me that he does not have any discretion to exempt employers from deducting tax from the earnings of employees. However, this is somewhat inconsistent with the fact that this has not been insisted on for a number of years. This requirement has thrown everything into a state of severe confusion. The pickers are threatening to walk off the job and the growers are threatening not to collect the tax. This is happening at this critical time. I exhort the Taxation Commissioner and his employees to be a little more humane and a little more understanding and aware of the circumstances of the horticultural industry. I would have thought that it might be ap propriate for him or his officials to advise orchard ists in the area, with due prior warning, that they will be insisting on such taxation instalments being deducted and that the growers should make the necessary arrangements to do so. In this way the pickers would also be aware of their responsibilities.
The Taxation Commissioner has asked me whether the problem is one of having to pay higher than base rate levels of taxation. In many cases that is the case because these pickers often work seven-day weeks and earn between $300 and $400 a week. They are therefore taxed at a rate higher than the base rate. Of course, they are in a position where they see nearly half their daily or weekly income disappear in tax. That, of course, has severe effects on incentive. In many cases they will move on to other areas where they are not required. We have seen in rural industry gener ally, where it is very difficult to get contract or casual labour, employees having nearly half of their incomes immediately disappear in tax, not withstanding the fact that they might well be rebated at the end of the financial year. The Commissioner of Taxation has provided a special schedule of taxation instalment deductions on a national basis to employers who are properly registered as group or tax stamp employers to meet the seasonal situation of their employees engaged in, for example, the harvesting of fruit.
However, the Taxation Commissioner requires such special certification for that special schedule to be sought on application by the employee. I think most people realise that many of the people who are employed in casual work such as this are not likely to be the sorts of people who would re quest from the Taxation Commissioner a special

certificate to exempt them from the higher rate of tax. Not only do they have to take that initiative themselves but also they have to provide the ad
 ditional amount of income, their tax file numbers
thir full names, residential addresses, the sourc of mcome throughout the year, in order for them to gain that certificate which in turn allows the employer to make the appropriate deduction as provided under the special schedule. It seems somewhat irohic to me that it is the employer's responsibility to collect the taxation instalments; it is the employee's responsibility to apply for the certification to allow his employer to operate under the special schedule. Furthermore, we see a situation where an industry of particular sig nificance to a regional locality can be very severely disrupted at a critical period. I exhort the Commissioner and his employees to be more aware of the special significance that applies to those industries and also to approach the problem in a more understanding and humane manner.
Another point that ] wish to raise concerns the commitment made by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) last year in the election cam paign to provide $2m towards the establishment of a formula one international standard motor raceway in the Australian Capita] Territory. I believe if $2m is to be allocated towards such a fa cility we should not necessarily presume that it is to be located in the Australian Capital Territory. There are other circuits in Australia that could be upgraded to formula one standard. Of course, I refer to the best known of all these raceways in Australia-the Mount Panorama circuit in the city of Bathurst, which is in my electorate. Most of us know that staged there every year is the Har die Ferodo 1000 in addition to the Australian grand prix motor cycle races. The races at Mount Panorama are really of national significance. Indeed, I think it can be claimed that the Bathurst races each year rival the Melbourne Cup as Australia's single most well known sporting event . It attracts between 40,000 and 50,000 people. It is covered by international television. It is covered by some 20 television networks. It has been operated by the Bathurst City Council for many years. It has been praised by such famous people as Stirling Moss and Jack Brabham. I believe if there is to be consideration of $2m going towards the upgrading and the establishment of a formula one raceway then other centres-in particular, Mount Panorama at Bathurst-should certainly be seriously considered.
Debate interrupted.

Adjournment

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 04 1

ADJOURNMENT Australian Sports Institute-Australian Surf
Championships-Drought-New Guinea: Property Deal-Air Fares: Discounts to
Sporting Bodies-Hospitals Funding-Commonwealth Hostel Site Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar) Order! It being 1 0.30 p.m. I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr MORRISON (St George) ( l0.30)-Mr Deputy Speaker, tomorrow another great sport ing event will take place. I refer to the Australian surf championships, which are to be held at Wanda. It is not only a major sporting event but also one that has a particularly Australian feeling because it originated in this country. It happens also to be a humanitarian activity. It is both a sport and an avocation for the young lads and women who participate in the sporting movement. The honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) and I have had some experience in this field. In fact, some 36 years ago I participated in an Australian surf championship with the Preshwater Club, to which both the honourable member for Port Adelaide and I belonged. On that occasion we happened to win. It is in that context that 1 wish to relate what has been happening over the past two days.
I made a simple request to the director of the Australian Institute of Sport to allow two cham pion swimmers from the Freshwater Club to take leave on Friday, and over the weekend to partici pate in the Australian surf championships. They have been training with their team mates for the event for five months. They won the metropolitan championship and the State championship. They have been at the Institute for only three weeks. These gentlemen had entered into an honourable and prior commitment to their team mates, their club and their State. Therefore, I was staggered by the rejection by the Institute's director, Mr Don Talbot, of the representations that I made to him and his refusal to allow the swimmers to partici pate. The argument advanced by Mr Talbot in his less objectionable moments was that they would miss vital training. It is not as though an Olympic Games or a Commonwealth Games were to be held in a couple of weeks. They were not just going away for a naughty weekend. They would have to face up to four or five highly competitive swims over the weekend. One would have thought that an institute of sport would have encouraged its young lads to participate in an Australian championship, but Mr Don Talbot refused point blank to grant such leave.

I saw the Minister for Home Affairs (Mr Wil son) about the matter on four occasions over the last two days. I regret that the Minister-he is new to his portfolio-did not feel that he could influence his director, but I must say that he lis tened to my representations sympathetically. My concern was not only about the fact that Mr Tal bot refused permission for the two lads from the Freshwater Surf Club, who are members of the State team in the Australian championships, to participate. It was also about the authoritarian and despotic attitude taken by Mr Talbot, who would clearly be much more confortable running a sports institute in Czechoslovakia or East Ger many, where the populace is more accustomed to iron-fisted controls. I say to Mr Talbot that he is at present running an Australian sport institute where the concept of team-work and loyalty to one's club and one's team mates is a prerequisite. I admit that there is a place for discipline in every activity, but there is no place for self-indulgent authoritarianism of the kind that Mr Talbot appears to practise.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) ( l0.34)-Australia is being seriously affected by drought conditions. Indeed, so far as agricultural production is concerned, the situation is very serious for the whole country. Pastoral conditions in New South Wales and in other parts of Australia are deteriorating at an alarming rate. Drought conditions still exist, and if rain does not fall within the next few weeks the situation will be extremely serious for farmers, dairymen and graziers. Because of hot days and drying winds grass and herbage are being burnt off. Our great dams are down to 9 per cent of capacity and not a drop of water is flowing into them.
We are seeing a continuation of the very serious drought we experienced last year-possibly the worst in the history of our country. It is a drastic situation when we are going into the winter with out water in our creeks, rivers and dams. Farmers who lost wheat crops, stock and milk production last year, and who have seen their wool clips halved, will place in future months a great strain on our banking system. A temporary measure of relief has been provided by the Australian Wheat Board, which last week paid some $60m from wheat pools of previous years to those farmers who produced in those years. This will assist farmers who lost crops last year to meet fuel and essential personal store purchases.
Travelling around the grain-growing areas of New South Wales one sees millions of acres prepared for the sowing of wheat, barley, oats, and other grain crops. These lands were so farmed as to conserve moisture after the rain in February.

1 042 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Adjournment

There is n o sign of rain at present and the weather charts do not give us any reason to"be optimistic. The weather forecasters of this country are of exactly the same opinion; there is no sign of cloud cover or indication that it will rain. Obviously, the banks and financial institutions will be required to meet a heavy demand for funds. Despite the great resources boom and our production of numerous minerals, our great primary industries still head Australia's export income. It is essential that they be assisted financially, not only for economic reasons but also to provide food for Australia's requirements. We must ensure that the Commonwealth Development Bank, the Primary Industry Bank, and the trading banks have adequate funds to meet these demands.
It has been reported freely in the Press that the Australian Bankers Association is lobbying pub licly for the release of funds from the banks, statu tory reserve deposits so that they may keep themselves funded over the June quarter tax run-down period. It is essential that primary producers' requirements should not be forgotten in the course of this operation. Indeed, arrangements should be made for some of the statutory reserve deposits to be released to the banks so that they can help their primary producer clients. Viable farmers and graziers must be assisted to carry on because they are the backbone of Australia's economy. When they fail to produce the whole of Australia suffers and an icy blast is soon felt in our highly populated cities. Therefore, the Government must at all cost review constantly and investigate the financial side of our great primary industries, with resultant benefit to the nation. I commend this very important matter to the consideration of Cabinet, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) , and the Government as a whole.
Mr COHEN (Robertson) ( 10 .38)-1 wish to raise a matter that I believe borders on scandal. The Minister at the table, the Minister for Admin istrative Services (Mr Newman ) , will be relieved to know that it does not involve the Australian Government. It involves another government and a very high and significant figure in that government. I refer to the Deputy Prime Minister of the Government of Papua New Guinea, Mr Okuk, and I am speaking on behalf of a constituent, Mrs M. H. Barker. In that connection I wish to quote from a letter that I have received from her solici tors, Neil K. Everson and Associates. The letter states:
Mrs Barker, together with her late husband, Mr S. B. Barker, spent a lifetime of dedicated work pioneering in the Morobe District, New Guinea, in response to the Australian Government's call for assistance in occupying and developing these areas in 1 927. M r Barker has served in World War I in Gallipoli, France and Germany, World War II, was 3 times

mustard gassed and awarded the Military Medal for rescuing comrades under fire. His services in New Guinea continued throughout the Japanese invasion.
On her husband's death in 1 967, Mrs Barker was left the mammoth task of reconstructing the gold and coffee produc ing property which her husband had bewn out of the jungle, and at wbich time was under mortgage. Mrs Barker has battled over the years to fully repay the debts. She is now 67 years of age and after a life of hardship and sacrifice with neither comforts nor respite, her deteriorating health precipi tated her return to Australia to receive medical care.
The property concerned comprises some 2 1 2 acres, but I will not go into all of its details. The letter continues:
New Guinea government restrictions on the sale of proper ties has effectively depressed property values. Nevertheless, Mrs Barker made every effort to sell specifically to the nationals of the Wau region, where the property is located.
Numerous negotiations were conducted and purchase agreed, for which Mrs Barker incurred considerable legal ex pense in preparing contracts. However, on each occasion, when contracts were ready for signing and the deposit due, a ridiculously low offer would he made. For example, a drop from the negotiated figure of K52,000to K I 0,000-. The original figure itself was very depressed in my opinion, based on analysis of sales.
These tactics continued over the past five years and were obviously designed to wear the ailing old lady's defences down. Accordingly, in 1977, I made representations to the New Guinea Government, requesting that it purchase the property. Although I did not receive an official response, a National gentleman from the highlands area contacted me and we negotiated a reasonable purchase price for the prop erty. Again, a Wau National whose actions had already in curred legal expenses for Mrs Barker, protested that he again wished to purchase the property. This 'purchaser' stalled until the highland purchaser obtained a property elsewhere, then the local man again did not fulfill tlie contract. Mrs Barker and my own assistance to the local man extended to obtaining bank approval offinance of purchase.
These procedures continued until June 1 980 when Mrs Barker became dangerously ill. The Local Land Officer_and Local Warden confirmed that the Local nationals had had sufficient time to purchase and that Mrs Barker had the right to sell to people from other regions of New Guinea. Mr Richard Major of Port Moresby then made representations on behalf of Deputy Prime Minister Okuk advising that he wished to purchase the property.
In my direct negotiations with Mr Okuk, agreement was reached at K48,000-, plus an additional K 300per month occupation fee until settlement, as Mr Okuk was to take immediate possession of the property, with its harvest of coffee and extraction of gold. On I I July 1 980 Mr Major signed contracts as nominee for Mr Okuk and paid the K4,800desposit plus one month's occupation fcc of K300in advance. Mr Okuk took occupation the same day and I left New Guinea with Mrs Barker.
Since that date, no additional occupation fees have been paid and the required Ministerial approval for property trans fer has not been forthcoming, due to the local people lodging an objection and claiming they have the right to the property.
I think this situation is a disgrace. This woman served her life in New Guinea with her husband. Her property has been deliberately stolen from underneath her. A man who is a participant in this is the Deputy Prime Minister of a country. I have

Adjournment

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 043

written to the New Guinea Government asking for its assistance. It says there is nothing it can do; it is a legal matter. I have raised the matter in this House because I can see no way of solving the matter other than to shame the Government of New Guinea and the Deputy Prime Minister by public exposure. r hope I have shamed them to the point where they will give this woman the few last remaining dollars she is entitled to and has earned over a lifetime of service to the people of New Guinea.
Mr McLEAN (Perth) ( 1 0.43) -1 want to raise a matter of great concern to sporting bodies in Western Australia. It highlights the ridiculous situation that can occur only under a two-airline agreement. Honourable members will recall that early in 1 980 sporting bodies and other groups in the community were concerned about the with drawal of discounted air fares. Historically they had enjoyed certain concessional arrangements with the airlines. In August 1 980 the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) told the House that he was aware of the concern of some sporting bodies at the actions by the major domestic airlines to can cel all discriminatory discounts to those bodies. To the Minister's credit, he called both airlines together and as a result of his initiatives both air lines agreed to an interim measure which included a 1 5 per cent discount for sporting and charitable organisations. The Minister also decided to refer the whole issue to the Holcroft inquiry.
The present arrangements remain unsatisfac tory for Western Australian sporting groups, largely for the same reason that all Western Australian air travellers are discriminated against the present air fare setting formula. That is due to the incidence of massive cross-subsidisation. A discount applied equally throughout Australia in evitably means that discounts are of much less value to Western Australian sporting bodies. Of course, it is not possible for all sporting teams to take advantage of advance purchase excursion fares because for good reasons many of them can not select their teams more than the required number of days prior to any particular departure time.
A constituent of mine who represents a major sporting body in Western Australia has provided me with air fare figures which indicate the particular disadvantage of Western Australian sport ing groups wishing to participate in annual inter state carnivals which rotate between the six States. These figures show costs for 30-man teams from each State participating in each State over a six-year period based on present fares. I cannot vouch for the accuracy of these figures, but even if

they are no more than an indication, they do illus trate the' point. I seek leave to have this table on air fare costs for interstate carnivals incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted The table read as follows-
AIR FARE COSTS FOR INTERSTATE CARNIVALS ( 30-man teams)

Total Annual

cost

cost

Victoria New South Wales
South Australia Tasmania Queensland Western Australia

$ 3 3 , 1 50 36,930
37,950 42,000 50,Dl 0 73,830

$ 5,530 6,1 55 6,325 7,000
8,335 1 2,305

Mr McLEAN-I thank the House. These

figures show a sad Western Australia.

Fsotorreyxafmorpslep,otrhtientgabbloed'siheos wins

that the total cost for a Victorian team to compete

in each carnival over six years is $33,1 50. These

figures rise progressively for the other States,

through to the highest cost of $73,830 for the

sporting body in Western Australia. These costs

are prohibitive and can force some Western Aus

tralian teams out of national competitions. It

would be cheaper for them to compete in certain

overseas countries. The constant discount to the

present air fare structure means that Western

Australian sporting groups have to pay $40,000

more over six years than equivalent groups from

Victoria. Western Australians acknowledge that

they have to pay more because they have to travel

further. We do not ask the Government for any

subsidies in this respect, but under the present air

fare setting formula, given the profitability of long

haul trunk routes for the airlines, we know the rel

evant disadvantage should be less than it is.

All this particular organisation wants is the right to negotiate freely with the airlines and for the Government to stay out of it. The Holcroft inquiry agreed with this. It concluded that bureaucratic approval of the level and eligibility for commercial discounts could and should be removed; it should be a negotiable commercial matter. If Western Australian bodies channel this amount of business through the airlines on high profit routes, why should they not be given the right to negotiate freely for a better deal? The air lines would benefit because Western Australian people would be travelling and sporting organisations would also benefit because they could com pete in national competitions. It is the kind of sen sible commercial negotiable position which should be facilitated between any consumer and

J 044 REPRESENTATTVES 26 March [ 98 1

Adjournment

provider of services. [t cannot happen under the the Commonwealth to meet their hospital short

present system and it is one of many situations falls. They asked the Commonwealth Govern

which demand the abolition of the two-airline ment to come to the party in the spirit of the cost

agreement for a more commercial a n d sharing agreement and support them in a 50-50

deregulated aviation industry. A t present, West arrangement to meet these shortfalls. It is not just

ern Australian sporting bodies-many of which a complaint of Labor Ministers or Labor poli

are supported, financed and administered by vol ticians, as the Minister would suggest. Major

unteer help-are being discriminated against health bodies in this country have pointed out

under the present airline arrangements. They are that this is a national problem. For instance, the

being denied the opportunity to participate in Australian Hospital Association has pointed out

national competitions in which they should take that costs in all hospitals were rising and that in

their rightful place without the kind of discrimi some areas the increases were beyond the control

nation that Western Australian sportsmen, along of the States. For instance, drug costs had gone up

with other air travellers, presently face.

by 20 per cent in a year; X-rays are 70 per cent

Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) ( 1 0.48)-1 want briefly tonight to contrast the behaviour of the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) in this Parliament, in his near total refusal either to answer or to debate the national health problems facing this country, with his great willingness to use this House to snipe at the hospital problems of the States, particularly those States administered by Labor governments. Although the Government has had the Jamison report for three months, the Minister informed the House this week that he was unable to tell us of any decision yet made on any recommendation of that report, nor could he indicate at what time those issues would be brought before this House. He described the report as significant. Although his party controls the business of the House, he has never in this House made a statement about that report nor

more expensive because of the high silver content in X-ray film; there has been a rise of 1 6.6 per cent in the use of outpatient and casualty services and an increase of 1 3. 5 per cent in the number of patients admitted for treatment. That information comes from the Australian Hospital Association. Professor Cobbold who is on the finance committee of the Royal Hobart Hospital gave three reasons-reasons which are facing all the hospitals in this country-for rising costs. He said, firstly, there was increasing use of public hospitals throughout Australia because more and more people were opting out of private health insurance; secondly, the inflation component in the cost-sharing agreement was not realistic; and thirdly, the cost of advances in medical tech nology was high and was not being considered by the Commonwealth.

offered any opportunity for it to be debated. However, he is perfectly prepared to use this House to make snide, disparaging and dishonest remarks about the predicament of the States.

The problems that are facing the hospitals are not due to any major weaknesses in State government administrations. The problems are being faced by every State because of this pattern or

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member for Bonython is reflecting upon the Minister.

costs which all hospitals are facing. Rather than simply snidely snipe at particular States, let us admit that we are faced with a nationwide problem which is beyond the control of the individual

Dr BLEWETT-The Minister has made

disparagingremarks about the predicament of the

States, particularly the Labor States, in relation to

their hospital budgets. I ask the honourable

members who asked questions of the Minister

the honourable member for Mitchell (Mr Cad

man) , the honourable member for Franklin (Mr

Good luck) and the honourable member for

Macarthur (Mr Baume)-to consider the prob

lem facing the States budgets because they

ainrerperlaotbiolenm. tsontohtejiur shtofsapciitnagl

New South Wales or Tasmania, but problems fac

ing every State in this country, with the possible

exception of South Australia.

States. I am afraid that all we get from the Minister for Health is rather shabby attempts to refuse to share the burden of this national problem. Let me refer to a couple of the things he has said about New South Wales. He attempted to evade the whole problem by saying that New South Wales was some $ 1 7m short of the appropriation that is now available to it. The Minister should listen to his own Treasurer (Mr Howard) who has told us year after year that the pattern of expenditure and receipts makes it very difficult to use them at a particular point in the year to predict what the deficit will be. What has happened in New South Wales is that there has been a somewhat unpredictable pattern of expenditure payments

At the Perth conference a fortnight ago, all but in New South Wales the people know that the

States requested supplementary assistance from shortfall on hospitals will be between $ l Om and

Adjournment

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 045

$ 1 4m. This figure of $ 1 7m that the Minister has dragged outthis unpredictable problem at a particular time in relation to particular payments-is not any true indication of the ulti mate deficit. Indeed, his own civil servants know that because the whole issue was discussed with them and I presume it has been passed on to him. It was just a cheap trick to try to disguise the problems that New South Wales is facing.
The reality is that the New South Wales hospi tal system is facing a deficit of at least $ lOm. The New South Wales Government has offered to share that burden with the Commonwealth in the spirit of the 50-50 cost sharing agreement. All that we on the Opposition side are asking is that co-operatively the Commonwealth and the State governments should come together to meet this problem. Similarly, there is the argument that New South Wales has not been able to work out administrative arrangements for outpatient charges over the past two years. The reason New South Wales has not been able to work out the arrangements is that the private health funds will not come to the party. It is the Minister in this House who has the power and the authority to compel the private health funds to meet with the New South Wales Government in an attempt to tackle that problem, that is the problem of payments for insured outpatients receiving treatment in public hospitals.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr DOBIE (Cook) ( 1 0. 54)--I rise to extend to this 'crowded' chamber an invitation to attend the greatest participating sporting event on the Australian sporting calender, namely, the National Surf Life Saving Championships which will take place over the next three days in the electorate of Cook at the beach of Wanda. In the first place I extend to everyone in this 'crowded' chamber a cordial invitation to attend but par ticularly I extend a personal invitation to the Labor Party shadow Minister for sport, the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) , to come to these championships as my guest. I believe he has not received an invitation. I have risen to speak because tonight seems to be the occasion when various people have been talk ing about what sporting events are the greatest after the Melbourne Cup. I think the National Surf Life Saving Championships have the most participants of any event on the Australian sport ing calendar. I hate to say to the Queenslanders that it is even bigger than the Commonwealth Games. I believe that it is an event that should have much more publicity.

I am pleased to have the support of my col league the honourable member for Phillip (Mr Birney) who is also very active in the surf life saving movement. ] would just like to pay a very brief tribute tonight to the tremendous effort that has been put in by the President, office bearers and all the club members of the Wanda Surf Life Saving Club which will be the host club for the next three days. I also pay tribute to the other three clubs which serve the No. 2 district of the Sydney branch of the surf life saving movement for the tremendous effort they have put in over the last 1 8 months for this event that is going to take place. I hope that a large number of people will come to see this very fascinating and very Australian of sporting occasions. I am very con fident that the Wanda boys will maintain and exceed the high standard that was set last year by the Maroochydore club in Queensland, which of course set a standard against which all future national championships will be set.
I am not about to enter into any of the debates about who will or will not compete, but I just re mind honourable members that in the next three days as in the past weeksomething like 4,000 to 5,000 sportsmen will be wending their way to the centre of Australia. I am delighted to see that the Minister who is from Tasmania, the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) , is showing such interest because a large number of people are coming all the way from his southern State of Tasmania. I pay tribute to Allan Whelp ton the national President and to Gus Staunton for the tremendous effort he puts in as executive director. I again pay tribute and say that we would not be having national surf championships as we are having tomorrow if it had not been for the life long dedication and application of Sir Adrian Curlewis, whom we are all looking forward to sec ing there tomorrow. I again extend to people in this 'crowded' chamber, the 'crowded' public galleries and the 'crowded' Press gallery a cordial invitation to make their way tomorrow to the finest beaches in Australia.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) ( 1 0.57) I have won the right to speak next by default in this 'crowded' chamber. The subject that I want to discuss might well be described as a local issue but to my mind it is a sad commentary on our temporary social values and inherent selfish prejudices. The subject is that of the Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services hostel site which exists in the electorate of Dun das, which the Minister at the table, the Minister for Administrative Services ( Mr Newman ) , visited last week, I believe. The simple story about this matter is that this Commonwealth hostel,

I 046 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Adjournment

which was closed some years ago, sits o n I I acres of land which has been the subject of constant negotiations between the New South Wales and Commonwealth governments as to its future. At one stage I believe the New South Wales Government made some arrangements to buy it to build medium density housing commission villa homes or town houses upon. It was an ideal situation on which to build. [t was 1 1 acres that was serviced, close to the main road, transport and everything. It was an ideal plot on which to build this sort of development.
But enter the villain. He, the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) , has just entered the chamber. By some measure of influence within the Government he has had that decision altered. The latest decision is that single level dwellings will be built. I woulq have thought that that would be acceptable, but apparently the honourable member for Dundas fears that 200 or 300 possible Australian Labor Party voting people might make an impact on his 7,000 ma jority, so he is very anxious to see that that does not happen. Last Saturday this gentleman organised a meeting at that piece of land. Enter the nouveau riche; the local residents arrived. All the veneer of respectability fell off them and their prejudices were revealed when they let us know quite _clearly that they did not want people living in housing commission homes near them because those sorts of people might be of some lesser form of life.
Mr RuddockHow many of your neighbours were there?
Mr JOHN BROWNI tell the honourable member that there is a block of land in my street not more than a mile away, and I am very happy for the New South Wales Government to build housing commission homes on it.
Mr RuddockOpposite your place in Ingleby Street.
Mr JOHN BROWNRight opposite my place. I have petitioned the Minister to see that that is the case. I am appalled to think that people who live near me would have these little minds,

that they would think that their property values or their social status might be lessened by having the housing commission people live near. The object of the present exercise is to have this land turned into open space. We do not need open space in Parramatta; we have the best endowed area in metropolitan Sydney. I implore the Minister to make sure that this people's land is used to the best advantage of the people of Australia. I implore him to allow the 49,000 people on the housing commission lists in New South Wales to have an opportunity to live in the sorts of sur roundings that the honourable member for Dun das and 1 live in.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar) Order! It being I I p.m. the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 2 . 1 5 p.m. on Tuesday next.
House adjourned at 1 1 p.m.
REPLY TO A REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATlON
Joint House Department
Mr Les Johnson to ask Mr Speaker-
( 1 ) What arrangements are in operation for the disposal of wastepaperfrom Parliament House.
(2) Is the disposal of waste paper conducted by a (a) public instrumentality or (b) private contract.
(3) If disposal is by private contract, were tenders called prior to letting the contract.
(4) [f so, (a) how many tenders were received, (b) who was the successful tenderer and (c) what are the terms and con ditions of the contract.
(5) If tenders were not called, who disposes of the waste paper from Parliament House and what are the terms and conditions of this arrangement.
Mr SpeakerThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) Waste paperis cleared from Parliament House by a private treaty.
(2) See answer to ( 1 ) .
(3) No.
(4) Not applicable.
(5) The disposal is carried out by A. T. Cooper, without charge, on the condition that regular clearances a"re made to ensure there is no build-up of paper bales in the limited paper storage area.

Answers to Questions

26 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 047 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Taxation: Gold Mining Companies
(Question No. 14)
Mr Holding asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 November 1 980:
( 1 ) Has his attention been drawn to the article headed 'Few fears on gold exemption' on page 25 in the Business Age, Tuesday, 5 August 1980.
(2) Is it a fact that the tax exemption for gold mining companies (a) is useless to companies who really need it, that is, those not making profits, (b) is producing exceptional windfalls for companies in an era of $500 + prices for an ounce of gold and (c) gives the governments of the United States of America and the United Kingdom a chance to cream off tax from Australian operations of United States of American and United Kingdom companies which is foregone by Australia.
(3) Are the estimates of gold company net profitability for 1 979-80 as follows: (a) Gold Mines of Kalgoorlie, $7m ($2.28m in 1978-79), (b) Poseidon, approximately $7m ($2.1 m in 1978-79), (c) Central Norseman, approximately $20m ($9.5m in 1978-79); if not, is he able to state what the relevant figures are for those companies.
(4) Is he able to supply similar figures to those referred to in part (3) for Peko-Wallsend and Western Mining Corporation, which do not separately report profits on their gold mining operations.
(5) Is he also able to provide figures showing any loss of revenue in each financial year since the inception of the gold tax exemption, assuming that any companies concerned would have paid normal company tax rates in the absence of the gold tax exemption.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) Yes.
(2) (a) The tax exemption effectively applies only where the company is in receipt of income that would otherwise be taxable.
(b) Recent high prices of gold would have increased the profitability of gold mining.
(c) Although I am unable to speak with authority on the taxation laws of other countries, it is understood that in both the United Kingdom and the United States of America a company resident there which operates a branch gold mine in Australia would be liable to tax at home on any profits. Credit would be allowable under the usual rules of each country for any tax imposed by the country of source. In the absence of any tax in Australia, this could meanthat thenet tax levied in the United Kingdom or the United States of America would be correspondingly higher.
If a United Kingdom or United States of America resident company owned shares in a company resident in Australia which worked a gold mine here, withholding tax at 15 per cent would be payable to Australia on any dividends flowing to the United Kingdom or United States of America company. That company would normally be eligible for a tax credit at home for the Australian withholding tax.
If income from working,a gold mine were not exempt from tax and the United Kingdom or United States of America resi dent company owned 10 per cent or more of the Australian resident company, the United Kingdom or United States of

America parent company would also be entitled to a credit for a proportion of the 46 per cent company tax which would then be payable in Australia by the Australian-resident company. This would mean that the net tax levied in the home country would be correspondingly lower.
(3) The companies' published results for 1 978-79 agree with the figures quoted. Company profit figures for the 1979-80 year, as reported to the stock exchanges, are:

$m

Gold Mines of Kalgoorlie

7

Poseidon

7

Central Norseman

23

(4) No.
(5) Figures are not available showing the loss to revenue which has resulted from the taxation exemption for income derived from gold mining for each year since its introduction. However, based on the reported profits and gold mining pro duction of the companies mentioned in (3) and statistics of Australian gold mining production for 1 979-80, and assuming that profits would otherwise have been fully taxable, the cost to revenue of exempting gold mining income from income tax is put at about $77m in respect of the 1 979-80 income year. It should be noted that the" average price of gold realised by the companies mentioned in (3) during 1 979-80 was about $A434 per ounce.

Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(Question No. 19)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 26 November 1 980:
( 1 ) Has the Attorney-General's attention been drawn to the recommendation of the Administrative Review Council in paragraph 160 of its 4th Annual Report for research into changes in stalistics on cases finalised by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
(2) ) f so, can the Attorney-General state what steps he has taken to ensure such research is carried out.
( 3 ) Ifno action on this matter has occurred, why is this so.
Mr Viner -The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's questions:
( 1 ) In paragraph 1 60 of its 4th Annual Report the Administrative Review Council referred to statistics showing changes in the results of cases finalised by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and said that there would appear to be room for em piricaL. research into these changes to determine their cause and, in particular, whether the Tribunal's earlier operations have led to alterations in departmental approaches to decision.making and review. The Council did not, however, make a formal recommendation on the matter.
(2) In paragraph 160 of its Report, the Council quoled certain figures comparing the results of cases before the Tribunal in 1 979-80 with the results for 1 978-79. When, however, the equivalent figures for 1977-78 are taken into account there is no prima facie evidence of a discernible trend one way or the other. The comparative figures are-

1 048 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Answers to Questions

1 977-78 1978-79 1 979-80

%

%

%

Cases settled and applications

withdrawn without Tribunal

making a decision (as a per

centage of all cases disposed

of) . . . . . . . . . 3 1 . 5 36.6 26.1

Decision affirmed as a percent

age of those cases in which

Tribunal reached a decision

on the merits . . . . . 56.4 6 5 . 1 6 1 .5

Cases where applicant has suc

ceeded partly or wholly,

whether after final decision by

Tribunal or otherwise (as a

percentage of all cases

disposed of) . . . . . . 42.7 29.3 34.9

It should also be notedthat applications under the ACT Rates Ordinance made up 44 per cent of all applications to the Tribunal in 1 977-78 and 39.2 per cent in 1 978-79, but only 2.6 per cent in 1 979-80, whereas applications under the Migration Act (by persons under deportation orders) increased from 8.4 per cent of all applications in 1977-78 to 25.6 per cent in 1 979-80, making this area ofjurisdiction the largest in terms of volume. Given these substantial changes in jurisdiction, and the absence of a discernible trend in results over the last 3 years, I do not think it would be useful to commit departmen tal resources to the research suggested by the Council at this stage. It would be open to the Administrative Review Council to undertake the suggested research of its own initiative, should it think it desirable to do so.
I can however assure the honourable member that my officers have frequent consultations with officers of other de partments affected by the jurisdiction of the Tribunal concerning the impact of the Tribunal on departmental approaches to decision-making and review.
(3) See answer to question (2) above.

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(Question No. 38)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 26 November 1 980:
( 1 ) Does article 50 of the 1 966 International Covenant on Civil and Political R ights, which Australia signed in December 1 972 and ratified in August 1 980, state that the provisions of the Covenant shall extend to all parts ofFederal States without any limitations or exceptions.
(2) Which Federations have ratified the Covenant or acceded to it.
(3) Have any Federations purported to ratify it or accede to it with reservations; if so, what were the reservations.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's questions is as follows:
( I ) Article 50 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights states:
The provisions of the present Covenant shall extend to all parts of federal States without any limitations or exceptions.
(2) The following countries that are generally regarded as beingFederal States haveratified or acceded to the Covenant:
Australia Austria

Canada Federal Republic ofGermany India USSR Venezuela Yugoslavia
(3) The following countries that are generally regarded as being Federal States have ratified or acceded to the Covenant with declarations and/or reservations:
Australia Austria Federal Republic of Germany India USSR Venezuela
The texts of these reservations and/or declarations are as follows:

Articles 2 and 50

Australia advises that, the people having united as one people in a Federal Commonwealth under the Crown, it has a federal constitutional system. It accepts that the provisions of the Covenant extend to all parts of Australia as a federal State without any limitations or exceptions. It enters a general res ervation that Article 2, paragraphs 2 and 3 and Article 50 shall be given effect consistently with and subject to the pro visions in Article 2, paragraph 2.

Under Article 2, paragraph 2, steps to adopt measures necessary to give effect to the rights recognised in the Covenant are to be taken in accordance with each State Party's Constitutional processes which in the case of
Australia, are the processes of a federatio in which legislat
ive, executive and judicial powers to give effect to the rights recognised in the Covenant are distributed among the federal (Commonwealth) authorities and the authorisation of the constituent States.

In particular, in relation to the Australian States the im

plementation of those provisions of the Covenant over whose

subject matter the federal authorities exercise legislative,

executtve and judicial jurisdiction will be a matter for those

authorities; and the implementation of those provisions of the

Covenant over whose subject matter the authorities of the

JUoflssdtil.tCutlOnnt

Sates
will be

exercise legislative, executive a matter for those authorities'

and and

judicial where a

prvisio has bot? federal and State aspects, its implemen

tatIOn wIll accordmgly be a matter for the respective consti

tutionally appropriate authorities (for the purpose of im

plemntation, the Northern Territory will be regarded as a constituent State).

To this end, the Australian Government has been in consul tation with the responsible State and Territory Ministers with the object of developing co-operative arrangements to co ordinate and facilitate the implementation of the Covenant.

Article 10

Australia accepts the principle stated in paragraph I of

Article 1 0 and the general principles of the other paragraphs

of that Article, but makes the reservation that these and other

provisions of the Covenant are without prejudice to laws and

lawful arrangments, of the type now in force in Australia, for the preservatton of custodial discipline in penal establish

gmaetiotns'I.InacrceelpatteiodnatsoanpaorbajlelrcatpIvhe

2 (a) to be

the principle of segre achieved progressively.

In relatIOn to paragraphs 2 (b) and 3 (second sentence) the

obligation to segregate is accepted only to the extent that such

segregation is considercd by the responsible authorities to be

beneficial to thejuveniles or adults concerned.

Answers to Questions

26 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 049

Article 14
Australia accepts paragraph 3 (b) on the understanding that the reference to adequate facilities does not require pro vision to prisoners of all the facilities available to a prisoner's legal representative.
Australia accepts the requirement in paragraph 3 (d) that everyone is entitled to be tried in his presence, but reserves the right to exclude an accused person where his conduct makes it impossible for the trial to proceed.
Australia interprets paragraph 3 (d) of Article 1 4 as con sistent with the operation of schemes of legal assistance in which the person assisted is required to make a contribution towards the cost of the defence related to his capacity to pay and determined according to law, or in which assistance is granted in respect of other than indictable offences only after having regard to all relevant matters.
Australia makes the reservation that the provision of com pensation for miscarriage of justice in the circumstances con templated in paragraph 6 of Article 14 may be by administrative procedures rather than pursuant to specific legal provision.
Article 17
Australia accepts the principles stated in Article 1 7 without prejudice to the right to enact and administer laws which, insofar as they authorise action which impinges on a person's privacy, family, home or correspondence, are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety, the economic well-being of the country, the protection of public health or morals or the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.
Article 19
Australia interprets paragraph 2 ofArticle 1 9 as being com patible with the regulation of radio and television broadcast ing in the public interest with the object of providing the best possible broadcasting services to the Australian people.
Article 20
Australia interprets the rights provided for by Articles 19, 2 1 and 22 as consistent with Article 20; accordingly, the Commonwealth and the constituent States, having legislated with respect to the subject matter of the Article in matters of prac tical concern in the interests of public order (ordre public), the right is reserved not to introduce any further legislative provision on these matters.
Article 25
The reference in paragraph (b) of Article 25 to "universal and equal suffrage" is accepted without prejudice to laws which provide that factors such as regional interests may be taken into account in defining electoral divisions, or which establish franchises for municipal and other local government elections related to the sources ofrevenue and the functions of such government.
Convicted persons
Australia declares that laws now in force in Australia relat ing to the rights ofpersons who have been convicted of serious criminal offences are generally consistent with the requirements of Articles 14, 1 8, 19, 25 and 26 and reserves the right not to seek amendment of such laws.
Discrimination and distinction
The provisions of Articles 2 ( 1 ) and 24 ( 1 ) , 25 and 26 relat ing to discrimination and distinction between persons shall be without prejudice to laws designed to achieve for the members of some class or classes of persons equal enjoyment of the rights defined in the Covenant. Australia accepts Article 26 on the basis that the object of the provision is to confirm the right

of each person to equal treatment in the application of the law.
AUSTRIA
Upon ratification: 1 . Article 12, paragraph 4, of the Covenant will be applied
provided that it will not affect the Act of April 3, 1919. State Law Gazette No. 209, concerning the Expulsion and the Transfer of Property of the House of Hapsburg-Lorraine as amended by the Act of October 30, 19 19, State Law Gazette No. 501 , the Federal Constitutional Act of July 30, 1925, Fed eral Law Gazette No. 292, and the Federal Constitutional Act of January 26, 1 928, Federal Law Gazette No. 30, read in con junction with the Federal Constitutional Act of July 4, 1 963, Federal Law Gazette No. 1 72.
2. Article 9 and article 14 of the Covenant will be applied provided that legal regulations governing the proceedings and measures of deprivation of liberty as provided for in the Ad ministrative Procedure Acts and in the Financial Penal Act remain permissible within the framework of the judicial re view by the Federal Administrative Court or the Federal Con stitutional Court as provided by the Austrian Federal Constitution.
3. Article 10, paragraph 3, of the Covenant will be applied provided that legal regulations allowing for juvenile prisoners to be detained together with adults under 25 years of age who give no reason for concern as to their possible detrimental influence on the juvenile prisoner remain permissible.
4. Article 14 of the Covenant will be applied provided that the principles governing the publicity of trials as set forth in article 90 of the Federal Constitutional Law as amended in 1 929 are in no wayprejudiced and that
(a) paragraph 3, sub-paragraph (d) is not in conflict with legal regulations which stipulate that an accused person who disturbs the orderly conduct of the trial or whose presence would impede the questioning of an other accused person, of a witness or of an expert can be excluded from participation in the trial;
(b) paragraph 5 is not in conflict with legal regulations which stipulate that after an acquittal or a lighter sentence passed by a court of the first instance, a higher tribunal may pronounce conviction or a heavier sentence for the same offense, while they exclude the convicted person's right to have such conviction or heavier sentence reviewed by a still higher tribunal;
(c) paragraph 7 is not in conflict with legal regulations which allow proceedings that led up to a person's final convic tion or acquittill to be reopened.
5. Articles 19, 2 1 and 22 in connection with article 2 ( 1 ) of the Covenant will be applied provided that they are not in conflict with legal restrictions as provided for in article 16 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
6. Article 26 is understood to mean that it does not exclude different treatment of Austrian nationals and aliens, as is also
permissible under article I , paragraph 2, of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF " \ . Articles 19, 2 1 and 22 in conjunction with Article 2 ( I ) of the Covenant shall be applied within the scope ofArticle 1 6 of the Convention of 4 November 1950 for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
"2. Article 14 (3) (d) of the Covenant shall be applied in such manner that it is for the court to decide whether an accused person held in custody has to appear in person at the hearing before the court ofreview (Revisionsgericht).

1050 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 198 1

Answers to Questions

"3. Article 1 4 (5) of the Covenant shall be applied in such manner that:
(a) A further appeal does not have to be instituted in all cases solely on the grounds the accused person-having been acquitted by the lower court-was convicted for the first time in the proceedings concerned by the appellate court.
(b) In the case of criminal offences of minor gravity the re view by a higher tribunal of a decision not imposing imprison ment does not have to be admitted in all cases.
"4. Article 1 5 ( l ) of the Covenant shall be applied in such manner that when provision is made by law for the imposition of a lighter penalty the hitherto applicable law may for certain exceptional categories of cases remain applicable to criminal offences committed before the law was amended."
INDIA
Declarations "I. With reference to . . . article I of the Inter
national Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Government of the Republic of India declares that the words "the right of self-determination" appearing in (this article) apply only to the peoples under foreign domination and that these words do not apply to sovereign independent States or to a section of a people or nation-which is the essence of national integrity.
"II. With reference to article 9 or the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Government of the Republic of India takes the position that the provisions of the article shall be so applied as to be in consonance with the provisions of clauses (3) to (7) of article 22 of the Consti tution of India. Further under the Indian Legal System, there is no enforceable right to compensation for persons claiming to be victims ofunlawful arrest or detention against the State.
Reservation "III. With respect to article 1 3 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Government of the Republic of India reserves its right to apply its law relating to foreigners.
Declaration "IV. With reference to . . . articles 1 2, 1 9 (3), 2 1 and
22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Government of the Republic of India declares that the provisions of the said articles shall be so applied as to be in conformity with the provisions of article 1 9 of the Consti tution of India.
"v.
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS Declaration made upon signature and confirmed upon ratification:
The Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic declares that
the provisions of paragraph I of article 26 of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and of paragraph I of article 48 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, under which a number of States cannot become parties to these Covenants, are of a discrimi natory nature and considers that the Covenants, in accord ance with the principle of sovereign equality of States, should be open for participation by all States concerned without any discrimination or limitation.
VENEZUELA
Upon ratification: Article 60, paragraph 5, of the Constitution of the Republic
of Venezuela establishes that: "No person shall be convicted in a criminal trial unless he has first been personally notified of the charges and heard in the manner prescribed by law. Per sons accused of an offence against the respublica may be tried in absentia, with the guarantees and in the manner prescribed

by law". Venezuela is making this reservation because article 14, paragraph 3 (d), of the Covenant makes no provision for persons accused of an offence against the res publica to be tried in absentia.
Rutile and Titanium (Question No. 59)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 26 November 1 980:
(I) Is the Minister able to say whether (a) Australia pro
duces 90 per cent of the world's rutile, (b) rutile is the most sought-after raw material for the production of titanium and (c) titanium is now classified as being strategically important in the manufacture of (i) jet engines, (ii) supersonic advanced aircraft, (iii) the frame and outer section of Concorde aircraft and (iv) components for satellites and rockets.
(2) Is the Minister also able to say whether Western Mining Corporation recently announced that negotiations have reached an advanced stage with the United States of America for the establishment of a $ 1 000 million titanium metal plant in Australia; if so, what is the significance of this announcement.
(3) Is the Minister further able to say whether the proposed plant is being planned in accordance with the Government's foreign investment guidelines.
(4ps the Minister able to say whether technical knowledge is being made available to Australia through General Dynamics for Australia's use; if so, and if titanium is import ant as a strategic mineral, will the Minister give an assurance that this knowledge is in keeping with the Government's atti tude towards the processing of Australia's minerals, particularly those of strategic importance with priority to export.
(5) Will the Minister give an assurance that titanium and the rutileresources from which it is made will be (a) produced so as to serve fully Australia's present and future needs and (b) treated as a vital defence material in export policy.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) (a) In 1 979 Australia produced 278,901 tonnes of rutile which was approximately 75 per cent of world production. In addition Australia produces around 55,000 tonnes ofsynthetic rutile (beneficated ilmenite) a year. I understand that studies are well advanced concerning the feasibility of establishing another synthetic rutile plant which could raise total annual Australianproductionto over 1 20,000 tonnes.
(b) I understand that rutile and synthetic rutile are main raw materials in the production of titanium sponge and ingot together with chlorine and magnesium or metallic sodium. While rutile is the preferred feedstock for titanium metal, ilmenite is already used as a feedstock (for example in the USSR) and, being more abundant and widely distributed throughout the world than rutile, has significant potential for substitution. Australia accounts for about 30 per cent of world ilmenite production..
(c) Titanium is an integral component of aircraft and engine manufacture. For example, according to the US. Bureau of Mines, in 1 979 about sixty per cent of titanium metal consumed in the USA., the major consumer, was used in jet engines, airframes and space and missile applications. The metal is being increasingly used in the aerospace industry, the chemical industry and other applications due to its high strength/weight ratio, comparatively lightweight and non corrosive qualities.
(2) Western Mining Corporation announced in October 1 980 that a Memorandum of Intent had been signed between Western Mining Corporation Ltd, General Dynamics Cor poration and United Technologies Inc., to establish a titanium

Answers to Questions

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 05 1

processing facility in Australia. The facility will have a pro jected annual capacity of 5000 tons of titanium sponge. The company stated that the facility is part of the Australian Industry Participation program contingent upon selection of the F-16 as a new tactical fighter for the Royal Australian Air force. The announcement also included the advice that the operation and management responsibility would be Australian.
Another project, involving the building of a titanium processing complex, is under consideration by Associated Minerals Consolidated, McDonnell Douglas and General Electric. This is contingent on the selection of the F-18 as the new tactical fighter.
(3) The establishment of the proposed plant would be examinable under foreign investment policy as a new business and would be considered against the normal criteria of the policy. These include the net economic benefits which would result from the proposal and the extent of Australian equity participation in the project.
(4) The Memorandum of Intent, referred to above, indicated that new technology would be transferred to Australia through the US partners. Such transfer of tech nology is consistent with the Government's policy of seeking to encourage the processing in Australia of raw materials to the extent that processing is economically feasible and con sistent with sound industrial development.
(5) (a) As indicated above rutile production is far in excess of domestic needs and in the event of a titanium plant being established, its production would also be in excess of foresee able domestic demand. At present domestic users of the metal currently obtained their requirements from overseas under normal commercial arrangements.
(b) Export of rutile and titanium would need to comply with all relevant Government policies. It should be recognised that although titanium can be of strategic importance, given the locations of titanium processing plants in the world, it is likely that strategic considerations would only arise in relation to exports in quite exceptional circumstances.
Tax Avoidance
(Question No. 63)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 November 1 980:
( 1 ) Has his attention been drawn to the recent decision of the High Court in the case of the Commissioner ofTaxation v. Everett.
(2) Is it a fact that this decision enabled members of pro fessional partnerships to alienate income to members of their families, thereby saving considerable amounts of tax, whereas wage earners cannot alienate income in this manner.
(3) If so, (a) do these possible tax savings, which can now be enjoyed for example by doctors and lawyers, create a further tax burden on employees who are not in a position to use similar procedures and (b) what action does the Government propose to take to prevent the use of this procedure in view of the potential loss of revenue.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) and (2) The decision of the High Court in Commissioner ofTaxation v. Everett appears to establish as a prin ciple of general application that a partner in a partnership is able to assign a part of his or her share in the partnership to a person who is not a partner and does not become one, with the consequence that, for income tax purposes, income which would otherwise be taxable in the hands of the partner instead becomes taxable in the hands of the assignee.

(3) The implications of the Everett decision have been carefully examined by the Government and it has been de cided that no action will be taken at this stage to overcome the effects of the decision. Although the Everett case was concerned with an assignment of income, the same taxation result could have been obtained if the assignee had become a partner in the partnership. Accordingly, any move by the Government to deny the validity of assignments for taxation purposes could be effective only if the alternative of introducing the as signee into the partnership were also denied.
That would be a very large step to take. It could hardly be confined to professional practitioners, when the taxation law has long recognised the legal sharing of income between per sons who are partners and many business people in the community have formed patnerships with members of their families.
Servicemen: Compensation for Injury
(Question No. 166)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence. upon notice, on 26 November 1 980:
( I ) Is it a fact that servicemen (a) injured as a consequence of service in a hostile environment (for example, in circumstances similar to the recent involvement of Papua New Guinea forces in Vanuatu) or (b) injured when part of a peace-keeping force, are not entitled to benefit from the pro visions of the Repatriation Act.
(2) Is compensation in these case limited to the provisions of the Compensation (Commonwealth Government Em ployees) Act.
Mr Killen-On 25 February 1981 (Hansard. page 202) I replied as follows:
( 1 ) and (2) The compensatory arrangements for ser vicemen in the situations suggested would depend on how long the serviceman had been a member of the regular Defence Force. Legislation enacted in December 1972 providcd for the peacetime soldier after completing three years service to have access to repatriation benefits. The serviceman, therefore, who had completed three years service would be covered by both the Repatriation Act and the Commonwealth (CGE) Act. If he had not completed three years service he would be entitled to benefit from the provisions of the Commonwealth (CGE) Act only.
The following supplementary information is now provided:
( 1 ) If Service members with less than three years service die, are killed or are discharged from the Defence Force because of service related injuries or disease, they and their de pendants have access to repatriation ber:efits.
(2) If Service members are injured as a consequence of ser vice in a hostile environment which has been declared special duty in a special area within the meaning of the Repatriation (Special Overseas Service) Act 1962, then the appropriate benefits of the Repatriation Act are available to all Service members so serving.
(3) Service members are not covered under the Commonwealth (CGE) Act when serving on special duty in a special area but are covered for all other peacetime service.
Satellite Station at Smithfield
(Question No. 207)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 27 November 1 980:
( 1 ) Can he say whether United States of America fleet bal listic missile submarines are the chief users of the navigational

1052 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Answers to Questions

satellite system of which the Tranet Station 1 12 at Smithfield, South Australia, is a part.
(2) [s the station at Smithfield also involved in tracking non-navigational satellites, particularly military geodetic satellites.

( I ) Is it a fact that the Government uses 2 measurements in determining employment growth, namely (a) payroll tax re turns with adjustments made for tax exemptions and (b) sample surveys; if so, for what periods are the measurements taken.

Mr KiIlenThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) The primary use of the US Navy Navigation Satellite System is to assist in the navigation of US Navy Ships, and commercial vessels of the US and other nations. The system is also used for mapping, charting and survey work. It would not be accurate to say that US ballistic missile submarines are the chief users of the system, but these ships do use the system as a means of updating their inertial navigation equipment.
The TRANET station at Smithfield (now designated TRANET 4 1 2) is a passive receiver of radio signals from sat ellites which emit on the appropriate wave lengths. It tracks the US Navy Navigation satellites, but not now for navigational purposes. I refer the honourable member to my answer to a Question on Notice on this subject in October 1977 (Senate Hansard, p. 1 1 35).
For the information of the honourable member, the navigational information provided by the US Navy Navigation Sat ellite System is derived from satellite tracking data obtained solely from stations within the US. The only contribution to navigation that is made by other tracking stations, such as Smithfield, lies in the use from time to time of data obtained by those stations to refine the geodetic data base of the Navy Navigation Satellite System.
(2) In addition to the US Navy Navigation satellites, TRANET Smithfield is used in support of other satellites as agreed between the Australian and US Department of De fence. These include from time to time satellites which collect data for geodetic purposes. The study of geodesy has military as well as civil applications.
Committee oflnquiry into Technological Change

(2) When were sample surveys first employed by the Government on a regular basis and forwhat reason.
(3) Is the Government determined to end the use of payroll tax returns as a measurement ofemployment growth.
(4) According to (a) the sample survey and (b) payroll tax returns, by how much has employment grown in each quarter of the last 2 years from I January 1 979, for those periods dur ing which both statistical measurements have been collated.
(5) Is it a fact that sample survey statistics have produced the more erratic results.
(6) Is it also a fact that the Government retains that measure because it produces a higher, though less stable, employment growth indicator than that obtained from payroll tax returns.
(7) Is it further a fact that persons working one hour or more during the week in which the sample is taken are not classed as unemployed.
(8) Does the Government now allow the unemployed slightly more extra income before imposing the means test on unemployment benefit; if so, will he instruct the organisers of the sample to set a limit, in the order of 5 hours work per week, below which a person may be classed unemployed for the purpose ofobtaining a more accurate indicator ofreal employment growth.
(9) Did unemployment rise from July 1979 to July 1 980; if so, by what amount.
( 1 0) Did employment grow according to both measure ments used over the period referred to in part (9); if so, by what amount.

(Question No. 271)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 3 December, 1 980:
( 1 ) Is it the Government's intention that the report of the Committee of Inquiry into Technological Change in Australia (the Myer Report) will be made available for public debate?
(2) If so, why is the cost of a 4 volume copy of the report $37.60 when purchased through the Australian Government Publishing Service?
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I I ) Did the annual increase in the availahle labour force
exceed 100 000 in the last financial year.
(12) If employment increased, according to either or both of the measurements, by an amount in excess of the increase in the available labour force, do the Australian Bureau of Stat istics (ABS) and Commonwealth Employment Service (CES) statistics register a fall in the unemployed figures over the same period; if not, why not.
( 1 3) If no fall was registered, what proportion of the employment increase was composed of those persons whn were not registered for or receiving unemployment benefit prior to gaining employment, commonly referred to as the hidden unemployed.

( 1) Yes. The report was tabled in this House by the Prime

( 1 4) Does a more comprehensive picture of the depth of

Minister on 19 August 1980, and the Government's detailed unemployment in Australia emerge if the difference belween

response to the report was announced, also in this House, by the employment growth as reflected by both survey and pay

the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Hansard, 1 8 Sep roll tax measurements and the increase in the available labour

tember 1 980, page 1 5 1 7) . Copies of the report have been force is added to the registered unemployed as reflected by

available for purchase through the Australian Government both the ABS and CES measurements.

,
\

Publishing Service since 3 1 July 1980. (2) I understand that prices are set by the AGPS in line
with the Government's policy on cost recovery. Volume I ,

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

which contains the Committee's main report and recommen

( I ) The Australian Bureau of Statistics compiles two

dations, sells for $9.80.

measures of employment: (a) the civilian employees series

Employment Statistics

and (b) the labour force series. The former is derived from data obtained from payroll tax returns, returns from govern

(Question No. 347)

ment bodies and some other direct returns (eg for hospitals) .

Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 4 December 1 980:

with employment not covered by such returns being estimated. It relates to civilian wage and salary earners employed at the last pay-period in each month. The labour

A nswers to Questions

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 053

force survey (a household sample survey) is generally con ducted during the two weeks beginning on the Monday between the 6th and 12th of each month, and the information obtained refers to the week before the interview.
(2) The labour force survey was first conducted in November 1960 in the six State capital cities and was ex tended to the rest of Australia in February 1964. It is designed to produce up-to-date information about the demographic, labour force and other characteristics of the population aged 1 5 years and over.
(3) The civilian employees series has not been published since July 1980, when figures for April 1980 were issued. The sources and methodology are being reviewed by the Statistician.
(4) (a) Growth in total employment in each quarter from the beginning of 1979, as shown by the labour force survey, is as follows. The gures are subject to sampling variability, an explanation of which is given in the labour force publication.

Quarter

('000)

1 979 March
June September
December 1 980-
March June September

.-35.9 -4.0 60.5 1 0 1 .8
23.3 - 1 0.5 92.6

(b) Payroll tax returns cover only about 75 per cent of em
ployees in the private sector and cannot provide an adequate measure of employment growth. Quarterly changes in the civ ilian employees estimates as published are as follows:

Quarter

( '000)

1 979-

March

28.9

June

1 .6

September

1 5.7

December

1 5.0

1 980-

March

1 8.2

Estimates for later periods are not available. All estimates are subject to revision.
(5) The labour force survey figures, which are subject to sampling variability, have shown greater month-to-month fluctuations; the difference in variability cannot be explained solely in terms of the estimated sampling variability of the labour force statistics.
(6) No. The purpose of the labour force survey is to provide not only estimates of employment but also estimates of unemployment and of persons not in the labour force. The Statis tician publishes employment statistics each month as part of the overall statistics of the activity of the popUlation aged 1 5 years and over.
(7) The definitions used in the labour force survey conform closely to International Labour Organisation recommendations. To be classified as unemployed a person must, amongst other things, have done no work, and not had a job, during the reference period (in the case of the labour force survey, one week).
(8) The means test on unemployment benefits has been eased. The Government does not, however, intend to instruct the Statistician to depart from the internationally accepted definitions of employment and unemployment. The number

of part-time workers who worked 1 -5 hours is published each month by the ABS. [n August 1980 it was estimated that there were 129 300 part-time workers who worked 1-5 hours, of whom 106 300 preferred not to work more hours and only 6 600 had actively looked for full-time work in the four weeks up to the end of the survey week.
(9) The labour force survey estimates of unemployed per sons for July 1979 and July 1 980 were 382 500 and 385 400 re spectively. Because of sampling variability the difference is not statistically significant.
( 10) Corresponding estimates of employed persons from the labour force survey were 6 067 600 and 6 280 000 respect ively. There are about two chances in three that the increase over the twelve months was between 1 90 000 and 234 000. Civilian employees estimates are available only to April 1980 and are subject to revision.
(1 1)-( 14) There are no statistics of the available labour force. The numbers 'available' will change according to different circumstances. Between June 1979 and June 1980 the increases shown by labour force survey estimates were: employed 175 100; unemployed 16 700; labour force 191 800. CES figures of registered unemployed are not available for June 1979 because of an industrial dispute in the Departments of Employment and Youth Affairs and Social Security in Western Australia. The labour force survey does not provide any information on whether persons were registered with the CES or receiving unemployment benefit before obtaining employment.
Migration between Australia and New Zealand
(Question No. 390)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 4 December 1 980:
( I ) How many New Zealanders came to Australia for (a)
permanent or (b) long term settlement in each year since 1 974-75.
(2) How many Australians left for New Zealand for (a) permanent or (b) long term settlement in each of the same years.
(3) In what States in Australia did the New Zealand immi grantssettle foreach year.
(4) What (a) facilities and (b) provisions are made for New Zealand immigrants arriving in Australia.
(5) How many New Zealand immigrants entering Australia in each year since 1974-75 had no New Zealand citizenship.
(6) Can citizens of some countries enter Australia via New Zealand without having to show any travel documents; if so, citizens of what countries.
(7) Are there any plans for regularising the 'free-flow arrangement betweenAustralia and New Zealand.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) The number of New Zealand citizens arriving from all countries as (a) settlers and (b) visitors for 1 2 months or more was as follows:

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1 977-78

Settlers Visitors

/.

2,771

6,482

3,1 17

7,687

5,224

1 1 ,986

8,690

1 3 ,647

1 054 R EPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Answers to Questions

1 978-79 1 979-80

1 1,668 1 4,274

1 6,450 12,915

(2) The number of Australian residents departing for (a) permanent and (b) long term residence ( 1 2 months or more) in New Zealand was:

1974-75

Residents departing permanently

Residents
departing for 12 months
or more

6,969

6,802

Residents departing
permanently

Residents departing for 12 months
or more

1975-76 1 976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1 979-80

6,000 4,671 4,389 5,430 6,226

4, \ 39 3,629
3,058 2,475 2,1 74

(3) State of intended residence of settler arrivals whose country of last residence was New Zealand was:

State

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80(p)

New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory
Not stated

n.a.

1 ,21 I

1 ,933

3,391

4,920

5,727

n.a.

672

1 ,089

1,618

2,152

2,61 5

n.a.

748

1 ,458

2,440

3,327

4,751

n.a.

195

396

421

44

665

n.a.

425

663

1,145

1 ,088

1 ,4 1 5

n.a.

83

80

131

142

123

n.a.

22

52

80

60

81

n.a.

43

86

71

93

129

n.a.

1 27

262

374

520

Total

3 , 1 41

3,526

6,019

9,671

1 2,766

1 5,506

(p) Preliminary n.a. Not available.

(4) No special facilities or provisions arc made for New Zealand immigrants. They can participate in applicable post arrival services available to all migrants in Australia.

(5) Settler arrivals who embarked in New Zealand and who last resided in New Zealand, other than Citizens of New
Zealand (available by Calendar year only for the four years 1 976 to 1979) were:

Calendar Year

1 976

776

1 977

1 , 1 00

1978

1 , 1 87

1 979

1 ,495

(6) Yes. A special arrangement known as the Trans Tas

man Travel Arrangement, exists between Australia and New

Zealand which enables;

(a) citizens of Australia and New Zealand; and

(b) citizens of other Commonwealth countries or the Re public of Ireland who have been granted permission to reside permanently in either country

to travel direct between the two countries for residence or for periods of temporary stay without passports or other forms of travel documents or prior entry authority (e.g. visas).

(7) There are no such plans at this time. The then New Zealand Minister for Labour and Immigration, the Hon. J. Bolger, and I agreed in April 1 980 that we would consider at our next meeting the results of a study conducted by officials of the characteristics ofmovement between the two countries under the arrangement, and the options identified for eliminating any potential abuses.

Etbnic Communities Councils
(Question No. 391)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 4 December 1 980:

( I ) Whatare the Ethnic Communities Councils.
(2) How many Councils are there in Australia.
(3) What is the purpose of these Councils.
(4) Have they received any Federal Government funding; ifso, what sums each year.
(5) What ethnic groups and organisations are part of these Councils.
(6) Are these Councils representative of the ethnic communities.
(7) What channels and/or mechanisms of communication are there between the Councils and his Department.
(8) What plans are there for the funding of these Councils.
(9) What are the main reports, functions, meetings and conferences, organised by the Councils each year in each State.
(1 0) Who are involved in these Councils.
Mr Macpbee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) , (2) and (3) Ethnic Communities Councils (ECCs) are non-government organisations set up by private individuals and organisations. They are not government instrumentalities.
At the Second National Conference of Ethnic Communities Councils held during July 1980 in Canberra, objectives of ECCs were summarised as follows:
firstly, to promote joint action and co-operation between ethnic groups on issues of their special concern;
secondly, to encourage the development of ethnic organ isations concerned with social and cultural life of their com munities; to assess their needs, and to provide consultants particularly to those groups which do not have adequate resources;
thirdly, to ensure the rights of ethnic minorities including effective participation in the making of decisions which

Answers to Questions

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 055

affect them, and access to government funding, also to be a forum for consultation-both within ethnic communities as well as between collectivity of ethnic groupings and various community organisations, including government depart ments which might want to have contact with the various communities;
fourthly, to participate actively in the development of a culturally pluralistic society in Australia, and represent eth nic community groups in relation to relevant community organisations and structures; and
finally, to promote action-oriented research into the social conditions ofethnic minorities in Australian society.
Although the various ECCs differ to some extent in structure and membership, their aims appear to be similar. A Fed eration of Ethnic Communities Councils was formed in July 1979. Councils have been established in all States and Terri tories and for Newcastle and the Hunter Valley region, Illawarra region, Mt Isa and Geelong.
(4) The Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs has provided funding as follows:
(a) Grant-in-Aid Scheme. All grants are provided to em ploy social welfare workers to assist migrant communities. Approval period is three years.

Ethnic Communities Council

1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 Total*

NSW Geelong* SA Mt Isa

2,827.50 3,364.21

23,245.58 3,732.30 8,724.02 1 5,800.35

7,794.20 6,563.60 6,307.22 6,050.85

33,867.28 10,295.90 15,031.24 25,215.41

Total

6,191.71 5 1,502.25 26,715.87 84,409.83

(* Payments have been made for period ending 31 March 198 1 ) .
* . The Geelong ECC operates a Migrant Resource Centre (MRC) for the Commonwealth Government and is funded for that purpose. Payments are made to the Geelong MRC.
(b) Migrant Project Subsidy Scheme ('once only' special purpose grants)
1978-79 Ethnic Communities' Council of New South Wales-$3,000 for
inaugural meeting of the Federation ofECCs
Geelong Ethnic Communities' Council-$946 for information project
Ethnic Communities' Council for South Australia-$2,000 to purchase office furniture and equipment
Ethnic Communities' Council of Queensland-$2,500 to pur chase duplicator and typewriter
Ethnic Communities' Council of Tasmania-$522 to meet ex pe,ns,es fo its inaugural meeting 1979-80
Federation of Ethnic Communities' Councils-$5,000 Assist ance towards the cost of the second National Conference of the Federation and other meetings of the Executive as necessary
Ethnic Communities' Council of the Australian Capital Territory-$1,500 production ofresume on ethnic communities in the ACT
1 980-81 Ethnic Communities' Council of New South Wales-$5,OOO
funding of seminars
Ethnic Communities' Council of Victoria-$5,000 for survey on the aged

(5), (6), (9) and (10) Details should be sought from the Councils.
(7) The usual channels available to non-government bodies active in community affairs are available to the Councils. Com munication to date has been by correspondence and personal representation.
(8) ECCs have in the past (refer 4) received, and are free to apply for, grants under the two programs administered by my De partment: the Migrant Project Subsidy Scheme and the Grant-in Aid Scheme. I understand that some funding has also been provided by State governments.
Immigration: Entrepreneurs and Small Businessmen
(Question No. 393)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 4 December 1 980:
( I ) What is the (a) entrepreneur and (b) small business
men scheme.
(2) When did each come into operation.
(3) What are the requirements for admission into Australia under each scheme.
(4) Do these (a) entrepreneurs and (b) small businessmen comply with every NUMAS requirement; if not, why not.
(5) How many (a) entrepreneurs and (b) small business men were admitted into Australia each year since the intro duction of the scheme.
(6) What was the country of origin of each of these (a) entrepreneurs and (b) small businessmen.
(7) What is the minimum sum required to be eligible under the (a) entrepreneur and (b) small businessmen scheme.
(8) What was the average sum brought into Australia per (a) person and (b) country each year.
(9) What projects and enterprises were established in Australia by the (a) entrepreneurs and (b) small businessmen and in what way is the money brought into the country invested.
( 10) What are the requirements, laws and legislation regarding the exportation of currency in each of the countries of origin of these entrepreneurs.
( 1 1 ) Are any checks made by his Department and Australia's overseas consulates as to whether the (a) entrepreneurs and (b) small businessmen contravene or in fringe currency regulations of their countries of birth or residence.
( 1 2) Are any checks made (a) of where and (b) in what country the money is deposited at the time of application.
( 1 3) How do officials of his Department establish what are the necessary enterprises in Australia.
( 1 4) What qualifications do his Departmental officials have in this area.
( 1 5) Is there any consultation regarding (a) entrepreneurs and (b) small businessmen with other Commonwealth Departments.
( 1 6) How many family members were brought into Australia each year under the (a) entrepreneur and (b) small businessmen scheme.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) There is no scheme as such. Government policy pro
vides for entry of persons who propose to establish in

1 056 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Answers to Questions

Australia worthwhile enterprises with beneficial economic and employment effects.
(2) Firm entry guidelines for entrepreneurs were introduced in 1976 and provision for the entry of small businessmenwas made in 1979.
(3) Entrepreneurs are required to have necessary technical and business experience anQ capital to undertake a viable and worthwhile enterprise. An important consideration in deter mining such applications is the capacity of the proposed enterprise to create employment in Australia. Small business men must have a background in the smaller scale enterprise they wish to set up in Australia.
(4) (a) Entrepreneurs are required to meet the personal and settlement factors of NUMAS. If they are able to meet the special requirements relating to the proposed enterprise and their capacity to operate it successfully, they are regarded as satisfying the NUMAS economic factors.
(b) Small businessmen are required to satisfy the economic as well as the personal and settlement factors ofNUMAS.
(5) and (6) A record of the number of entrepreneurs entering Australia was not kept prior to 1979. In the financial year 1979-80 78 entrepreneurs ( 1 66 dependants) were admit ted. Table A indicates their country of origin. Separate stat istics for small businessmen are not maintained as they are included in the general eligibility category as independent migrants who meet full NUMAS requirements.
(7) There is no minimum sum required. Applicants are to have sufficient capital to establish the enterprise.
(8) and (9) The available statistics do not provide the information sought in the question. Case records, however, indi cate that a significant number of entrepreneur migrants have entered agriculture, retailing, high technology manufacturing and service industry ventures.
( 10), ( 1 1 ) and ( 12) Exchange control regulations vary from country to country and it is for each applicant to comply with the regulations of his country of residence. Details of the requirements can be sought from the relevant authorities of the respective countries.
( 13), ( 1 4) and ( 1 5) As necessary, applications are assessed in consultation with the relevant expert Commonwealth and State Departments.
( 16) See answer to questions 5 and 6.
TABLE A
Arrivals ofEntrepreneurs 1979-80 by country oforigin

Arab Republic ofEgypt Argentina
Belgium Denmark Fiji Germany (Federal RepubJic)
Hong Kong Iran
Ireland Italy Japan Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Malaysia Norway Saudi Arabia
Singapore South Africa

Principal applicant Dependants

I

I

I

6

I

1

I

5

I

5

4

I

8

28

6

14

2

5

4

3

5

I

2

I

3

2

4

1

3

I

I

I

8

5

13

4

10

Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom USA. Vanuatu
Total

Principal applicant Dependants

1

2

2

3

15

27

10

19

1

1

78

166

Immigration Statistics (Question No. 394)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 4 December 1 980:
( I ) How many (a) immigrants and (b) refugees have been brought into Australia for each year since 1974-75.
(2) What was the (a) country of birth arid (b) country of last residence of the (i) immigrants and (ii) refugees.
(3) How many of the (a) immigrants and (b) refugees entered the workforce duringeach year.
(4) How many of these (a) immigrants (b) refugees had relatives in Australia.
(5) What was the average cost to the Australian taxpayer
for each (a) immigrant and (b) refugee in (i) travel costs to Australia, (ii) settlement services in the initial 3 months period, (iii) after 6 months residence and (iv) after 12 months residence for each year.
(6) What was the estimated average economic benefit from
each (a) immigrant and (b) refugee for each year.
(7) What was the average secondary costs for each (a) im migrant and (b) refugee for (i) social security, for example, pensions, unemployment benefits, etc., by item (ii) health and health care insurance, (iii) accommodation and housing, (iv) education, for example primary, secondary, technical, univer sity, etc., by item, and (v) other.
(8) What other (a) economic, (b) social, (c) political and
(d) other considerations are taken into account in determin ing the yearly immigration quotas or targets.
(9) What is the role of the Department in the formulation of immigration policy.
( 1 0) What is the effect and what provisions are made for
unplanned immigrants such as New Zealanders and refugees.
( 1 1 ) How does his Department calculate the costs and benefits per immigrant or refugee.
( 1 2) What procedures are used in those calculations and what factors are taken into account.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) (a) See Table 1; (b) See Table 2.
(2) (a) (i) See Table 3; (ii) Not available for period requested; (b) (i) See Table 4; (ii) See Table 5.
(3) and (4) Information sought is not available.
(5) (a) Not disaggregated to allow such calculation; (b) Total expenditure given in published Budget papers.
(6) and (7) While various partial studies on costs and
benefits of immigration and work recruitment have been undertaken it has not been possible to overcome all the difficulties involved in properly quantifying such costs and benefits. This has also been the experience of other countries involved in substantial immigration and refugee programs.

Answers to Questions

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 057

(8) In determining the intake the Government considers requirements in respect of each migrant category. In respect of family reunion the wishes of Australian residents to be reunited with their families has to be weighed against possible costs to the Australian community of any significant widening of this category. The number of refugees also reflects a balanc ing of international and domestic considerations supporting settlement of refugees and of costs associated with transport ing and settling refugees, taking account of such factors as employment opportunities, availability of accommodation and post-arrival services. The special category which consists mainly of New Zealand free flow settlers is largely self determined by economic opportunities in Australia. The general eligibility category is determined in part by labour market considerations, e.g. demand for occupations in Australia, in part by existence of family support in Australia, and in part by any special skills, background or other qualifications which should ensure successful settlement in Australia.
Not only does the Government look at each of the categories but also considers the total intake against the general background of Australia's capacity to absorb a particular level of migrant intake and general popUlation objectives.
The impact of the intake is kept under continuing review.
(9) The Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs has responsibility for the provision of policy advice on immi gration, entry control, citizenship, ethnic affairs and related matters. It implements Government policy and administers

legislation in these fields and plans, develops and co-ordinates migrant settlement and welfare programs.
(1 0) The free flow between Australia and New Zealand has applied without limitation as to numbers since early this century. The flow to each country has fluctuated over the years. It has been towards Australia in recent years. The arrangement for non-visaed travel is advantageous to those who wish to travel between the two countries, and to the development ofcloser relations between the two countries as a whole.
The refugee program is not unplanne migration.
( 1 1 ) and ( 12) See answer to Questions 6 and 7.

1974-75
1 975-76
1 976-77 1 977-78 1 978-79 1 979-80

Table I: Total Settler Arrivals

89,147 52,748
70,91 6 73,171 67,192 80,722

1 974-75 1 975-76 1 976-77
1 977-78
x 1978-79 1 979-80

Table 2: Total Refugee Arrivals
Not available 4,374 8 , 1 24 9,597 1 3,450 19,953

Table 3 COUNTRY OF BIRTH OF SETTLER MOVEMENT TOTAL SETTLER ARRIVALS

Financial year

1 974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1 977-78 1978-79 1979-80

AfricaMauritius
Arab Republic of Egypt South Africa
Other
AmericaCanada
Argentina Chile _ Peru
USA Uruguay
Other Asia-
Bangladesh
Cyprus
Hong Kong India Malaysia Singapore Sri-Lanka (Ceylon) China Indonesia Israel Japan Lebanon
Pakistan Philippines Thailand Turkey Vietnam
Other
EuropeU.K. and Ireland
Malta
Austria Belgium

256 473 1 ,297
984

140

1 66

154

235

203

244

283

315

306

215

890 1,592 2,463 2,509 2,765

482

634

807

987

872

1 , 305 758
2,002 140
3 , 1 30 2,1 17 1 ,0 1 3

649
629 1 ,905
110 1 ,432
517 438

606 1 ,065 1 ,702
46 1 , 220
594
278

724
902 1 ,261
90 1 ,066
544 456

685
769 822
88 1 ,098
440 351

726
531 480 1 33 1,332 278 331

62
1,633
875 2,048
1,128 782
999 721 1 46 287 1 10 2,271 131 1,030 108 1 ,744 852 1 , 197

36
2,855
897 907 1 ,201 620
515 671 131
1 67 89 1,519
99 1,1 1 1
1 70
1 ,062 539
1 ,338

32 2,773
1 , 102
868 1 ,777
730
572 779 268
205 82 1 2 , 1 86
71 1 ,681
305 1 , 199
951 2,040

42 549
1 ,489
1 ,104 2,1 1 8
742 562 1 ,200 349
149 79 2,554
109 1 ,462
232
1 , 1 59 5,400 2,943

29 335 1 , 1 80 856
1 ,683 525
383 1 ,044
367
161 108 1 ,134
70 1 ,256
212 743 10,828 2,591

54
305
799 844 1 ,585 503 301 1 ,290
366
204 119 967 1 15 2,0 1 3
196 830 1 2,9 1 5 3,500

37,647 1,224 343 120

17,339 397
133 90

1 9 ,2 1 9 319
181 57

2 1 ,861 444 175 75

1 3,800 508 162 43

17,3 17
512 210 60

1058 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Answers to Questions

Financial year

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Finland
France Germany Greece Hungary Italy Netherlands Norway
Poland Portugal Roumania Spain Sweden Switzerland
USSR. Yugoslavia
Other Oceania-
Australia
Fiji New Zealand Papua New Guinea
Other At Sea and Not Stated
Total

83 353
187
631 1 ,476 2,399
191 2,389
741 111
338 521
78 68 1
330 500 281 3,931
86

68
239
111 318 954 1,489 109 1,365
405 33
180 393 73 294
68 219 461 1,804
71

1 12
143
100
309 824 1,525
1 27 1,318
61 1 38
240 317
67 289 115 253
520 1 ,649
63

101 176
212
268
928 1,165
135 1 , 598
950 32 290 468
112 162
122 308 683 1 , 777
102

104
1 69
1 50 268
863 823
138 1,282
784 33 317
449
1 59 135
1 16 247
810 1 ,269
96

582
237
153 405
1 ,202 861
397 1 ,044 1 , 1 97
65
1,337 250
572 30 1
1 39 435 1,853 1,665
1 56

972 331
2,652 597 353
2
89,1 47

533 298 2,921 664 356
52,748

481
454 4,842
412 523
1 70,9 16

513 405
8,122 387 573 3
73, 171

566 436
10,776 527
359 8
67,192

658 400 1 3 , 1 80 430
301 31 80,722

Source: Australian BureauofStatistics. Table 4
COUNTRY OF LAST RESIDENCE OF SETTLER MOVEMENT-TOTAL SETTLER ARRIVALS

Financial year

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

Africa-

Mauritius

Arab Republico fEgypt

South Africa

Other

America-

Canada

Argentina

Chile

Peru

USA.

Uruguay

Other

Asia-

Bangladesh

Cyprus

Hong Kong

India

Malaysia

Singapore

Sri Lanka (Ceylon)

China

Indonesia

Israel

Japan

Lebanon

Pakistan

Philippines

Thailand

Turkey

Vietnam

Other

,

Europe-

UK. and Ireland

236 327 1 ,530 954

110
1 65 1 ,029
435

137 276 1 ,986
526

116 1 94 2,858
733

215 218 2,871
882

181
152 3,050
683

1 ,695 927
1 ,805
271 3,406
2,156 931

840
804 1 ,774
1 52 1 ,690
546 359

799
1,286 1 ,667
49 1,486
584 215

897 1,08 1 1 ,2 1 5
1 17 1 ,274
526 409

899
881 810
80 1,331
427 297

943
596 462 127 1 , 562
256 322

66
1 ,489 1 ,593 1 ,585
942 949 887
115 120
348 1 14 2,408 1 29 1 ,026 1 32
1 ,591 607
970

35
2,685 1 ,302
611 1,183
864 436
1 36 116
196 88 1 ,556 83 1 ,105
732 1 ,019
132 752

39
4,064 1 ,633
561 1 ,644
910 492 1 14 214
21 1 76
10,614 60
1,639 949
1 ,158 43 1
1,501

43
482 2,3 1 3
630 4,575
837 404
204 277 1 52
86
2,567 106
1 ,4 1 1
1 ,232 1 ,093 2,335
2,059

28
286 1 ,836
562 9,205
713 266
294 1 ,204
208 107
1 ,124 61
1 ,333 427 722
1 ,899 2,2 1 5

55
209 2,282
532 7,203
804
218 665 4,757
264 123 935 105
2,312 3,007
798 543
919

38,313 1 7,550 1 8,714 2 1,540 12,767 16,310

Answers to Questions

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATlVES 1059

Financial year

1 974-75 1975-76 1 976-77 1 977-78 1978-79 1979-80

Malta Austria Belgium Czechoslovakia
Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Italy Netherlands
Norway Poland
Portugal Roumania Spain Sweden
Switzerland USSR.
Yugoslavia Other
OceaniaFiji
New Zealand Papua New Guinea Other Not Stated

1, 190 1 ,000
1 15 13
345 1 54 691 1 ,583 2,507 52 2,454 823 108 1 67 464 25 602 396 548 1 26 3, 1 3 1 35
374 1 41 682 422 377

382 257
80 19 222 100 344 1 ,0 1 5 1 ,632 38 1 ,532 426 32 116 348 39 259 83 235 161 1 ,6 1 8 32
314 3,526
763 400 290

305 287
55 38 121 88 394 874 1 ,856 37 1 ,545 653 33 141 330 26 264 1 37 253 96 1 ,444 25
465 6,0 1 9
517 586 292

426 315 70 22
1 84 199 356 1 ,004 1,315 30 2,1 1 5 951
28 142
556 54
1 44 164 314
96 1 ,648
28

518 396 42
4 1 67 127 305 938 910 26
1 ,950 791 30 143
541 58
1 39 151
246 112
1 , 1 80 18

490 2,410
60 28 262 133 464 1 ,3 1 3
1 ,066 44
2,690 1 , 204
58
1 56 351 1 32
315
1 67 454 1 36
1 ,595 49

410
9,671 489
649 25

429
1 2,766 678
344 15

394 1 5,51 1
614
237 14

Total

89,147 52,748 70,91 6 73,171 67,192 80,722

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics.
Table S COUNTRY OF LAST RESIDENCE OF REFUGEE ARRIVALS-FINANCIAL YEARS 1975-76 TO 1979-80
( 1974-75 not available)

Country oflast residence

1975-76

1 976-77

1977-78

1 978-79

1 979-80

United Kingdom Ireland

33

18

5

6

7

1

EuropeAustria
Cyprus France Germany Greece Italy Malta
Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Spain
Switzerland U.s.S.R. Yugoslavia Other Europe

75

80

96

254

2,224

2,360

2,345

97

2

10

25

27

6

21

6

10

30

35

64

109

239

73

37

1 70

268

396

581

718

1 ,742

3

1

5

2

1

8

3

1

4

6

4

1 82

153

114

4

9

3

3

11

16

28

30

41

105

6

2

1

18

43

20

8

14

34

98

Total Europe
Middle EastEgypt Iran Iraq Israel Jordan

2,888 5

3,145
99 30 32
I

1 , 1 42
7 7

1 ,302
2 4 4

' 4,605
29 18

1 060 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Answers to Questions

Country of last residence
Lebanon Kuwait Saudi Arabia Syria Turkey Other Middle East
Total Middle East
North AmericaCanada USA
Total North America
South and Central AmericaArgentina Brazil Chile Mexico Peru Uruguay
Total South and Central America
AfricaMauritius South Africa Zambia Zimbabwe Other Africa
Total Africa
Asia (excluding Middle East)Burma China Hong Kong India Indonesia Japan Kampuchea Korea Laos Malaysia Philippines Singapore Sri Lanka Thailand Vietnam Other Asia
Total Asia
OceaniaCocos Island Nauru New Zealand Papua New-Guinea Other Oceania
Total Oceania Not accounted or not stated
Grand Total
n.a. Not separately available. (a) Latest available information.

1 975-76 4
8
17
36 36
74 202 29
305
2 I
3
21 10
n.a. 6
n.a. 96 10 1 97 2 565 1 25 30
1,063

1 976-77
3,526 1 1
37 60 7
3,794
3 38
41
25 1 6
33
1 3
5
29 30
2 2 5 n.a. 4 n.a. 62 3 19
581 310
3
1,050

1 977-78
1 ,206 18
12 6 1
1 ,257
4 2
6
2 1 5 1 33 5
47
6
47 34
1 17
8 n.a.
6 n.a. 2,61 0
20 3
1 ,002 2,3 1 6 1 ,067
7,13 1

1 978-79 42
1 17
70
1 2 4
2 2
6 30 1 35 937 n.a.
1 902 7,676 1 60 28 223 1 ,744 222 1 2,064

1 979-80 13
5 65
2 10
11 23
1 96 1,1 82
I 4,506
5,768 401 210
2,822 119 48
1 5,253

13 15 14 4,374

1 37 8,124

2 2
9,597

1 3,450

19,953

Answers to Questions

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 06 1

Institute of Multicultural Affairs
(Question No. 397)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) Was the report entitled Review of Migrant and Mul ticultural Education hastily prepared and severely criticised and rejected by those involved in its preparation.
(2) What expertise does the staff or the Director of the In stitute of Multicultural Affairs have in the field of migrant and multicultural education.
(3) Are there any other rcports in phase of preparation by the Institute.
(4) How, when and by whom will the (a) ethnic communi ties and (b) Opposition be informed of the (i) past, (ii) present and (iii) future projects of the Institute.
(5) How many persons, and at what level, are employed by the Institute on a (a) full-time, (b) part-time or (c) consult ant, advisor or other basis.
Mr Macpbee -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) The Review was not hastily prepared. In respect to the views of commissioned researchers, 1 refer the honourable member to a number of letters by commissioned researchers to the Australian Higher Education Supplement on 29 October and 5 November, 1980.
I also refer the honourable member to the letter by Mr J. R. Giles the Chairman of the South Australian Multicultural Education Co-ordinating Committee and South Australia's Deputy Director of Education in the Australian Higher Edu cation Supplement of 17 December 1980. Mr Giles wrote:
'I welcome the (Institute'S) Review . . . it has provided a new model for such reviews in Australian education. In stead of a leisurely two to three year report writing period, based on a considerable number of interstate visits and the concurrent expenditure of public money, the Review team backed its hunches, amassed data sufficient for its purposes and came up with a low key, remarkably accurate and use ful Review in a remarkably brief time.'
As the Minister responsible for the Institute, I concur with this view.
(2) To assist in the preparation of the report the Institute commissioned highly qualified and experienced researchers and consultants, whose names are listed in the review. As well, it received considerable assistance from officers in both Government and independent sectors of education. The qual ity of the report speaks for the expertise that the Institute was able to marshall.
(3) The Institute is preparing a number of other reports bearing on its statutory responsibility to advise the Government on all aspects of multiculturalism. These include a sup plementary report on the On-arrival program and reports on the Grant-in-Aid and the Migrant Project Funding schemes.
(4) The Institute has consulted widely with ethnic com munities on its projects and will, of course, report to this Parliament in the normal course of events. With respect to the Opposition, I am advised that a senior member of the staff of the then shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs was briefed by the Director on the Institute's work program in July 1980. I am further advised that the Chairman of the Insti tute has invited the honourable member to visit the Institute and be briefed on its activities.
(5) The Institute was allocated a staff ceiling of 30 for 1980-81 and is still in the process ofinitial recruitment.

At 31st December, full-time staff numbered 23 as follows, with one part-time employee.

Director, (Statutory Appointment)

Deputy Director (L3)

.

Chief, Community Education & Information

(L1) . . . . . . . . . . .

J

Chief, Administration (C1 . l 1 ) . . . . .

J

Senior Executive Officer, Operations (Cl .lO)

J

Senior Research Fellow . . . . .

I

Research Fellows

5

Principal Multicultural Affairs Officers

I

Senior Multicultural Affairs Officers

2

Multicultural Affairs Officers

2

Clerk (C1.8)

I

Clerks (Cl.4)

2

Clerical Assistant (Gr. 6)

I

Steno-Secretaries

3

Total

23

Consultants and commissioned researchers are engaged for
the duration of specific projects. At 3 1 December 1980 two commissioned researchers were employed.

Nugan Hand Bank
(Question No. 456)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) Did the Nugan Hand Bank, now in liquidation and the subject of various disturbing allegations, ever make an appli cation under the Government's foreign investment guidelines to the Foreign Investment Review Board.
(2) If so, when was the application made, what was the nature of it and what action did the Board take.
(3) Was there ever any other communication, written or oral, between the Nugan Hand Bank and the Board or its sec retariat in his Department; if so, when did that communi cation occur, what was the nature of it and what action did these authorities take.
Mr Howard -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) No.
(2) Not applicable.
(3) There is no record of any communication, written or oral, between the Nugan Hand group and the Foreign Invest ment Review Board or its secretariat or the Foreign Invest ment Division in my Department.
Department ofHousing and Construction: Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons
(Question No. 483)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) I n view of the fact that 198 1 is designated as the Inter national Year of Disabled Persons, what special arrangements has his Department made to assist disabled persons.
(2) Do any special arrangements made include (a) increased employment of disabled persons and (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building or other facility oc cupied by his Department; ifso, what are the details.
(3) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to facilitate any special arrangements for disabled persons in his Department.

1 062 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) TheMinisterforSocialSecurityis the Minister respon
sible for the Government's overall IYDP activities.
The Department of Housing and Construction has given its full support to IYDP and has developed a comprehensive and extensive program of some thirty activities including partici pation in conferences and workshops; surveys; preparation of bibliographies; brochures, booklets, displays and films; spon sorship ofawards; policies, procedures and projects.
The Department has developed a very close relationship with disabled people's organisations in the implementation of its IYDP program and has earned the respect of those organisations in its approach towards achieving equality and partici pation by disabled people in all aspects of community life. I have forwarded to the honourable member a copy of the Department's IYDP program and other supportive material produced for IYDP.
(2) (a) The Department of.Housing and Construction has been recognised for many years as an employer of disabled people. As part of its IYDP activities it conducted a survey of its total staff to assess the extent and type of disabilities ex perienced and how they relate to different work areas. The Department has a full time officer engaged in the advance ment of equal opportunities for all officers within the Department including the identification of work opportunities for disabled people.
(b) The Department's largest IYDP program activity is the survey of some 400-500 Commonwealth buildings throughout Australia to assess their access and use by disabled persons. The survey is based on a detailed building survey checklist developed by the Department in close consultation with disabled people. Buildings occupied by the Department of Housing and Construction have been included in the . survey.
The Government recently announced the provision of $250,000 to commence a program of modification works to Commonwealth-owned buildings during the remainder of this financial year. It is expected that some 27 buildings that have a high public use will have access modification works completed by the end ofJune 1981.
A program to continue modification works is currently being prepared for consideration by the Government. Commonwealth-owned buildings occupied by the Department il1 in due course receive a priority rating for modifica tions based on their relative public use. The rating will deter mine the timing and extent of future modification.
(3) The Department of Housing and Construction has been allocated $250,000 in 1980-8 1 to undertake access modification works to 27 Commonwealth-owned buildings. The Department's internal IYDP program is being funded within its overall 1980-81 budget allocation.
Uruguay: Raul Martinez
(Question No. 487)
Mr HoldIng asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 198 1 :
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the article headed 'A
Family fights to free a brother' (Age, 1 5 January 1981 , page 5).
(2) If so, is he able to state whether there is any substance in claims that Raul Martinez has been beaten, tortured and de nied food and water in the Libertad Prison, Uruguay.
(3) Has the Australian Government made any represen tations to the Government of Uruguay on behalf of Raul

Martinez; if so, when were those representations made, at whose request and what were the results.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) This article has been drawn to my attention. The Government is familiar with the case ofRaul Martinez.
(2) The Government has no further information on the treatment of Raul Martinez than that provided in answer to a question asked in the Senate by Senator Primmer on 27 November 1 980. Martinez is apparently held in solitary con finement under suspicion of being a member of the Tupamaros terrorist group.
(3) The. Government received a number of inquiries in November 1980 from people and interested groups concerned with the case of Raul Martinez. At. that time an officer from the Australian Embassy in Buenos Aires (from where we are accredited to Uruguay) , visited Montevideo to obtain information on Mr Martinez. The Uruguayan Government and press has named him as one of six ringleaders in a left-wing plot to overthrow the Government.
While the Australian Government will continue to make its interest in the case known to Uruguayan authorities, it must be noted that Mr Martinez is a Uruguayan citizen subject to Uruguayan law. Australian influence in such cases is limited.
Refugees: United Nations Resolution
(Question No. 500)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) What was the substantive text of the resolution passed
by the United Nations General Assembly in December 1 980 dealing with international co-operation to prevent mass movement of refugees.
(2) Which countries voted (a) for and (b) against the resol ution and which (c) abstained.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) Two resolutions were adopted by the United Nations
General Assembly on the question of refugees at its 35th Session in December 1980--Resolution 35/124 on international co-operation to avert new flows of refugees, and Res olution 35/196 on mass exoduses. The texts of both resol utions are set out below.
(2) Resolution 35/196 was adopted without vote. The full voting on Resolution 35/124 is set out bdow.
Resolution 35/196
Mass Exoduses
The General Assembly
Mindful of its mandate under the Charter of the United Nations to promote and encourage respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all.
Disturbed by the scale and magnitude of the exoduses and displacements ofpopulations involving hundreds ofthousands ofmen, women and children in many regions of the world.
Noting the immense burden imposed on the first hqsi countries and territories which receive the victims of these sudden and massive movements of population.
Bearing in mind the resolutions of the Economic and Social Council concerning international efforts to meet, humanitarian needs in emergency situations.
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 30 (XXXVI) of I I March 1980 concerning human rights and massive exoduses.

Answers to Questions

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 06 3

1. Expresses deep concern at the continued incidences of large-scale exoduses and displacements of populations and the resulting hardships and problems for the persons and States concerned.
2. Expresses determination to facilitate solutions to the problems caused by these large-scale. movements of population.
3. Endorses the request of the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 30 (XXXVI).
4. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to examine the report of the Secretary-General to be submitted to it at its next session and, on the basis of that report, to make recommendations for further action.
5. Decides, in light of the consideration given it by the Commission on Human Rights, to consider this question at its thirty-sixth session under the item entitled 'Report of the Economic and Social Council'.
Recorded Vote on Resolution 35/124
In favour: ( 1 05 countries) Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Burma, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Democratic Kampuchea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Re public, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Federal Republic of Ger many, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Rwanda, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United Republic of Cameroon, United States, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia.
Against: ( 1 6 countries) Afghanistan, Angola, Bulgaria, Byelorussia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Ger man Democratic Republic, Hungary, Lao People's Demo cratic Republic, Mongolia, Mozambique, Poland, Ukraine, USSR, Viet Nam.
Abstaining: ( 1 4 countries) Algeria, Benin, Burundi, Congo, Ethiopia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Sao Tome and Principe, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Zimbabwe.
Absent: Albania, Bolivia, Cape Verde, Chile, Dominica, Grenada, Haiti, Iraq, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Syria, Upper Volta, Yemen.
Education: Equal Opportunity for the Sexes
(Question No. 504)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( I ) How many (a) male and (b) female students passed the
higher school certificate or its equivalent in each of the States and Territories in (i) 1975, (ii) 1976, (iii) 1977, (iv) 1978, (v) 1979 and (vi) 1980.
(2) How many teachers were employed in both the government and non-government schools in each State and Territory in each of these years.
(3) What proportion of (a) male and (b) female students in each State and Territory passed mathematics at the higher school certificate at the (i) highest, (ii) intermediate and (iii)

lowest level and what proportion (A) failed and (B) did not attempt mathematics.
(4) [s there a significantly lower percentage of females (a) passing and (b) takingmathematics at this level.
(5) Is this also the case with the physicalsciences.
(6) Does this result in an inequality of opportunity for the sexes.
(7) Is there any evidence that careers advisers in schools influence students away from mathematics and the physical sciences.
(8) Is the Government concerned about the trend away from mathematics and physical sciences.
(9) What pressure is being exerted on State government and non-government school authorities to reverse this trend.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) and (3) The requested statistics are not readily available.
(2) The numbers of teachers who were employed in government and non-government schools are provided in the follow ing table:
[ as per attached table 1
(4) A recent study for ACER examining Changes in Sec ondary School Mathematics in Australia 1 964-1978 showed a trend for the percentage of female students taking math ematics to increase between 1964 and 1978, although it noted that a higherpercentage of students in specialised mathemat ics courses are male. Australia-wide figures on students attempting maths are not available. However the ACER study reports the following figures for some States:
MALES AS PER CENT OF YEAR 12 STUDENTS ATTEMPTING MATHS

1964 1 978

Victoria Queensland Western Australia South Australia
Australian CapitalTerritory

%

%

76

58

68

62

72

51

n.a.

60

n.a.

54

A separate study in Victoria, the STEP project, reported concern about the large number of female senior secondary students not taking any mathematics subjects at all in that State.
(5) There is no Australia-wide data on the numbers of fe male and male students studying the physical sciences. However the Victorian study referred to in (4) has expressed con cern at the fall-off in the proportion of Year 12 students in Victoria taking a combination of mathematics and science studies.
(6) There has been concern expressed in reports to the Government that girls, by not choosing certain subjects, are limiting their future options. The Williams report recom mended that 'more girls be encouraged to continue studies in mathematics and science' and this has been taken up by State Departments of Education. The Commonwealth Government through the Education Research and Development Committee and the Schools Commission, is supporting re search investigating girls' attitude to mathematics and differences between the sexes in understanding mathematics.
(7) I am not aware of any evidence that careers advisers influence students away from mathematics, and the physical science.

] 064 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Answers to Questions

(8) and (9) The Government recognises the importance of monitoring information in thearea of students' subject choice as an aid to educational and manpower planning. It has ac cepted the recommendation of the Myers Committee of In quiry into Technological Change that there should be national monitoring of trends in subject choices in secondary schools and has taken up the question of collection and dissemination of this data with State Ministers for Education through the Australian Education Council (AEC). The AEC is having the matter examined.
TEACHERS, BY CATEGORY OF SCHOOL, 1975 TO 1979(a)
(Number offull-time teachers plus full-time equivalent units ofpart-time teaching)

Non

Government government

schools

schools

New South Wales-
1 975 1976
1977 1978 1979 Victoria1975 1976
1977 1 978 1 979
Queensland (b)1 975
1 976
1977 1978 1979 1 980(p)
South Australia1975
1976 1977 1978
1979 WesternAustralia (c)-
1975 1976 1977 1978 1 979 Tasmania (c)1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 Northern Territory (c)1 975 1976 1977 1 978 1979 Australian Capital Territory1975
1 976 1977 1 978 1979
Australia1975
1976

40,692 42,374 44, 5 1 8 44,460 46,243
35,204 37,612 39,273 40,557 40,779
1 7, 1 8 3 1 8, 162 18,910 1 8 ,8 8 9 1 9,481 19,512
1 2,957 1 3 ,427 1 4, 1 25 14,475 14,603
9,824 10,345 10,777 1 1 ,436 1 1 ,495
4,251 4,241 4,51 1 4,584 4,751
1 ,096 1 ,195 1 ,376 1 ,445 1 ,360
2 , 1 74 2,31 2 2,441 2,514 2,497
1 23,441 129,668

1 0, 1 72 10,367 10,51 7 10,928 1 1,435
9,497 9,628 10,207 10,6 1 6 1 1,344
3,951 4,068 4,242 4,4 1 2 4,595 4,749
1,899 1 ,989 2,070 2,152 2,295
2,069 2 , 1 99 2,326 2,445 2,569
717 720 729 ' 757 793
123 129 137 173 185
563 600 678 715 770
28,990 29,700

Non

Government government

schools

schools

1977

1 35,931

30,905

1978

1 38,360

32,198

1979

141,210

33,986

(a) 1 980 preliminary data are provided for Queensland, but are unavailable for other States and Territories.
(b) There are no part-time teachers reported for Queensland government schools. Teachers occupying posts during the temporary absence of permanent teachers are excluded.
(c) Prior to 1979 pre-school teachers in primary schools in Western Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory were included in teacher numbers. They have been excluded from 1979 onwards in order to improve comparability with teacher statistics for the rest of Australia. The statistics are not available on the revised basis prior to 1979 and the data
presented for 1975 to 1978 are therefore not completely com parable with those presented for 1979 in those States.
Source: Australian Bureau ofStatistics.

Human Rights Committee: Association with Church ofScientology
(Question No. 505)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Immi gration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( I ) Has his attention been drawn to a reference to a Human
Rights Committee dealing with complaints about psychiatric hospitals (Hellenic Herald of 30 January 198 1, from the Eth
nic Press of I I February 198 1 ) .
(2) I s this Human Rights Committee a group associated with the Church of Scientology.
(3) If so, will he notify the Australian Greek Welfare So ciety and othergroups of the origin of this Committee.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) and (2) I am informed that the group referred to calls itself the 'Citizens Committee on Human Rights' and that it is sponsored by the Church ofScientology.
(3) The Committee seems to make no secret of its affilia tions. I am sure the Australian Greek Welfare Society and other groups will make up their own minds about this Committee.

Schools Commission Special Education Program
(Question No. 517)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) Did he make a statement on 20 August 1 980 announc ing that an additional $ I m would be provided under the Schools Commission special education program for the extra staff resources required to allow integration of a further 300 handicapped children into normal schools.
(2) If so, how many additional staff have been or will be employed.
(3) From what fields have these staff been or will be drawn, for example from teaching, nursing, physiotherapy or occu pational therapy.
(4) If staff have been employed how many were employed in Western Australia and where were they located.

Answers to Questions

2 6 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 065

Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I ) Yes, to operate from 1981 . (2), (3) and (4) Arrangements for the implementation of the program are being developed by the Schools Commission in consultation with State system authorities and other appro priate bodies. At this stage, therefore, it is not possible to give specific details concerning the numbers of additional staff which have been or will be employed, the professions from which staff have been or will be drawn or the numbers and lo cation of staff in Western Australia.
Legislation has been included in the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980 to provide for my approval ofprograms which are being undertaken or which will be undertaken, for the integration of handicapped chidren, into government or non-government regular schools.
Guidelines for the administration of the program in terms of this legislation have been circulated to government and non-government school systems and to all non-government schools.
Information concerning staff to be employed will become available when successful applications have been announced, the expected time for this being the third week in May 1981 .
Unemployment
(Question No. 534)
Mr Free asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
How many (a) males and (b) females aged (i) 16 and (ii) 17 years and receiving unemployment benefit were
(a) living with their parents, (b) living with other relatives and (c) living elsewhere as at 24 February 1981 .
M r Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The Department of Social Security does not maintain detailed statistics on the living arrangements of unemployment benefit recipients.
Trade and Resources: Overseas Posts
(Question No. 539)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) How many overseas posts administered by his Department have been closed down and then re-opened during the last five years.
(2) What were the dates ofclosure and re-opening.
(3) What were the respective staff strengths at closure and re-opening and their designation.
(4) What were the costs involved in each case in re-opening the posts.
(5) Does the Expenditure Review Committee propose to close any posts.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) None.
(2) to (4) See answer to ( 1 ) .

(5) I presume the honourable member is referring to the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions. The de liberations of that Committee have not been completed.
Taiwanese Fishing Vessel, Great Barrier Reef
(Question No. 543)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Primary Jndustry, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) What steps were taken by him toward notifying Taiwanese authorities of the Australian Government's atti tude to the latest trespass by a Taiwanese fishing vessel, the 'Shin Horng Yih' on the Great Barrier Reef.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to advice given by the Minister for Primary Industry in answer to my question No. 4840 (Hansard, 22 November 1 979, page 3435) with regard to the contravention of Australian laws by licensed or un licensed Taiwanese fishing vessels.
(3) If so, did he convey to Taiwanese authorities the inten tion of the Australian Government to request the surrender of Australianlicences under the terms of the agreement referred to in answer to question No. 4840.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) The Kailis Kaohsiung Fishing Company, representing the Kaohsiung Fishing Boat Commercial Guild, has been informed of the seriousness with which the Australian Government views the latest contravention of the Continen tal Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Act 1 968 by the 'Shin Horng Yih' also known as the 'Ging Hung No. III'.
(2) I am aware of the advice I gave the honourable member.
(3) Under the terms of the 1 980-81 agreement the Kaoh siung Fishing Boat Commerical Guild is amongst other things, required to ensure that in the event of a licensed Taiwanese vessel contravening Australian fishing laws the vessel and the persons responsible will not engage in further fishing in the Australian fishing zone. The 'Ging Hung No. III' was not a li censed vessel, but the master appeared before the court on several charges and was subsequently fined and the vessel, catch and gear were forfeited to the Commonwealth. I regard the penalties as satisfactory.
Commonwealth Employment Service-Positions Vacant Listings
(Question No. 544)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) Is it a fact that Commonwealth Employment Service offices were directed by his Department to discontinue the practice ofspecifying the preferred gender on positions vacant listings (as consulted by job applicants) in order to comply
with International Labour Organisation Convention No. I I I
as ratified by the Australian Government.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to complaints from both CES staff and job applicants that this practice has proved to be time-wasting and inconvenient, owing to the fact that job applicants must consult CES staff in order to ascertain the in formation omitted.
(3) If so, what impact does the practice of omitting the gender from CES positions vacant listings have upon employers' discriminatory attitudes with regard to the gender of employees.

\
\

1 066 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr VinerThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) Yes, this practice is in accord with the Government's policy and obligation under International Labour Organisation Convention No. I l l . Sex is one of the seven grounds of employment discrimination proscribed under this Conven tion. Job specifications including gender can only be accepted where an inherent job requirement is demonstrated.

( 1 ) My Department commissioned a new Vikoma Seaboom in 1 979-80 as an addition to the equipment holding of the National Plan to Combat Pollution of the Sea by Oil. It is sta tioned in Western Australia, but as with all National Plan equipment is available for use anywhere in the country.
(2) It is not envisaged that similar equipment will be pur chased during 1 980-81 .
Coastal Surveillance

(2) I have been informed that the non-specification of a particular gender is not causing any significant problems for CES staff.
(3) The procedures adopted in dealing with discriminatory vacancy notifications have gone a long way to reducing the discriminatory attitudes of some employers. CES staff report a favourable reaction from employers when informed of the requirements of the Convention, and of the Department's procedures in seeing that the requirements of the Convention are met.
Cape Class Vessels: Hire
(Question No. 549)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 ;
( I ) I n 1 979-80 (a) on how many occasions and (b) for what purpose were Cape Class ships hired either (i) to other Fed eral Government departments, (ii) to State Government emergency aid services or (iii) any other users in order to carry out functions outside normal lighthouse and navigational aid tendering and construction duties.
(2) What provision was made (in ship years) for (a) crew changes, bunkering and storing, (b) dry dock and repair and (c) contingency reserve arrangements to counter stress of weather, mechanical failure, diversions to man-made or natu ral disaster or oil pollution situation during 1 979-80.
(3) Taking into account the withdrawal of the M.V. Cape Moreton from service, what is the budgetary provision (in ship years) for the items referred to in Parts 2(a), (b) and (c) for 1 980-8 ! .

(Question No. 556)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 24 February \ 98 1 :
( 1 ) What sum was (a) appropriated and (b) actually spent by his Department on coastal surveillance including the Australian fishing zone for (i) 1 977-78, (ii) 1978-79, (iii) 1 979-80.
(2) What were the main items of expenditure and the cos! attributed to each item.
Mr Nixon -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) Nil. (2) See ( 1 ) .
Australian Coastal Surveillance Centres
(Question No. 568)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
What is the personnel establishment of the Australian Coastal Surveillance Centre.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The personnel etablishment of the Australian Coastal Sur veillance Centre is 1 controller on day work and 38 officers who are required to maintain rostered shifts 24 hours per day.
Nomad Aircraft

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) (a) (i) 10; (ii) Nil; (iii) 2. (b) (i) Conduct bathymetric survey work and service automatic weather stations;(ii) Nil; (iii) Servicing harbour buoys.
(2) (a) 39 days; (b) 60 days; (e) No specific provision made, but itineraries extended where necessary.
(3) MV Cape Moreton will return to service early March following Government decision to employ one Cape class ves sel on bathymetric survey work on behalf of Department of National Development and Energy.

(Question No. 569)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 24 February 198 1 :
O n what date was each Nomad aircraft chartered for use by his Department (a) ordered, (b) delivered and (c) tirst operational.
Mr Hunt The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Aircraft (Reg. No. or line sequence)

Date

Date Date first

ordered delivered operational

Oil Pollution: Vikoma Seaboom
(Question No. 550)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( I ) Is it a fact that in 1979-80 his Department com missioned a new Vikoma Seaboom, costing $95,000, which is to be utilised in dispersing oil pollution olf the Western Australian coast.
(2) If so, is it envisaged that similar equipment will be pur chased during 1980-81 for use off the Queensland coast.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

VIi -RCC VH-CRI VH-SBY VH SDZ VH SFR VIi -SNL VIi BRP LjS103 LjS-104

2 1 . 1 1 .78 27. 10.77
6.6.80 6.6.80 9.9.80 22.8.80 19.9.80 22.8.80 22.8.80

28. 1 1 .78
4. 1 1 .77 1 5.8.80 1 6.9.80 2.12.80 1 1 .12.80 27.2.81

15.4.80 2.7.79 1 ,9.80 10. 1 1 .80 6.1 2.80 15. 1 2.80

Note: (i) Each of the above aircraft have been (or are to be) utilised on civil coastal surveillance. Other Nomads have been chartered from time-to-time for short periods only for flying training purposes.

Answers to Questions

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 067

(ii) VH-RCC and VH-CRI were not ordered for use for coastal surveillance contracts. They were chartered by con tractors to the Department due to AVGAS shortages in re mote areas.
Coastal Surveillance-By Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 571)
Mr Morrison asked the . Minister for Immi gration and Ethnic affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :

Human Rights in the Soviet Union
(Question No. 599)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 25 February 1981 ;
( 1 ) Has his attention been drawn to reports that since mid November 1980 Soviet Courts have sentenced 41 dissidents for their political, religious and ethnic minority dissent, to terms ranging from 1 0 months to 1 5 years; if so, is he able to verify through Australian diplomatic representatives in the USSR whether there is any substance to these reports.

( 1 ) What sum was (a) appropriated and (b) actually spent by his Department on coastal surveillance for (i) 1977-78, (ii) 1 978-79 and (iii) 1979-80.
(2) What were the main items of expenditure and the cost attributed to each item.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) Nil. (2) Not applicable.
Dumping of High Level Nuclear Waste
(Question No. 583)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and En ergy, upon notice, on 25 February 198 1 :
( 1 ) Further to the answer to question No. 6447 (Hansard, 1 8 September 1980, page 1 589) , has the Department of National Development and Energy now received the Report by Dr Jackson Davis on the dumping of high level nuclear waste in the Pacific Ocean; if so, has that report been (a) cir culated to other relevant Commonwealth departments and authorities and (b) the subject of a report to the Minister.
(2) Has the Minister or the Department of National Development and Energy made any arrangements for a copy of Dr Davis' report to be forwarded to the Parliamentary Library; if not, will the Minister do so.
(3) Can the Minister now provide an answer to part (2) of question No. 6447; if not, why not.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( l ) (a) and (b) Yes. (2) Yes. (3) An evaluation of radioactive waste disposal off the coast of California between 1946 and 1970 is contained in a Fact Sheet released by the US Environmental Protection Agency on 1 1 September 1980, a copy of which has been for warded to the Parliamentary Library. The report notes, inter alia, that (a) two sites off the Farallon Islands about 80 kilo metres from San Francisco received approximately 99 per cent of the radioactive materials dumped in the Pacific Ocean by the United States of America; (b) the kind of material dumped was typical low level wastes including contaminated paper towels, rags, clothing, glassware and laboratory equip ment; and (c) scientific information obtained from surveys of the low-level nuclear waste dumpsites at the Farallon Islands indicates no evidence of harm to man or the marine environment.

(2) Is he able to say whether most of these dissenters were arrested in the first half of 1980 in the pre-Olympic purge of dissent, a situation foreshadowed in the report entitled Human Rights in the Soviet Union tabled by the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence on 8 November 1 979 (Hansard, page 2789).
(3) Does the Australian Government intend to actively pursue its undertaking referred to in its reply of 1 8 September 1 980 (Hansard, page 1485) to the Committee's report to (a) send observers to Soviet political trials and (b) keep the Australian Government informed on Soviet human rights viol ations including the provision of information available on the treatment of Soviet citizens imprisoned for political or re ligious beliefs or because they have sought increased rights for a Soviet minority.
(4) Have Australian Embassy personnel attended human rights trials in the Soviet Union further to the 2 unsuccessful instances mentioned in his answer to question No. 60 (Hansard, 4 December 1980, page 473).
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) I am aware of these reports. The Embassy in Moscow
has provided the Government with regular and comprehensive reports of all political trials in the Soviet Union of which the Embassy has been aware. This reporting confirms that a series of trials has been held since the Olympic Games. While the Embassy cannot confirm that the number oftrials quoted, 4 1 , is completely accurate, such a figure is credible. It is cer tainly clear that the number is distressingly high.
(2) The Soviet authorities are thought to take up to nine months to prepare cases against defendantn. It is likely, there fore, that most of those tried were detained before the Olym pic Games. I should add, of course, that arrests have continued since the Games.
(3) and (4) The Government's undertaking continues, and is reflected in the standing instructions to the Embassy. But of course the Soviet Union deliberately makes it difficult for Em bassies and others to learn about what is going on in time to seek to attend the trials-which are not publicised in advance, are arranged at very short notice, and are often held outside Moscow in areas to which travel by foreigners is restricted. For these reasons the Embassy has not been able even to seek to attend recent trials. Moreover, when in the past it has learnt about trials in time, as in the two instances mentioned in answer to Question No. 60, the Soviet practice of holding the trials in secrecy or at least of excluding foreigners has meant that Embassy officers have been denied admission. Despite these very real practical difficulties, the Embassy has not relaxed its efforts to learn about trials in time to scek ad mission, and the instruction stands that the Embassy is to make every effort to have officers attend trials. .

1068 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 198 1

Answers to Questions

Electoral: Enrolments in Federal Divisions
(Question No. 607)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 25 February 1981 :
What was the number of (a) electors enrolled and (b) estimated number of residents in each Federal electoral div ision as at 25 February 1981 .
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Australian Bureau of Statistics has advised that inter censal population estimates for Federal electoral divisions are not made. A table showing the number of residents in each division as at 30 June 1976, the date of the last quinquennial population census, was published in the Hansard of 1 9 August 1980, pages 470-472, as part o fthe reply by my prede cessor the Hon. J. E. McLeay, to a question on notice (No. 6054) asked by Dr M . H. Cass M.P.
The enrolment statistics for each Federal electoral division as at the end of February are set out in the table below:
DIVISIONAL STATISTICS BY STATE AND TERRITORY AS AT END OF FEBRUARY 1981

Net enrolment

New South Wales Banks
Barton
Bennelong Berowra B1axland Bradfield
Calare Chifley
Cook . Cowper Cunningham , Dundas Eden-Monaro Farrer
Grayndler Gwydir Hughes Hume Hunter Kingsford-Smith Lowe
Lyne Macarthur Mackellar Macquarie Mitchell . Newcastle New England North Sydney Parramatta Paterson Phillip Prospect
Reid Richmond Riverina
Robertson
St. George Shortland
Sydney* .

73,340
70,323
72,223 70,838
73,083 72,843
73,325 79,435
74,971 79,545
79, 1 2 5 73,450
75,759 73,586
68,659 73,2 1 2 77,227 7 1,046 81 ,830 72,168 72,388 79,777 8 1,546 71,652 88,375 86, 1 11 7 1 ,732 70,768 70,779 73,915
71 ,792 70,374 78,656 69,159 8 1,526 7 1,448
86,550
7 1 ,475 80,850
7 1 ,419

Warringah Wentworth Werriwa
State Total State Average
Victoria Balaclava Ballarat Batman Bendigo Bruce Burke Casey Chisholm Corangamite Corio Deakin Diamond Valley Flinders . Gellibrand Gippsland Henty Higgins Holt Hotham Indi Isaacs Kooyong Lalor . La Trobe McMillan Mallee Maribyrnong Melbourne Melbourne Ports Murray Scullin Wannon Wills
State Total State Average
*IncludesLord Howe Island
Queensland Bowman Brisbane Capricornia DariingDowns Dawson Fadden Fisher Griffith Herbert Kennedy Leichhardt Lilley McPherson Maranoa Moreton Oxley Petrie Ryan . Wide Bay
State Total

Net enrolment
68,827 70,882 86,672
3,232,661 75,178
69,767 70,624 73,070 71 ,048 76,072 77,902 74,972 73,890 71,435 75,206 81 ,586 77, 9 1 4 79,295 73,858 70,898 71 ,021 70,405 8 1,527 79,157 69,456 73,979 72,376 82,505 76,558 71,946 68,429
75,01 I
68,551 68,471 70,887 77,788 67,568 74,651
2,447,823 73,873
75,566 67,883 68,878 69,927 73,496 86,431 86,420 65,939 71,837 63,603 69,719 67,294 85,976 67, 1 1 8 66,920 77,146 74,9 8 1 72,930 72,353
1 ,384,41 7

Answers to Questions

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 069

( 1 ) How many diplomatic staffwere employed in the Aus-

Net tralian Embassy in Indonesia as at (a) 30 June 1975 and (b)

enrolment 3 1 January 198 1 .

--------

State Average

72,864

(2) Do staff from the Embassy visit Bali on a regular basis to serve the needs of Australian tourists on the island.

South Australia Adelaide Barker Bonython Boothby Grey Hawker Hindmarsh Kingston Port Adelaide Sturt Wakefield
State Total State Average
Western Australia Canning Curtin Forrest Fremantle Kalgoorlie Moore O'Connor Perth Stirling Swan . Tangney

76,607 76,658 83,289 80,1 29 74,354 75,026 78,178 8 1 ,037 77,749 79,460 76,61 1
859,098 78,100
73,573 64,459 66,006 68,592 67,565 74,640 65,515 67,51 7 68,690 68,0 1 8 70,582

(3) If not, what are the reasons for this.
(4) What formal or informal arrangements exist between the Commonwealth Government and Qantas for Qantas personnel on Bali to deal with norm;!1 consular enquiries from Australian citizens.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) There were eight diplomatic staff employed in the Australian Embassy, Jakarta both at 30 June 1975 and at 3 1 January 198 1 .
(2) Staff from the Embassy in Jakarta visit Bali on a regular basis once every two weeks and on an 'ad hoc' basis to meet urgent requirements.
(3) See (2) above.
(4) No formal arrangement exists between the Commonwealth Government and Qantas, but successive Qantas man agers and their staff have informally assisted a considerable number of Australian citizens over the years. [ should like to place on record my appreciation of the very valuable service they have performed in this regard.
Expenditure on Roads in Queensland
(Question No. 613)
Mr Jull asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 25 February 1981 :

State Total State Average
Tasmania Bass Braddon Denison Franklin Wilmot
State Total State Average
Total All States
TerritoriesAustralian Capital Territory Canberra Fraser
Territory Total Territory Average

755,157 68,651
55,667 54,659 55,291 56,264 55,034
276,9 1 5 55,383
8,946,071
66,803 70,104
1 36,907 68,453

What was (a) the total expenditure, (b) Commonwealth Government Expenditure and (c) State Government expenditure on roads in Queensland in the years (i) 1978-79 (ii) 1 979-80.
Mr Hunt--The answer to the honourable members's question is as follows:
(a) Total Commonwealth/State expenditure on roads in Queensland was:
(i) $207,297,362 for the year 1 978-79 and (ii) $229,68 1 ,106 for the year 1 979-80.
(b) Commonwealth Government payments to Queensland for roads was
(i) $ 106,947,000 for the year 1978-79 and (ii) $ 1 14,947,000 for the year 1 979-80
(c) State Government expenditure on roads in Queensland as shown in Main Roads Department Annual Report was
(i) $ 100,350,362 for the year 1 978-79 and (ii) $1 14,734,106 for the year 1979-80.
Bureau of Statistics

Northern TerritoryTotal Australia

57,044 9 , 1 40,022

(Question No. 619)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 25 February 1981 :

- Includes Lord Howe Island.
Australian Embassy in Indonesia
(Question No. 609)

Are interviewers employed by the Bureau of Statistics required to inform interviewees that interviewees do not have to supply any information which they do not wish to provide; if not, will he instruct the Bureau to instruct its interviewers to do so.

Mr Jull asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Howard--The answer to the honourable

upon notice, on 25 February:

member's question is as follows:

1 070 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 198 1

Answers to Questions

No. If reliable statistics are to be compiled it is important that responses are obtained from all selected people or businesses, and a legal obligation to provide information for official statistical purposes is included in the Census and Stat istics Act 1905. Of course the Bureau makes a considerable effort to obtain the willing cooperation of respondents, by explaining to them the purposes for which the information is sought.
Schools Commission: Dr K. R. McKinnon
(QuestionNo. 627)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 25 February 1981 :
( 1 ) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that the Com pendium of Australian Public Service information produced by the Public Service "Board contains. the information that Dr K. R. McKinnon was the official Head of the Schools Commission as at 3 November 1980.
(2) When was the decision taken not to renew Dr McKinnon's commission, by whom, in consultation with whom was it taken and for what reason.
Mr Fife: The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) Dr McKinnon's appointment as Chairman of the Schools Commission continued until 1 3 January 198 1 .

(2) On 4 December 1980 I announced the Government's decision not to offer re-appointment to Dr McKinnon. The Government exercised its prerogative in making an appoint ment to a full-time statutory office when it became vacant.
Nuclear Power Stations
(Question No. 702)
Mr Uren asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 4 March 1981 :
I s the Minister able to state how many nuclear power stations were (a) ordered, (b) cancelled and (c) deferred dur ing 1980 in (i) Japan, (ii) the United States of America, (iii) the United Kingdom, (iv) France, (v) the Federal Republic of Germany, (vi) Canada, (vii) Italy and (viii) OECD countries, and in each case what was the generating capacity.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Data available to the Australian Atomic Energy Commission on nuclear power stations ordered, cancelled and de ferred during 1 980 in the above mentioned countries are sum marised in the following table:

Orders

Cancellations Deferrals

MWe

MWe

MWe

Units (net) Units (net) Units (net)

Japan") USA UK'" France") German F.R. Canada Italy

?

?

0

0

0

0

0

0

1 6 1 7,849

0

0

4 2,500

0

0

0

0

5 . 6,025

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

All OECD countriesCll

9 8,525

1 6 17,849

0

0

Orders-Contract signed (not options or letters ofintent) Cancellation-Contract cancelled Deferral-Indefinite deferral

Notes on Table

( 1 ) In most countries contracts are signed for nuclear power stations to be erected at specific

sites and such information appears in the literature. In Japan and France, however, auth

orisations are often given before specific sites are designated. It is this latter event which is

usually reported in the literature rather than the placing of an order or the signing of a

contract.

The figure for France has been deduced from the Electricite de France published

program and other available information.,

"
,'

During 1980 in Japan three reactors were authorised by the Japanese Government for

planning and construction. They will represent 3,012 MWe net.

"

(2) Placement of contracts for various components of these reactors has bn spread over

two years but major components for them were ordered in 1 980.

:

(3) The total of 9 units does not include those authorised in Japan since no firln evidence of

order placement has been obtained.
Military Attaches: Exchange with China

;

.

 military attaches as foreshadowe In Peking in Jan\lary 198 1 ?

(Question No. 705)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 4 March 1981 :
( 1 ) Is it a fact that the Government has now reached agreement with the People's Republic of China for the exchange of

(2) Is it also a fact that the People's Republic ofI China has
been pressing for such an exchange for some years?, (3) Has this pressure been resisted by the Government be-
cause ofpossible repercussions from the Soviet Union; if not, . what has been the principal reason for the delay?

Answers to Questions

26 March 1 981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 07 1

(4) Will this exchange of military attaches take place; if so, when?
(5) Will he take immediate steps to ensure that military attaches are also appointed to countries in the Middle East which will prove to serve Australia best, in view of the fact that Australia faces a n escalation of dependence on certain categories of crude oil from the Middle East?
Mr Street-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
( 1 ) Yes.
(2) The People's Republic of China has for several years expressed an interest in such an exchange.
(3) See my reply to Mr Holding of 26 February 1981 Hansard p. 230.
(4) No date for the exchange has been determined. This is a matter which will be arranged through normal diplomatic channels.
(5) The Australian Government maintains a continuous re view of its overseas defence representation. At this stage the government does not consider that Australia's interests re quire additional defence representation in the Middle East.
Australian Embassies in the Middle East
(Question No. 706)
Mr McLean asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 4 March 1981 :
Which Australian embassies in the Middle East have a mili tary attache on the staff?
Mr StreetThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There are no resident Australian military attaches on the staff of any of the Australian diplomatic missions in the Middle East. The Defence Attache at the Australian Embassy in Islamabad is, however, accredited to Iran.
Australian Citizenship
(QuestionNo. 751)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Immi gration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 1 0 March 1981:
( 1 ) How many persons who arrived from overseas between 1975 and 1979 declared an intention to settle in Australia.
(2) How many of these persons now hold Australian citizenship.
Mr Macphee-The 9.nswer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) The number of persons arriving in Australia with the stated intention of settling, from 1 975 to 1979 inclusive, was 328,730 persons.
(2) Persons granted Australian citizenship who arrived in Australia between 1 January 1975 and 3 1 December 1 979 numbered 34,256 persons.
Housing and Construction: Hire of Plant and Machinery
(Question No. 806)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 1 2 March 1981 :

( 1 ) What was the operations turnover for the Plant and Workshops Division activities of his Department in (a) 1 978-79 and (b) 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in hiring plant and machinery from outside sources in (a) 1978-79 and (b) 1979-80.
(3) What was the capital cost of plant and equipment under the control of the Division for (a) 1 978-79 and (b) 1 979-80.
(4) What amount of the turnover was obtained in (a) each of the States, (b) the Northern Territory and (c) the Australian CapitalTerritory in (i) 1978-79 and (ii) 1 979-80.
Mr I\1cVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) 1 978-79-$1 7.8m (includes $3.23m for workshop turnover) 1 979-80-$1 4.8m (no workshop turnover figures included. Due to changed costing procedures now included in project costing).
(2) 1 978-79-$1 . 8m. 1979-80-$1 .9m.
(3) As at 30 June 1 979-$1 5.9m. As at 30 June J 980-$19.2m.
(4)-

Year
1 978-79 1979-80

Qld NSW Vic. SA WA ACT NT
$ million 3.42 2. 1 8 4.47 1 .03 1 .59 3.32 1 .75 2.14 2.38 4. \ 3 1 .03 1 .3 5 3.07 .70

Housing and Construction: Purchases
(Question No. 807)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 12 March 1981 :
( I ) What was the total value of work carried out by his Department's day labour force during (a) 1 978-79 and (b) 1 979-80.
(2) What was the total expenditure by his Department on purchase of building materials, plant and equipment, tools and associated items for (a) 1 978-79 and (b) 1 979-80.
(3) What percentage of expenditure for each year was for (a) building materials, (b) plant and equipment and (c) tools and associated items.
(4) What sum was spent by the Stores Branch of his Department in replacing (a) plant and equipment and (b) tools and associated items in these years.
(5) What sum was spent by the Stores Branch in purchasing (a) additional plant and equipment and (b) additional tools and associated items in the same years.
(6) Did expenditure by the Stores Branch in (a) 1 978-79 and (b) 1 979-80 include amounts attributable to overseas aid; ifso, what sum in each year.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) 1 978-79-$93.1m. 1979-80-$99.3m.
(2) 1978-79-$26.2m. 1 979-80-$33.0m.
(3) (a) 1 978-79-24.0%, 1 979-80-29. 1 %; (b) 1 978-79-3.9%, 1979-80-3.8%; (c) 1978-790.3%, 1 979-80-0.3%.

1 072 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Answers to Questions

(4) (a) 1978-79-$3.3m, 1979-80-$3.6m; (b) Not separ ately recorded but included in answer to (2) above.
(5) (a) 1 978-79-$0.3m, 1979-80-$0.2m; (b) Not separ ately recorded but included in answer to (2) above.
(6) Yes. The amounts which are not included in the answer to (2) above were: 1978-79-$1 .9m; 1979-80-$5.7m.
Postal and Telecommunications Employees
(Questiou No. 254)
Mr Duffy asked the Minister for Communi cations, upon notice, on 3 December 1 980:
(1 ) What was the total number of (a) permanent: and (b) exempt staff employed by the former Postmaster-General's Department as at 30 June 1970, indicating in each case the number of (i) part-time and (ii) full-time staff in the desig nations of (A) postman, (B) postal officers, (C) assistant postal officer, (D) postal clerk, (E) mail officer, (F) senior mail officer, (G) lines assistant, (H) Linesman Grade 1 , (I) Linesman Grade 2, (J) Line Foreman Grade 1, (K) line fore man Grade 2, (L) line inspector, (M) driver, (N) storeman, (0) technician, (P) technician's assistant and (0) clerical assistant.
(2) What was the total number of (a) permanent and (b)
exempt staff employed by the Australian Postal Commission as at 30 June 1980, indicating in each the number of (i) part time and (ii) full-time staff in the designations of (A) post man, (B) postal officer, (C) assistant postal officer, (D) postal clerk, (E) mail officer, (F) senior mail officer, (G) driver, (H) storeman, and (I) clerical assistant.
(3) What was the total number of (a) permanent and (b)
exempt staff employed by the Australian Telecommuni cations Commission as at 30 June 1 980, indicating in each case the number of (i) part-time and (ii) full-time staff in the des ignations of (A) lines assistant, (B) linesman, (C) line ser viceman, (D) lines supervisor Grades 1 , 2 and 3, (E) senior lines officer Grades 1 and 2, (F) principal lines officer Grades
I and 2, (G) technician, (H) technical officer, (I) technical
assistant, (1) storeman (K) driver and (L) clerical assistant.
(4) What was the number of staff designated (a) engineer and (b) Clerk Class 6 and above employed by the former Postmaster-General's Department as at 30 June 1 970.
(5) What was the number of staff designated (a) engineer
and (b) Clerk Class 6 and above employed by (i) the Australian Postal Commission and (ii) the Australian Telecom munications Commission as at 30 June 1980.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable
member's question is as follows: ( I ) The Australian Post Office Financial and Statistical
Bulletin for the year ended 30 June 1 970 was tabled in Parli ament on 1 8 February 1 97 1 .
Table 4 2 of the Bulletin gives the total numbers of perma nent staff and temporary and exempt staff employed by the Postmaster-General's Department as at 30 June 1970. It shows too a full-time/part-time breakdown of the total number of temporary and exempt staff.
Table 43 shows the numbers of full-time official staff, by designation group. The numbers cover permanent, temporary and exempt staff.
No distinction was made in the Postmaster-General's De partment collection of staff statistics between temporary and exempt staff, so separate information concerning the number ofexempt staffis not available.
(2) The Australian Postal Commission Annual Report 1 980 was tabled in Parliament on 3 December 1980.

Table 19 of the Report gives the total number of official staff employed by the Australian Postal Commission at 30 June 1980. Breakdowns of permanent/temporary full-time staff and full-time/part-time official staff are given also.
Table 20 shows the numbers of full-time official staff by designation group. The numbers cover permanent and tem porary staff.
No exempt staff and no permanent part-time staff were employed.
(3) The Australian Telecommunications Commission Annual Report 1980 was tabled in Parliament on 3 December 1980.
Table 42 of the Report gives a listing of full-time Telecom staff. A breakdown of individual occupations into perma nent/ temporary employees is as follows:
AT 1 8 JUNE 1980

PermaTemnent porary

Total Fulltime

Parttime

Lines Assistant Linesman
Lines Serviceman

392 6,692
6,572

756 1 , 148
946 7,638 1 24 6,696

Lines Supervisor Grade 1
Lines S upervisor Grade 2
Lines Supervisor Grade 3
Lines Officer Senior Lines Officer
Grade 1 Senior Lines Officer
Grade 2
Principal Lines Officer
Grade I
Principal Lines Officer Grade 2
Other Lines Staff

1 , 995
1 ,274
113 1 ,936
717
1 18
57
3 862

40 2,035
5 1 ,279
113 1 ,936
717
1 18
57
3 863

Total Lines Staff

20,731 1 ,872 22,603

Assistant Technician
Technician (Telecom) Technical Officer Other Telecom Tech-
nical Staff

2,5 1 0 8,557 9,681
503

1,491 293
10

4,001 8,850 9691
503

Total Telecom Tech

nical Staff

2 1,251 1 , 794 23,045

Storemen Drivers Clerical Assistants

694

1 14

808

356

47

403

5,698

675 6,373

86

Notes:
Lines Assistant includes Lines Assistants Grade 2 (Holding).
Lineman includes Lineman Grade 2 (Holding) and Radio Lineman.
Other Lines Staff includes Cable Assigners, Lines Records Officers, External Plant Instructors-all grades, External Plant Managers.
Technical Assistant Levels have been replaced by Assistant Technicians.
Technician includes Vestibule Technician (Telecom).
Technical Officer includes Technical Officer (Telecom) all grades and Technical Officer all grades.

Answers to Questions

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 073

Other Telecom Technical staff includes managers in exter nal plant area and Internal Plant Instructors.
Storemen, includes: Fork Lift Driver, High Rise Operator, Mobile Crane Driver Class B, C, Storeman, Senior Storeman, Stores Assistant, Stores Supervisor, Senior Stores Supervisior Grades 1 , 2, 3.
Drivers includes: Garage Attendant, Motor Driver, Transport Assistant, Transport Overseer, Assistant Transport Overseer, Transport Officer.
(4) (a) See Table 43 of the Australian Post Office Financial and Statistical Bulletin for the year ended 30 June 1970.
(b) Table 43 of the Australian Post Office Financial and Statistical Bulletin gives the total number of full-time official staff in the clerical and administrative group. A breakdown of staffinto individual grades is not available.
(5) (i) (a) 40 (b) 1 ,23 1 . (ii) (a) permanent-2,202, temporary- [ 7 , total - 2,219; (b) permanent-2,5 7 1 , temporary--, total- -2,571 *.
- It should be noted that the staff levels provided for cleri cal staff include not only administrative types, but also econ omists, Finance Officers, Manpower Planning Officers, Or ganisation Officers, Industrial Officers, etc. whose salary ranges equate to the clerical structure.
Telephone Facilities for Deaf People
(Question No. 381)
Mr Adermann asked the Minister for Com munications, upon notice, on 4 December 1 980:
( 1 ) Has his attention been drawn to the availability in Australia of the special telephone handset which uses a print out enabling a totally deaf person to use a telephone where there is a similar handset at the receiver's end.
(2) Is it a fact that this device could offer great assistance to deaf people seeking to phone for the police, the fire brigade or hospital aid.
(3) Will he encourage the installation of these handsets in police stations, fire stations and hospitals.
(4) Is he able to say whether these handsets are available on lease; if so, will he consider reducing telephone rental charges for the deaf who install this handset.
(5) Would this be an appropriate Government initiative for 1981 , the International Year of Disabled Persons.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) Yes. Telecom Australia has advised me that the Porta Printer II telephone aid for the deaf is available to the public through a private company, Intercept Communications of Camberwell, Victoria. Owing to a recent upsurge of demand for the equipment in the United States of America, however, supplies of the units have been exhausted. Efforts are being made by the supplier to obtain other equipment but it is likely to be some time before any will be available.
(2) The device has obvious advantages for the profoundly deaf who have been unable to use the couventional telephone. Telecom has given a permit for its connection to the telephone network and, as part of its contribution to the 1981 Inter national Year of Disabled Persons, is to act as distributing agent for the company.
(3) The installation of the units in offices of various emerg ency services would be of considerable assistance to totally deaf people. It is a matter for emergency services, individual government departments and other organisations, however, to decide their own requirements and obtain units either from the supplying company or Telecom.

Telecom has published a special booklet, 'Telephone Ser vices for Special Needs' detailing products available to aid dis abled people in their use of the telephone. The availability of the PortaPrinter is promoted in the booklet. A short film has also been produced to provide information on Telecom prod ucts and services, such as the Porta Printer available for the disabled.
(4) and (5) In acting as a distributor for the private company the units will be available through Telecom on a sale only basis. It is not known whether the private supplier in tends making the units available on a lease basis. The sale price of the units will be in the order of $800-$ 1 ,000, however, it is understood that the supplier intends to offer a cheaper rate to disabled persons and organisations.
Nursing Home Benefit
(Question No. 503)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
What would be the estimated cost t othe Commonwealth of recommendation 25 of the Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration ofHospitals that the fund nurs ing home benefit be discontinued, and that all insured patients in nursing homes be eligible for the Commonwealth benefit.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
It is estimated that on the basis of the current arrangements the cost to the Commonwealth of discontinuing nursing home fund benefits and making all insured nursing home patients eligible for Commonwealth nursing home benefits would be approximately $120m per annum.
Breast Cancer Research
(Question No. 512)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( l ) Is it a fact that breast cancer is the biggest killer of women in Australia.
(2) If so, what sum has been allocated in 1981 for research into breast cancer.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) No; female deaths from breast cancer are well out weighed by deaths caused by heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, and malignant neoplasms of the digestive organs.
(2) In 1981 the National Health and Medical Research Council (NH & MRC) support for research specifically directed to breast cancer is $ 1 1 3,000. The NH & MRC does not initiate research but responds to applications made by medical and scientific researchers. The applications made are assessed by an independent, scientific committee and, after this peer review process, the most outstanding research proj ects are funded to the limits of available funds. In addition to this specific breast cancer research, the NH & MRC is pro viding support of almost $2m in 1981 for other cancer re search, some of which will be relevant to breast cancer.
There are, however, other research projects throughout Australia related to breast cancer funded other than from Commonwealth Government funds. I do not have information as to the extent of such research.

1074 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Answersto Questions

Equipping ofSmall Boats with Radio
(Question No. 521)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Communi cations, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( I ) Has he received representations requesting that VHF
receivers be made compulsory on all boats over 3.6 metres.
(2) If so, have these representations also included the rec ommendation that the Government should assist in the equip ping of these boats with VHF radios by allowing (a) purchase of the radios to be exempt from sales tax and (b) their use to be free oflicence fees.
(3) Would the widespread use of VHF reduce the cost and increase the effectiveness ofsearch and rescue work at sea.
(4) In view of the constant loss of life at sea due to unavailability of communication equipment will he (a) make the equipping of small boats with VHF receivers compulsory and (b) seek to have VHF receivers made (i) sales tax exempt and (ii) free of licence fees.
Mr Sinclair- -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) No.
(2) Not applicable.
(3) VHF radiotelephone equipment is already widely used in the maritime community and has proved to be a highly efficient and reliable means of short-range communication. I have no doubt that more widespread use of this type ofequip ment would improve the effectiveness of search and rescue work at sea.
(4) The reference to VHF receivers is taken to mean VHF transceivers. The Commonwealth responsibility for the car riage of shipboard equipment extends only to those ships which fall under jurisidiction of the Navigation Act, which is administered by the Minister for Transport. (Approximately 240 ships.)
Responsibility for'the safety ofprivatecraft lies with the re spective State Governments. In these circumstances, consideration of legislation to require the carriage of radio equip ment on private craft would come within the ambit of each State Government.
(i) This aspect of the honourable member's question would be more correctly addressed to my colleague the Treasurer.
(ii) It is the responsibility of my Department to ensure that all installations are licensed under the Wireless Telegraphy Act and that the operation of these stations conforms to the Regulations under the Act. Fees have been established on a user-pays principle and the rates are set at levels designed to cover the costs ofmanaging the radio frequency spectrum.
Provision already exists however, for the grant of a free licence for a station which is operated solely in connection with the direction of operations relating to the preservation of human life. Further, a special li cence fee of $2 has been established for stations in ves sels which are regularly providing search and rescue fa cilities for other vessels and shore stations which are dedicated to safety communications.
Detonation of Mine at Moreton Island
(Question No. 522)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1 980:
( I ) Did the manager of the Tangalooma Hotel, Moreton Island, request assistance from the Army to detonate a mine

washed up on the beach at Moreton Island late in October 1980.
(2) If so, (a) when did the mine first appear on the beach, (b) when was it brought to the attention of the Army and (c) whenwas a unit dispatched to deal with it.
(3) Wasthere any delay in the Army's response; ifso, why.
Mr Killen T - he answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) (a) It is not known when the 60mm mortar bomb first appeared on the beach.
(b) 1630 hours 29 October 1980. (c) An Explosive Ordinance Disposal operator departed Brisbane for Moreton Island by Queensland Water Police launch at 0700 hrs 30 October 1 980. The mortar bomb was detonated that morning.
(3) There was no undue delay in undertaking the task. The main factor in choosing daylight was one of public safety to ensure the blast danger area both landward and seaward was clear of people.
Leopard Tanks
(Question No. 560)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( I ) How many Leopard Tanks are on the inventory of the
AustralianDefence Forces.
(2) How many are currently (a) operational and (b) retained in reserve.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) There are one hundred and three ( 1 03) Leopard Tanks
on the Australian Defence Force inventory of which seventy four (74) are operational and twenty-nine (29) retained in reserve.
Water Supply to Ivanhoe, New South Wales
(Question No. 590)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 25 February 1981 :
( 1 ) Has his attention been drawn to the article headed 'Town's fear of poison' in the Sun-Herald, 22 February 1981 , page 5 .
( 2 ) Has his Department o r any other Commonwealth auth ority or department, made any investigation of the poisoning of the water supply to the town ofIvanhoe, NSW.
(3) Have traces of 1080 poison been found in the water supply of lvanhoe.
(4) When was use of the town water supply suspended and what were the circumstances which led to that suspension.
(5) Is he able to state (a) when the town water supply will be used again, and (b) what (i) State and (ii) Commonwealth controls will be used to ensure no further poisoning of the town water supply.
Mr MacKeIlar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) I am aware of this press article.
(2) Responsibility formonitoring the Ivanhoe water'supply lies with the New South Wales Government.

Answers to Questions

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 075

(3) and (4) E nquiries about the claimed presence of 1080 in the Ivanhoe water supply and use of the town supply should be addressed to the New South Wales Government.
(5) I am not in a position to comment on this matter as this is a State Government responsibility. However, my Department and the National Health and Medical Research Council are concerned with safety of Australian water supplies and, in conjunction with the Australian Water Resources Council, have published guidelines for drinking water quality, viz 'Desirable Quality for Drinking Water in Australia' available through the Australian Government Publishing Service.
Ireland (Question No. 603)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 25 February 1981 :
( 1 ) Has his attention been drawn to the Bull Laudabiliter in the Roman Bul/arium, 1739, in the Annals ofBaronius and in the Expugnatis Hibernica of Giraldus Cambrensis ofabout 1 188 (Rolls Series, Edition v. 3 1 8), and confirmations of it as the document brought from Rome by John of Salisbury in 1 155.
(2) If so, can he say whether Vatican claims to sovereignty over Ireland in that document were confirmed by letters from Alexander III in the Black Book of the Exchequer Ed. Hearne, 1 774, i. 42-48, and in instructions by Innocent X to Nuncio Rinuccini in 1645 which quoted English Pope Adrian IV as having authorised Henry II ofEngland to annex Ireland on condition that he propagate the faith, protect the Church in Ireland and levy every subject a penny a year for the Holy See which came to be known as Peters pence.
(3) Will Australia use its good offices to procure continuing discussions between Eire, the United Kingdom, the Vatican, the European Parliament and European courts and the United NatiOnS to arrive at an equitable solution of economic and social discrimination and injustices in Ireland with full public discussion with a view to consensus and teaching of agreed historical information in State and church schools in Ireland.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) and (2) No.
(3) Although Australia enjoys warm and friendly relations with Ireland, the United Kingdom and the. Vatican, is developing closer links with the institutions of the European Community, and participates actively and constructively in the work of the UnitedNations and its Specialised Agencies, it would not be appropriate for the Government to act in the manner suggested by the honourable member.
Taxation Deductions: Fire Fighting Expenses
(Question No. 721)
Mr Milton asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 5 March 1981 :
( I ) Is it a fact that a person who makes a monetary do
nation to the Country Fire Authority is able, in most cases, to claim the donation as a legitimate taxation deduction.
(2) Is it also a fact that a person who incurs expenses on items such as petrol, protective clothing, etc., in the course of his fire prevention and fire fighting duties is unable to claim this expenditure as a taxation deduction.
(3) If the position is as stated, will he give consideration to allowing as a taxation deduction legitimate expenses incurred in fire fighting duties by Country Fire Authority volunteer firemen.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) Yes. Gifts of the value of $2.00 and upwards to the CountryFireAuthorityqualify as incometax deductions.
(2) Under the general deduction provisions of the income tax law, losses and outgoings are deductible only whn they are incurred in the production of assessable income and are not of a capital, private or domestic nature. Expenditure on petrol, protective clothing, etc. incurred by volunteer members of the Country Fire Authoritywho are not paid for their services would not be deductible.
(3) It is a principle of income tax law that, in general, a de duction is not allowable for expenditure which is not incurred in gaining or producing assessable income or necessarily in curred in carrying on a business for the purpose of gaining or producing such income. If a deduction were to be allowed to volunteer firemen for expenses incurred in fire-fighting duties, it would be difficult to deny comparable treatment to many other kinds of expenses not related to income producing activities as, for example, expenses incurred by persons par ticipating without reward in a wide variety of activities beneficial to the community generalJy.
Regulation of Insurance Broking Industry
(Question No. 724)
Mr Hurford asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 5 March 198 1 :
( I ) Has his attention been drawn to Press reports indicating
that both the New South Wales and the Western Australian Governments are impatient at the delay in the enacting of Commonwealth legislation regulating the Insurance Braking Industry.
(2) Is it a fact that the Constitution expressly gives pre eminent power and responsibility with respect to insurance to the Commonwealth Government; if so, will he undertake to act on these criticisms and those of the Australian Federation of Consumer Organisations and take action on the Australian Law Reform Commission's Report on Insurance Agents and Brokers.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) I am aware ofPress reports of the kind mentioned.
(2) Sub-section 51 (xiv) of the Constitution empowers the Commonwealth to legislate with respect to 'Insurance, other than State insurance; also State insurance extending beyond the limits of the State concerned'. The Commission's Report is currently being examined by my officers in the light of comments received to date from interested parties. r refer the honourable member to my statements in the House on this subject on 5 March 198 1 .
Iwasaki Sangyo Co. (Australia) Pty Ltd
(Question No. 745)
Mr Humphreys asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 10 March 1981 :
( l ) Is it a fact that the Foreign Investment Review Board has placed an embargo on the purchase of land by a Mr Iwasaki Yohachiro, or his agents or servants, additional to that land covered by the Franchise Agreement negotiated between the Queensland State Government and the Iwasaki Sangyo Co. (Aust) PtyLtd.
(2) Is it also a fact that certain parcels of land outside the franchise area, which the Commonwealth Government has in the past formally prohibited Mr Iwasaki to purchase, namely (a) 1 06 acres in the Parish of Woodlands and (b) 532 acres

1 076 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Answers to Questions

and 588 acres in the Parish of Rosslyn, have been purchased by the Maryvale Land Co., a company registered in Melbourne, Victoria.
(3) Is he satisfied that a Mr A. C. Setu who is employed by the Maryvale Land Co. in an advisory capacity, is not acting on behalfofIwasaki Yohachiro.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) Conditions attached to the Government's 30 July 1978 approval of the Iwasaki Sangyo Co. (Australia) Pty Ltd's proposal to establish a tourist resort near Yeppoon Queensland, restricted land to be acquired by the company to that set out in the Franchise Agreement between the company and the Queensland Government and required that Federal Government approval be obtained before the company acquires, makes any arrangements, signs any contracts, or negotiates to acquire any additional land in any part of Australia.
(2) On 23 January 1980, orders were issued under the Foreign Takeovers Act 1 975 prohibiting the purchase by Iwasaki Sangyo of certain land outside the franchise area. The land to which the honourable member refers approximates the description of some of the land subject to the above mentioned orders.
(3) I have been advised that a wholly Australian-owned company known as Maryvale Forest Pty Ltd has acquired the properties which were the subject of the orders under the Foreign Takeovers Act. Written advice has been received from that company that it is not in any way associated with the Iwasaki Sangyo Company and that Mr A. C. Setu is not employed in any capacity by Maryvale Forest.
Soviet Union: Dual Citizenship Laws
(Question No. 803)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 1 2 March 1981 :
( I ) What progress has been made towards completing studies of dual citizenship laws enacted by the Union ofSoviet Socialist Republics and the implications arising for Australian citizens who may be affected.
(2) Have any difficulties been experienced in Australian dealings with the USSR arising out of law which became effective in that country on 1 July 1 979.
(3) What advice is given in Australia to those who could be affected and who undertake international travel.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) Departments concerned have completed a study of the law and have obtained information from the Soviet authorities in Moscow and from some other countries about particu lar aspects which may be the cause of anxiety to Australian citizens of Soviet background.
The new law appears to be largely a consolidation of exist ing legislation and it is unlikely that any person who did not previously possess Soviet citizenship will have acquired it as a result of the law. On the other hand some people may be learning for the first time that the Soviet Union regards them, and always has regarded them, as Soviet citizens regardless of the fact that they themselves and the Australian Government regard them as Australians.
No one will cease to be an Australian citizen as a result of the new Soviet law, and nothing in the law can affect the responsibility which the Australian Government accepts for the welfare of its own citizens. This responsibility is one which the Government will not shirk. In practice, this means that all Australians, including those who may also be regarded by the

USSR as Soviet citizens, will continue when in Australia to enjoy the full protection of Australian law, and when abroad, will be given all possible assistance by Australian diplomatic missions and consular posts. This is not to deny that there are dangers and difficulties in situations involving dual nationality and real limitations on the assistance which a country can give to one of its citizens who is in another country which also claims him or her as its citizen. In this regard I must stress the importance of clarifying citizenship before embarking on a visit to the Soviet Union. The honourable Member will be aware of the Government's concern about dual nationality and will recall a statement by the former Minister for Foreign Affairs Mr Peacock on 17 October 1979 on the Report of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs and De fence on 'Dual Nationality'. In that statement Mr Peacock said that Australia should initiate relevant action in the United Nations and should give high priority to negotiating bi lateral agreements to overcome dual nationality problems, even though there are formidable difficulties of a political, legal and practical nature. We are in fact now considering this possibility in some detail. On 21 November 1979, the Australian representative on the Sixth Committee of the 34th Session of the United Nations General Assembly raised the question of dual nationality, and made a request that the In ternational Law Commission give appropriate priority to including dual nationality in its program. The delegation to the Sixth Committee reported that many other delegations pri vately expressed interest in the statement made by Australia on dual nationality.
I mentioned that the study about which the honourable Member asked had been completed. The results of that study have been summarised in an information paper, which has been distributed to enquirers on request. The text of that in formation paper is as follows:
'A new Soviet Citizenship Law came into force on 1 July 1979. A number of Australian citizens have expressed concern about the implications of this law for Australians with origins in the Soviet Union or the Baltic States.
The Australian Government formally sought clarification from the Soviet authorities of some aspects of the law and consulted other countries which have citizens who might also be affected by Soviet citizenship legislation. The notes which follow are based upon a study of the law itself and of the information provided by the Soviet authorities and other countries in response to the requests made by the Government. The notes deal particularly with the concerns expressed by some Australian citizens that as a result of the new law they might have acquired Soviet citizenship or might have lost their Australian citizenship, with the position of Australian citizens with Soviet antecedents who travel to the Soviet Union and with the position ofthose Australians with origins in the Baltic States.
On the question of what effect the Soviet legislation might have on Australian citizenship, the Minister for Foreign Affairs has already assured Parliament that nobody will lose Australian citizenship through the operation of a law of another country. This statement remains true of any Australian who automatically but involuntarily acquires citizenship of another country under the laws of that country, whether he or she is residing in Australia or elsewhere. In short, no one will cease to be an Australian citizen as a result of the new Soviet law.
Similarly, the Soviet law cannot affect the responsibility which the Australian Government accepts for the welfare of its own citizens or its determination to discharge that responsibility. Limits on the Government's freedom of action in this regard do, however, exist and are outlined in the paragraphs which follow.
Broadly, the study which has been made confirms earlier advice that the new law might represent a consolidation-and

Answers to Questions

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 077

perhaps an elaboration-of earlier provisions but not an extension ofexistingSoviet law.
First, and perhaps most importantly, the law does not appear to be retroactive. The Soviet authorities have confir med that it is not retroactive and that it does not confer Soviet citizenship on anyone who did not previously possess it. This means, and the Soviet authorities have also confirmed this point, that the law does not affect the status of anyone who left territorywhich is now part of the Soviet Union before that territory was incorporated into the USSR. Such people are not regarded as Soviet citizens. The authorities have further confirmed that persons deprived of Soviet citizenship by the Decrees of 1921 remain deprived of it and that no international treaties, including any treaties referred to in the new law, give citizenship retroactively to former residents of areas subsequently incorporated into the USSR.
It is possible that some people who in the eyes of the Soviet authorities always possessed Soviet citizenship have only recently become aware of this through promulgation of the new law. The new law confirms that a person becomes a Soviet citizen, regardless ofhis place of birth, ifboth his parents were Soviet citizens. The new law also deals with the situation of persons having one parent who is a Soviet citizen. Soviet citizenship does not lapse with the passage oftime or with resi dence outside the Soviet Union: it continues to operate unless it is renounced. It is possible that children of parents who left the Soviet Union many years ago but did not renounce their Soviet citizenship are, under Soviet law, and without realising it, Soviet citizens.
The Soviet authorities have advised that the new law does not alter pre-existing renunciation procedures. Soviet citizens wishing to renounce Soviet citizenship may do so on appli cation to a Soviet Consular or Diplomatic Mission which then refers the application to the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet. This process would normally take at least three months.
The new law makes clear that marriage of itself has no effect on the citizenship ofeitherparty.
In regard to the particular position of former residents Of the Baltic States, the Soviet authorities have advised that the new law does not change the 1940 legislation relating to per sons from these States. They advise that only those persons who were resident in the Baltic States at the dates of their in corporation into the USSR are regarded as Soviet citizens. Persons who left before the incorporation are therefore not so regarded. It is likely, therefore, that those who left the Baltic States after their incorporation into the USSR, and the chil dren ofthose persons, are regarded by the Soviet authorities as Soviet citizens unless they hold documents showing that they are no longer regarded as Soviet citizens under Soviet law.
It is a sovereign right of countries to make their own laws concerning who they will or will not regard as their own citi zens. There laws need not be consistent with the laws of other countries and are not necessarily recognised by other countries. It follows that what has been said about retention of Australian citizenship reflects Australian law and need not be accepted by the Soviet authorities. This is an important point for Australians of Soviet origintravelling to the Soviet Union. The new Soviet law explicitly states that the USSR does not recognise dual nationality. Australian citizens who also pos sess Soviet citizenship are therefore regarded by the USSR as possessing only Soviet citizenship and this of course is most important when those people are in the Soviet Union. The Soviet authorities have made clear that they attach no Jegal significance to the issue of Soviet visas to Soviet citizens trav elling on Australian passports and that they will continue to

Vr[SlaOrnd,

bsuuct [s paenresoxnpsh.ac[st

Soviet citizens. This is not a new statement ofwhat has previously

pro been

Soviet policy.

In these circumstances it is up to people to make their own decision whether or not to visit the Soviet Union. If people decide to make a visit it is of the utmost importance that they
seek to clarify their citizenship status before doing so, particularly if they have a parent or parents born in the Soviet Union. An Australian who has held a Soviet passport or who believes
he or she may be also a Soviet citizen should seriously consider taking steps to renounce his or her Soviet citizenship before visiting the USSR.

We know that numbers of Australians of Soviet origin have
visited the USSR on Australian passports and have not encountered difficulties. We also know-and the Soviet authorities have confirmed this-that Soviet citizens perma
nently resident abroad are not liable for military service in the USSR and do not become liable merely by visiting the Soviet Union. Our understanding is that the new law will not bring about changes in the treatment of Soviet citizens or former Soviet citizens visiting the Soviet Union, but we shall wish to see how the new law operates in practice before confirming this view.

Intending travellers should heed the advice given in Parliament by the Minister for Foreign Affairs that problems of
dual nationality cannot be overcome by citizens simply assert ing that they do not accept their other citizenship and that it is for the individual to ascertain in advance the consequences of coming within the jurisdiction of another country which claims his or her citizenship whether the individual, or the
Australian Government, recognises that claim or not. Australian Consular officers can in such circumstances give advice but they may not be able to assist when the jurisdiction of
another country is being ascerted. They will of course take all the steps open to them.

Copies of the text of the new Soviet law are available from my Department on request.

(2) No.

(3) Each applicant for an Australian passport receives a copy of a booklet entitled 'Hints for Australian Travellers'
which explains the difficulties involved in dual nationality and warns Australians that they should seek advice from appro priate authorities if they wish to clarify their other nationality status.

Australian Capital Territory: Funding of Community and Welfare Organisations
(Question No. 169)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 26 November 1 980:
( I ) Were any of his Department's 1 980 recommendations on funding of community and welfare organisations altered as a result of ACT House ofAssembly recommendations.
(2) If so, what were his Department's recommendations, what variations did the ACT House ofAssemblypropose and what was the final determination offunding.
Mr Hodgman-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
I am informed by my Department that the attached sched ule lists the names of the organisations which applied, the amounts approved by the previous Minister, the amounts recommended by the House of Assembly and the final amounts of the approved grants.

078 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Answers to Questions

SCHEDULE-WELFARE GRANTS

Organisation

Amount approved by previous Minister

Abortion Counselling Service

Spiral Club

WodenCommunity Service

Rape Crisis Centre

Drug Referral and Information Centre

Diabetes Association

Civil Rehabilitation Committee

YMCA

Marriage Counselling Service

Technical Aid to Disabled

Arthritis and Rheumatism Assoc.

Grow, Canberra

Campus Child Care Collective

TPI Social and Welfare Club

Pregnancy Support Service

Guide Dogs for the Blind

Salvation Army

The Cottage (ANU)

Holt After School Childrens Centre

Church of England-Lyons

Youth Refuge

Barnardo's Womens Auxiliary

ACT Council on the Ageing

Disabled Adults Residential Establishment

Tuggeranong Family Action

Belconnen Community Service

Blind Society

Parents of Twins Club

Asthma: Spcld: Hear a Book: Epilepsy Association

Cancer Society

IYDP Planning and Co-ordinating Committee

Northside Community Service

Life Line

Womens Refuge

Indo China Refugee Association

Canberra Opportunity for Deaf Children

Southern Cross Homes

Scullin Learning Centre

Tuggeranong Community Service

Senior Citizens Club-Turner

Dickson Neighbourhood Centre

Girl Guides Association-ACT

Canberra Consumers Incorporated

YWCA

Camp Pelican Committee

ACT Playgroups Association

National Trust Australia-ACT

Horticultural Society ofCanberra

Kambah Residents Association

Belconnen Community Service

Rupert Public Interest Movement

Torrens Development Association

St John's Ambulance Association

St John's Ambulance Brigade

National Council of Women-ACT

Careers 1981

Heraldry and Genealogy Society

Wireless Institute of Australia

Duke of Edinburgh Award Scheme

Campus Community Broadcasting

Keep AustraliaBeautiful Council-ACT

.

Canberra & South East Region Environment Centre

YMCA

Questacon

$ 5 ,000
300 60,000 6,500
5,500 2,000 8,000 2,000
5 ,000 9,000 50,000
1 0,000 7,700 1 2,000 4,000
3,000
2,750
7,700 6,000 6,000 1 ,000 26,000
1 3,000 500
2,000 5,000
7,000
20,000 7,000 1 ,000 3,220 33,000 6,000

House of Assembly Recommen-
dation $
5,000 300
70,000 5,500 2,000 8,000 2,000
5,000 9,000 50,000
3 , 500 10,000 7,700 1 2,000 4,000
4,400
2,750
7,700 6,000 3,000 1 ,000 26,000 2,000 1 3,000 4,000 2,000 5,000
7,000
7,000 1 ,000 3,220 33,000 6,000

Approved Grant
$ 5,000
300 70,000 6,500 5,500
2,000
8,000 2,000
10,000 9,000 60,000
3, 500
1 0,000 500
7,700 1 2,000 4,000
4,400 5,000
2,750
7,700 6,000
600 6,000 1 ,000 26,000
2,000 1 3 ,000
500
2,000
6,000 deferred
500 7,000
500
20,000 7,000 1 ,000 3,220 40,000 1 2,000

Answers to Questions

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1079

Organisation
Access Newspaper Association RSPCA-ACT Citizens Advice Bureau Weston Creek Community Assoc. Australian Thrillseekers Organ. Scout Association Canberra & District Historical Soc. Model Boat Club-ACT Royal Lifesaving Society-ACT Society for Growing Australian Plants National Womens Club Australian Air League-ACT Baringa Gardens Community Assoc. Police & Citizens Youth Club Wild Life Foundation-ACT Belconnen Youth,Club CSIRO Creche North Belconnen Community Child Care Association Childbirth Education Association Radio2XX Hear a Book Service Australian Crime Prevention Council Spence Childrens Cottage Parents Without Partners Marymead Birthright Pegasus-Riding for the Disabled Catholic Social Services Smith Family AD PACT St Vincent de Paul Society Canberra Community Legal Service ACT Council on Social Service Handicapped Citizens Assoc. Jobless Action NoahsArk Parent Support Service Red Cross Dr Barnardo's

Amount approved by previous Minister
$ 1,500 20,000 2,000
13,00.0.
10,000
4,40.0.
6,040

House of Assembly Recommen-
dation
$ 1,500 20,000 8,000
13,00.0.
10,000 4,400
..
6,040

1,040 4,800
7,00.0.
2,000
5,600

1,040 4,800
2,200 2,000
5,600

500

500

1,950 25,000
..
10,000 102,000
90,00.0.
60,000 104,900 19,300
2,800 deferred

8,000 21,200
..
102,000
90,000 20,000 81,300 121,900 19,300
4,000 2,800 17,000

Approved Grant
$ 1,500 20,000 2,000 13,000
10,000 6,000 deferred 11,250
1,040 4,800 8,000 2,290 2,000
5,600
500
1,950 25,000
1,100 500
10,000 102,000
110,000
60,000 104,900
19,300
4,000 3,500
- 1-7,0-00
707,200

Medibank
(Question No. 525)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
Is it a fact that a married partner cannot insure for health cover with Medibank without the other partner also insuring; if so, why.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
It is understood that as a general policy Medibank Private does not accept single membership of a family if the applicant is, or could be, covered by family membership. The main reason is that Medibank Private spreads the health insurance risk through the whole of its membership. It wishes to avoid situations where an individual member of a family seeks health insurance cover because of anticipated expensive medical and hospital treatment and then ceases membership, after benefits have been paid, leaving contributors remaining with the fund to bear the major part of the costs. However, where

special circumstances exist, Medibank Private may consider departure from the general policy.
National Acoustic Laboratory: Supply of Hearing Aids
(Question No. 551)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) What is an acceptable period of delay on the part of National Acoustic Laboratory Centres in Queensland in the supply of hearing aids to eligible hearing-impaired persons.
(2) In how many instances were eligible hearing-impaired persons required to wait longer than one month to be supplied with hearing aids through each of the National Acoustic Laboratory Centres in the Brisbane metropolitan area.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Because of the demand for services from the National Acoustic Laboratories and the current staff levels a priority

1 080 REPRESENTATIVES 26 March 1981

Answers to Questions

system has been introduced to try to keep delays to a mini mum. Within the priority system, it is hoped that the maxi mum delay for first appointments will be as follows:

Child under four years of age . . .
Child over four years of age with an aid . . . . . . . . . .
Child over four years of age without an aid
New pensioners
Other pensioners
Department of Veterans' Affairs clients

one month
one month
two months three months one month
three months

(Urgent cases can receive earlier attention.)

(2) The number of persons in the Brisbane metropolitan area with a waiting period for first appointment in excess of one month as at 3 l January 1981 was:

Nuclear Powered Submarines
(Question No. 559)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 198 1 :
( I ) How many United States of America nuclear powered submarines have visited Australian ports.
(2) On what dates did each visit take place; what was the name of the submarine and the port visited in each case.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) Twenty-one. (2)

Dates ofvisit

Name of submarine

Port visited

Mt Brisbane Gravatt Redcliffe

Children under four years

of age

5

12

Children over four years of

age with an aid

21

Children over four years of age without an aid

13

93

New pensioners

215

51

60

Other pensioners

16

52

Department of Veterans'

Affairs clients

76

7

13

Others

2

12

Total

291

94

263

For initial appointees there is an aid fitting appointment two weeks later.
Coastal Surveillance
(QuestionNo. 558)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for D efence, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) Did the Report of the Australian Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs recommend that the Defence Forces should be involved in coastal surveillance as much as possible.
(2) If so, what steps have been taken by his' Department to implement the Royal Commission's recommendation.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) Yes.
(2) The recommendation concerning Defence Force involvement in coastal surveillance is one of a number of recommendations relating to civil coastal surveillance made by the Australian Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs. These recommendations are being examined by the Standing Inter-Departmental Committee on Coastal Surveillance, which is chaired by the Department of Transport and of which Defence is a member. The question of the future level of Defence Force involvement in civil coastal surveillance is being addressed in the context of the major review of civil coastal surveillance which is now being prepared in accord ance with the Government's announcement in July 1978. That review is scheduled to be submitted to Government in mid-198 ! .

1-7 May 1960 8-13 May 1961 2-18 May 1964 14-18 August 1976 5-10 March 1978 19-27 April 1979 20-25 October 1979 24-29 October 1979 26 March-l April
1980 1-7 April 1980 19-26 May 1980 18-25 July 1980 25-30 July 1980 13-19 August 1980 6-1 1 September 1980 1 1 -16 September 1980 10-17 November 1980 1 6-22 December 1980 23-29 December 1980 61 1 February 1981 27 February-6 March
1981

US Halibut US Sargo US Sculpin US Snook US QUeelifish US Tunny US Pilllado US Gurnard US Haddock
US Los Angeles US Guardfish US Puffer US Baton Rouge US Tautog US Groton US Permit US Omaha US Haddo US Philadelphia US Memphis US Gurnard

Sydney Sydney Sydney
HMAS Stirling
Melbourne
HMAS Stirling HMAS Stirling
Melbourne
HMAS Stirling
HMAS Stirling HMAS Stirling HMAS Stirling HMAS Stirling HMAS Stirling HMAS Stirling HMAS Stirling HMAS Stirling HMAS Stirling HMAS Stiriing HMAS Stirling HMAS Stirling

Council of Defence
(Question No. 636)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 26 Febuary 1981 :
On what dates did the Council of Defence meet in 1 979 and 1 980.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) In 1979 the Council of Defence met on the following dates:
14 February, 2 March, 6 April, 4 May, 1 June, 1 3 July, 1 6 August, 2 7 August, 1 4 September, 1 2 October, 8 November and 10 December.
(2) In 1 980 the Council of Defence met on the following dates:
1 3 February, 7 March, 1 4 April, 2 May, 4 June, 4 July, 4 August, 5 September, 7 November and 5 December.
Radioactivity in Mineral Waters
(Question No. 665)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 3 March 1981 :

Answers to Questions

26 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 108 1

( 1 ) Is he able to say what is the degree of radioactivity found in mineral waters currently on sale in Australia.
(2) Apart from the recent investigation of Taurina Spa mineral water, what research has been carried out or inquiries undertaken into the levels of radioactivity present in local or imported mineral waters including Hepburn Spa and Perrier Water.
(3) Will he undertake to advise the House of the degree of radioactivity of these mineral waters and to publicise the findings so that potential consumers may be able to choose just how much radioactivity they wish to absorb into their bodies.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) Assays by the CSIRO ofmineral water samples are:
Taurina Spa (3 samples)-45  2 picocuriesjlitre; 52  2 picocuriesjlitre; 40 __ 2 picocuriesjlitre.
Hepburn Spa2.5  0.1 picocuriesjlitre. Perrier-0.6 -+ 0.04 picocuriesjlitre.
Of the imported mineral waters sold in Australia the following values have been determined from studies of the scien tific literature and overseas reports:
San Pelligrino (Italy)-4.9 picocuriesjlitre. Fiuggi (Italy)-.31 picocuriesjlitre. Crodo (ltaly)- O. l l picocuriesjlitre. Sanbernadino (Italy)-less than 0. 1 picocuriesjlitre. Ferravelle (Italy)-0.29 picocuriesjlitre. Sangenini (ltaly)- 1 . 1 6 picocuriesjlitre. S. Paolo (ltaly)- 0.48 picocuriesjlitre.
The maximum radium content specified in the draft European Regional Standard for Mineral Waters which has been adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission is 30 picocuries jlitre.
(2) As indicated Hepburn Spa and Perrier are below the recommended maximum limit of radium content.
In respect of imported waters, my Department has ar ranged with importers to receive information on the radiologi cal content of mineral waters they propose to import.
As well, the National Health and Medical Research Coun cil is currently surveying brands available for sale in Victoria of both local and overseas origin through its Market Basket Survey which is a food monitoring program. Testing is being performed by the Australian Radiation Laboratory in Melbourne.
(3) Yes.
Taxation Deductions
(Question No. 699)
Mr Dawkins asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 4 March 1981 :
( l ) Has his attention been drawn to the practice in the building industry in Western Australia whereby some employers pay their employees in cash a sum equal to their wage, nett of taxation, but do not remit to the Australian Taxation Office the tax collected.
(2) If so, is it the practice of the Commissioner of Taxation to pursue the employee for the unpaid tax rather than the employer.
(3) What action can he take to ensure that employers meet their obligation in passing on taxation payments deducted from employees' wages.
 Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

( 1 ) No, though l am aware of the general position that cases of employers failing to remit tax instalments deducted from employees' wages are continually being detected by the Australian Taxation Office. My attention has been drawn, however, to a practice in the building industry in Western Australia whereby some employers have failed to deduct tax instalments from payments to employees.
(2) The Commissioner of Taxation has advised that, under the PAYE provisions of the income tax law, an employer who fails to remit to the Taxation Office the amount of tax instal ments deducted from the wages of an employee, or fails to purchase tax stamps of a face value equal to the deduction, as the case may be, is liable to pay that amount to the Commissioner. He said that, in accordance with these pro visions, payment of the unpaid tax is sought from the employer.
(3) The PAYE provisions impose heavy penalties, including imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, on employers who do not account for instalments deducted from employees' wages as required by the law. The Commissioner has advised that, with the aim of securing the highest possible level of compliance with these provisions, a substantial number of specially trained inspectors are continually employed in conducting inspections of the wages records of employers. Any complaint that tax deducted has not been accounted for as required by the law is examined by the in spectors. He added that computer facilities assist in prompt identification of employers who fail to remit tax instalments deducted from employees' wages.
Taxation Avoidance
(Question No. 731)
Mr Armitage asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 1 0 March 1981 :
( I ) Has the Australian Taxation Office carried out investi gations in the Wollongong area of New South Wales, of sub contractors who are allegedly avoiding taxation; if so, were these investigations conducted as a result of complaints to the Australian Taxation Office by the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union.
(2) What are the results of any investigations undertaken.
(3) If taxation avoidance has been found, will he provide the names of the sub-contractors concerned and indicate what action will be taken against them.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) The Commissioner of Taxation has advised me that inquiries have been made of sub-contractors in the Wollongong area. The secrecy provisions of the income tax law preclude him from advising whether or not these inquiries were con ducted as a result of complaints lodged by the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union.
(2) and (3) The secrecy provisions of the income tax law prevent the Commissioner from supplying this information. He has, however, been able to give the general advice that it is his practice to take appropriate action to see that the taxation law, including the PAYE provisions, is properly applied.
River Murray Waters Agreement
(Question No. 825)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for N ational Development and Energy, upon notice, on 1 2 March 1981 :
( l ) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the Adelaide News of 5 March 1981 which reported that the M.V.

1 08 2 REPRESENTATIVES 2 6 March 198 1

Answers to Questions

Murray Explorer has twice been damaged by sandbar and snags near Loxton, S.A., in the River Murray channel.
(2) Has his attention also been drawn to the fact that the River Murray has not flowed to the sea for several weeks as the mouth is blocked by a sand-bar.
(3) Is it a fact that the River Murray Commission is not maintaining a navigable channel in these areas as required by the RiverMurrayWaters Agreement.
(4) Has the question of South Australia's entitlement, under the River Murray Waters Agreement or under the Con stitution, to sufficient water to enable the River Murray to be navigablebeen examined; if not, why not.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for N ational Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( I ) and (2) Yes.
(3) The River Murray Waters Agreement does not require the River Murray Commission to maintain a navigable chan nel in the River Murray. This falls within the area ofresponsi bility of the respective State Governments. In fact, the South Australian Government has recently issued a statement declaring its iptention of maintaining a navigable channel in the riverin that State.
(4) A number oflocks on the river in South Australia allow water levels for navigation to be adequately managed. I am informed that the water entitlement of South Australia under the River Murray Waters Agreement is sufficient for this purpose.
River Murray: Water Quality
(Question No. 827)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 12 March 1981 :
( I ) Is it a fact that the Australian Water Resources Council
does not undertake research, but merely allocates funds to bodies and individuals applying for research grants.
(2) If so, does this mean that the Australian Water Re sources Council cannot directly investigate water resource problems even thoughthese may be of great importance.
(3) Has the Australian Water Resources Council set questions, as a priority for research, relating to the quality ofRiver Murray water; ifso, what researchhas been undertaken in this area.
(4) Ifquestions have not been set, why not.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

( 1 ) and (2) While the Australian Water Resources Council does not undertake research or allocate funds for research, it does have responsibility for a water research program. This program comprises projects negotiated with research insti tutions on the advice of the Council's specialist committees in accordance with priorities reviewed every three years. The program is funded by the Commonwealth through an appro priation to my Department.
(3) and (4) A number of priority research areas, while not directly identified with the River Murray, are pertinent to problems related to the quality of River Murray water. Re search projects recently completed or in progress in these categories include:
(a) Comparison of irrigation land-use forms as contribu tors to eutrophication in the River Murray
(b) Effect of variations in salinity of River Murray waters on citrus production
(c) Economics of stream salinity and dry land salting in the Victorian Murray Basin
(d) Salinity as a water quality criterion.

Taxation: Lord Vestey

(QuestionNo. 836)

Dr Everingham asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 12 March 1981 :

( 1 ) Has his attention been drawn to claims by the present
Lord Vestey, his father and grandfather that they-have never paid income taxes and rarely any other taxes.

(2) Is he able to say whether these millionaires have (a) acquired the biggest areas of cattle land, most inefficiently managed and often in breach of land conservation laws, in Australia, (b) the biggest cattle population in the world and (c) the greatest chain of beef processing, transport, insurance
and marketing in Australia and the world.

(3) Has he taken steps to see that Lord Vestey's activities in Australia contribute theirfair share to the people of Australia; if so, what are the details.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

( 1 ) I am aware of such claims but cannot, of course, vouch for their accuracy.

(2) No.

(3) Responsibility for the administration of the taxation

law has been vested in the Commissioner of Taxation.. The

secrecy provisions of that law prevent him from disclosing in

formation about the affairs of any taxpayer but I understand

that it is his-practice, in carrying out activities aimed at obtain

ing compliance with the taxation claims of the kind referred to.

law,

t. o

take cognizance

of


