House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 121, 1981 Tuesday, 31 March 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 083

Tuesday, 31 March 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2. 1 5 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
National Health Scheme
To the H6110urable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulin dependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the N.H.S. and that insulin prescriptions revert to 1 0 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Campbell, Mr Charles, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton and Dr Theophanous.
Petitions received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of childrens services, which has been reduced by almost 40% in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 budget. And further, that annual budget allocations in the area of childrens services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free and Mr Mountford. Petitions received.
American Naval Vessels and Aircraft: Use of Facilities in Australia
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned Australian citizens respectfully showeth:
That considerable concern is generated by the decision of the Australian Government to provide facilities in Western Australia and Northern Australia for the use of American naval vessels and aircraft involved in the nuclear attack network;
That the extension of facilities to these vessels and aircraft and their potential to carry nuclear weapons can inevitably have the effect of drawing Australia into any potential world nuclear conflict;
That the involvement of Australia in providing these facilities and allowing such aircraft to use Australian airspace further compromises our ability to determine a non-aligned

independent position in any continuing hostilities. Your pet itioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will communicate to the representative of the Government of the United States of America that Australian facilities will not be provided to American naval vessels and aircraft which might by their presence in Australia make this country a high pri ority target in the event of nuclear war.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of Parliament assembled in the House of Representatives and the Senate. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Taxpayers who incur child care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other taxpayers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding.
Petition received.
Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives, of the Australian Parliament assembled the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia and New South Wales respectfully showeth:
That the Federal Government did not make increased funding available for necessary government school programs on capital grants but did however increase the money available to the non-government school sector by 5.9 per cent.
As well as general recurrent educational costs, government schools are primarily responsible for such vital programs to the community as the following:
I . Migrant education 2. Disadvantaged schools 3. Special education 4. Multicultural education 5. Disadvantaged country areas 6. Children in institutions 7. Community education 8. Services and development 9. Education centres 10. Special projects.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives assembled should restore and increase substantially. in real terms, the allocation of funds for government school programs.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howard.
Petition received.
Discriminatory Legislation
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament in Canberra assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
The currently discrimination in the provision of work, in appointment to jobs and in promotion exists in Australia on particular grounds including, inter alia, grounds of race, eth nic origin, marital status, pregnancy and/or sex;

1084 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 198 1

Petitions

That currently discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits is exercised against particular groups of individuals-in particular, against married women.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray: That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in Commonwealth employment, in employ ment of individuals under federal awards, in employment of persons by statutory bodies and quasi-governmental organisations, and in employment of all persons in areas over which Commonwealth and Australian Capital Territory equal op portunity legislation should have jurisdiction; and That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits to all persons withoutregard to sex and/or marital status. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jull. Petition received.
Medical Reports
To the Honourable the Speaker andMembers of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersignedcitizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we are gravely concerned by the invasion of privacy caused by Government agents seizing patients' medical records:
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, should:
Legislate to protect the private and confidential nature of medical records from scrutiny except on the express and informed consent of the patient or an order from a presiding judge.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr McLean. Petition received.
Proposed Sale ofTrans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

The reasons are as follows: 1 . We believe it would transfer control, the key aspect of
agriculture in this country, to overseas interests not re sponsible to the Australian Government. 2. We believe it would restrict the growing and trading of many seeds. 3. We believe it would cause a decline in the genetic diver sity of crops making them inore subject to destruction by pests and diseases. 4. We believe thorough investigation of the effect of simi lar legislation overseas and a full public debate is required before any decision is made. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament re frains from enacting any legislation on Plant Variety Rights. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Porter. Petition received.
Two Airlines Policy
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the present two air lines domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.
That this policy has resulted in expensive air fares and poor service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visiting Western Australia and vice versa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition and formulate an Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley, Mr Campbell, Mr McLean and Mt' Shack,
Petitions received.
Telephone Services

Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans Australia Airlines within 5 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale ofTrans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in: (i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline
services in Australia; (ii) higher domestic air fares. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.

To the Honourable the Speaker of the House of Representa tives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Macquarie respect fully showeth:
That we consider the lack of service provided by Telecom Australia in Sydney's 047 telephone ZOne is not only inconvenient but is affecting families, business concerns and employment in the area.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government direct Telecom Australia to provide an adequate service to subscribers and users in the 047 telephone zone.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Free.

by Mr Morris. Petition received.
Plant Breeders' Rights

Petition received.
ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT REAGAN

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned at the prospect of any legislation regarding Plant Variety Rights.

Ministerial Statement Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister) -by leave-All Australians heard with deep shock and concern this morning the news of

Attempted Assassination ofPresident Reagan 3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 085

an attempt on the life of President Reagan. Presi dent Reagan has undergone surgery and his con dition, as I am advised, is reported Lo be good. His Press Secretary, Mr James Brady, who was also shot is reported as being in a critical condition. One security guard and one policeman were also shot. A young assailant has been charged with these shootings.
This is the latest tragic example of the vulner ability of public figures in the United States of America to the threat of attempted assassination and is part of an increasing pattern of political violence around the world which continues to shock all decent people. The news we have of the President's condition gives us some relief. We have all heard the reports of his bravery and good spirits in the aftermath of this attempt on his life. We salute him and admire him. We all hope and pray for his speedy and complete recovery. At this time of trial, the United States Government and people are demonstrating yet again their great strength and reSIlience as a nation. The United States people should know that we in Australia respond Lo this shocking event in a spirit of complete sympathy, support, and concern for all those personally involved and for their families. I in form the House that I have this morning sent personal messages to Mrs Reagan, to the President, and to Secretary of State Haig, expressing our sin cere concern for and our hopes for a speedy recov ery of all those who were involved.
Mr HAYDEN ( Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) -by leave-Like the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), I was appalled to hear the news this morning of the attempt to assassinate President Reagan. We have been pleased to hear that his condition is improving, and on behalf of the Opposition I shall be sending a message to the President and Vice-President expressing our deep concern that this should have happened and our hope for the early recovery of the President. We shall also be conveying to Mrs Reagan our sym pathy at a time of great tension and anguish for her and her family, and indeed of great anxiety for the American people.
I shall also ask that the sympathies of the Opposition be made known to the families of those who were struck down around the President. The con dition of Press Secretary, James Brady, is reported to be critical. I n our justified concern for the well being of the President, we should also take care to keep in mind the sacrifice of Mr Brady, of the secret service agent and the policeman who were shot and the equal anguish of their families.
Mr Speaker, this deadly attack is unfortunately not without precedent in the United States. As

well as the assassination of John Kennedy in 1 963, and that of President McKinley in 1 90 1 , there have been several other attempts on United States Presidents this century, including President Ford. This sort of violence is becoming more prevalent; the lives of national leaders throughout the world seem now to be much more at risk. In Australia, it is true, there has been no tradition of political violence against national leaders-the attack against the then Leader of the Opposition, Arthur Calwell, in 1 966 stood out because of its rarity. But I say in all seriousness that Australian Prime Ministers must take account of the increasing dangers to their safety and take adequate security precautions.
In the Australian and British context, a low-key approach in which security precautions have been as inconspicuous as possible has proved effective so far. To my mind there is always a danger that highly visible security might encourage the unbalanced seeker after macabre celebrity, against whom it is almost impossible to defend, however massive the security measures taken. I reiterate our deep shock at these events, and our hope that in the text few days we shall hear good news about the condition of the President and all others involved.
TELEVISION SERVICES I N THE DANDENONG RANGES Notice of Motion
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) - I give notice that, on the next day ofsitting, I shall move:
That in the opinion of this House immediate priority should be given to the installation oftranslators to improve television reception in the Dandenong Ranges, in Victoria, in view of an election promise by the previous member for La Trobe that the services would beprovided early in 1981 .
SERVICE PENSIONS FOR MERCHANT SEAMEN
Notice of Motion Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) -I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, 1 shall move:
That this House is of the opinion that Australian merchant seamen who can furnish the necessary residential qualifica tions, campaign medals, discharge books and gunnery cer tificates, having served in theatres of war in World War II, should be granted a Service pension.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
SECURITY SERVICES Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Prime Minister a question.. I refer to the rather sensational perhaps sensationalised-reports, which are very

1 086 REPRESENTATTVES 31 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

disturbing, of Soviet penetration of the British se I think it is worth noting that we have had a

curity service, including the allegation that a royal commission into the security services and

founding father of the Australian Security Intelli that the royal commissioner, as r am advised, was

gence Service may have been a Soviet agent and aware of the circumstances of the bulk of these al

that the penetration of British agencies may be legations, certainly the ones coming out of the

current. Is it a fact that there is a regular exchange United Kingdom involving particular officials or

of top classified security material between the Bri persons from the United Kingdom, including

tish and Australian security services? Is it a fact Colonel Ellis, as I have just mentioned. He made

that Mr Justice Hope did not investigate matters his reports. The Government has considered those

related to these claims, reasonably enough, be reports and has acted upon them in a very sig

cause they were not known at the time? Further, nificant way, and statements have been made in

has the Prime Minister noted the very disturbing the Parliament about that. Again, I think we need

allegation of Mr Brian Toohey, a senior journalist to keep these matters in perspective so far as

who has just returned from several years' assign Australia is concerned.

ment in Washington, that the Central Intelligence Agency believes that there has been a high level penetration of the Public Service, perhaps even the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, by the Soviets for more than a decade, result ing in a volume and quantity of security material flowing to the Soviets exceeding anything coming from any other part of the world? Therefore, will he arrange for a full and urgent inquiry into these matters and for a report to be tabled in Parliament on them as promptly as possible? Finally, will the Prime Minister reaffirm the normal prac tice of arranging full briefings on request for the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and me from all heads of security agencies in this country in relation to these matters?

The honourable gentleman has raised allegations involving a mole in senior echelons of the Government's advisers, making the suggestion that the United States is .aware of that out has not done anything about it, has not advised us. The original allegation is an incredible one. I am only disappointed that the Leader of the Opposition has given any credence or support to it because he has been given briefings by the Director-General of the Australian Security and Intelligence Organ isation and by the Department of Defence, amongst others, and he has visited the joint facilities in which the United States and Australia are full partners and has seen the extent of our cooperation. I ask him, and I ask the House, whether it is conceivable that the United States Govern

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable gentleman knows a full briefing is available to him at any time. I hope that he will take up the matter if he has any concerns about some of the current allegations. I hope also that no members of this House will wilfully try to enlarge allegations which significantly concern events of some dec ades ago, in many instances, and try to suggest that they are relevant to the various services today. Let me give as an example the allegations in relation to Colonel Ellis. He was involved in in

ment would continue co-operation of this kind if it believed for one moment that there was a KGB mole in the senior ranks of the Public Service. If the United States had suspicions it would tell us. The relationship is of that kind; there is not the slightest doubt about that. We would certainly act to see whether those suspicions were unfounded or founded. If the Leader of the Opposition wishes to have a further specific briefing by Mr Justice Woodward, that will be available to him as a matter of course.

telligence matters in Australia some 25 to 30 years ago. Certain allegations have been made about Colonel Ellis in the recent book by Mr Chapman Pincher in the United Kingdom, but these allegations are not new. It became known to various

Allegations of this kind are the stock in trade in certain areas, prompted sometimes by shadowy figures in the world of intelligence. I note also that Brian Toohey recently wrote:

people in Australia that this book was to be In the double agent, triple agent business, the KGB has

published before it was published. I was told of the allegations that would be made in the book and I was told at that time that the allegations

managed to create a debilitating atmosphere within the CIA in which no one is safe from the indiscriminate finger of suspicion.

were not new. A senior officer of my Department If the Leader of the Opposition or anyone else has

confirmed on 3 1 March with Mr Justice Hope any evidence-not indiscriminate allegations-of

that he was fully aware of the allegations about KGB penetration, I invite him to provide it to me.

Colonel Ellis when framing his recommendations But the suggestion that the United States knows

as royal commissioner on intelligence and secur of penetration and does not tell us about it is so

ity. Allegations against Colonel Ellis have no utterly absurd that it should be given no credence

present significance for Australia, as I am advised. by anyone in this House.

Questions Without Notice

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 087

POLAND Mr DEANMy question, which is addressed to the Prime Minister, refers to recent events in Poland between the union Solidarity and the Pol ish Government, and this Government's ex pression of concern about those events. I ask the Prime Minister: What is the current position in Poland and the Government's response to it?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Government is clearly following developments in Poland closely and with a very great deal of concern. Over recent weeks we have been in very close touch with a number of other countries in relation to Poland. It would now seem that the general situation is being aggravated by increased external pressure, notably from some of Poland's so-called allies in the Warsaw Pact. We are concerned that the Soviet media has recently reported Polish de velopments in tendentious terms. We are concerned with the pressure that has apparently been placed upon Poland by the Soviet Union or War saw Pact countries. We view this as an unhelpful intrusion in Polish internal affairs.
In recent months the Polish Government and people have shown a commendable capacity for restraint and moderation in their attempts to solve the country's very serious difficulties. It would seem also that events within the recent 1 2 or 1 8 hours demonstrate again their capacity to resolve their own problems if only they are left alone to do so. Any departure from that course is likely to have serious repercussions not only in Poland but also abroad. The Government has said many times before that the Polish people must be left to resolve their difficulties in their own way without a threat of external interference or co ercion. We can only be disturbed by the knowledge of the extent ofpreparations ofWarsaw Pact countries, and Soviet Union forces, and their capacity to act with great speed and with very little warning in terms of additional military prep arations. The state of readiness of Soviet Union forces on the boundaries of Poland has been very high for months. That carries its own implications of which, I have no doubt, the Government of Poland would be well aware. We have joined with others in publicly expressing our anxiety about the grave consequences of intervention by the Soviet Union for international order, peace, and East-West relations. If the Soviet Union lIlOved to an invasion of Poland the world would not be the same again. These views have been made abundantly clear to the Soviet Government. It would know very plainly where Australia stands.

SECURITY SERVICES Mr LIONEL BOWEN-My question, which is directed to the Prime Minister, relates to a matter raised today by my leader. I also submit that it comes within the special case consideration iden tified by Mr Justice Hope in paragraph 460 of his report. Is the Prime Minister in a position to advise the House whether the Australian Government was informed of British doubts about, and the interrogation of, British agents Hollis and Ellis? If the Government was informed, what a<;tion was taken to vet Australian officials? Mr MALCOLM FRASERThese matters occurred very many years ago. I have already made it plain that since that time we have had our own royal commission. Mr Ellis was involved some 25 to 30 years ago. Obviously I would have no personal knowledge of the details of what oc curred 25 or 30 years ago. 1 have knowledge of the fact that Mr Justice Hope was aware of these allegations at the time he made his report and any thing he needed to say or wanted to say he was able to say. Mr Lionel Bowen-The interrogation period was before Hope. Mr MALCOLM FRASER-If it was even earlier 1 would suggest that it is of even less rel evance to the Australian scene today. Mr Lionel Bowen-You were in government at the time. Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I was not in parliament at the time. I have been advised that Mr Justice Hope was aware of these matters. He was able to report on any matters that he wished. The report of the royal commission postdates any of these matters, whether they relate to Hollis or Ellis. Let me only say that I was advised, before these reports in relation to both gentlemen be came public, that they would be made public. I was also advised of the official attitude in relation to both of them. Therefore, our authorities were aware of the circumstances in relation to Hollis and Ellis. I think that honourable gentlemen opposite are really going on a far-fetched fishing operation, especially since our own royal com mission examined all Australia's security agencies much more recently than when these events oc curred. The royal commission has reported and we have acted upon that report. As the honour able gentleman knows, there is full consultation with the Leader of the Opposition.
SUPERANNUATION Mr TAMBLING-My question is directed to the Minister representing the Minister for Finance. I understand that the Australian

J 088 REPRESENTATIVES 31 March 1981

Questions Withollt Notice

Government Retirement Benefits Office will not consider arrangements for superannuation cover age for the Northern Territory Government's per manent part-time employment scheme until the Commonwealth Public Service Board has determined terms and conditions of employment for its own proposed permanent part-time employment scheme. Can the Minister inform the House whether the Commonwealth intends introducing such a scheme for the Australian Public Service? If so, in the light of the high priority which the Northern Territory Government has attached to introducing its scheme, is the Public Service Board prepared to bring forward that date of introduction.
Mr HOWARD-I will arrange to have the sub stance of the honourable gentleman's question referred to my colleague, Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle. I am aware of the importance attached to the matter by the Northern Territory Government. However, 1 hope that the honourable gentleman would understand that a decision on this has to be looked at in the light of the oper ation of the superannuation scheme as it affects other employees of the Commonwealth. The matter has taken some time, but it is a complex one. I will take it up with Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle with a view to providing a more detailed answer.
RESOURCE RENTAL TAX Mr KEATING-Did the Prime Minister notice remarks by the senior executive adviser to the Nippon Steel corporation, Mr Saburo Tanabue, that Japanese industry would be prepared to accept a resource rent tax on Australian coal and iron ore exports to that country? In particular, J ask whether he saw a specific rcmark by Mr Tanabue that:
If I were inside the Australian Government I would be thinking that it is not good that just iron ore companies and the collieries are making so much profit, while no money is coming to the Government. It is reasonable for Governments to consider this.
With the weight of opinion in favour of a resource rent tax coming from the Prime Minister's own departments, academics and now one of the most influential i ndustrialists in Japan, will the Government reconsider its objections to such a tax so that, to paraphrase the Prime Minister's own words, every Australian family will share in the benefits from resources development?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-l thank the honourable gentleman for the advice contained in his question about Mr Tanabue.

COMMONWEALTH-STATE TAX SHARING ARRANGEMENTS
Mr McLEAN- - Is the Prime Minister aware of concern being expressed in Western Australia regarding possi b l e fut u r e changes to Commonwealth-State tax sharing arrangements? In assessing the future allocation of funds to Western Australia, will the Government consider not only the natural advantages of that State but also the man-made disadvantages confronting Western Australia in the form of air fare discrimi nation and a more costly, uneven sharing of industry protection and subsidy burdens between all States?
Mr Scott-He answers Dorothy Dixers.
Mr MAICOLM FRASER -I am glad that the honourable gentleman thinks the Leader of the Opposition asks me Dorothy Dixers. Some time ago, because the States recognised that the rela tivities between the States in respect of the moneys that we make available in tax reimburse ment grants may well have altered, or that the needs of the States may have altered, all the Premiers agreed that a report ought to be provided by a special division of the Commonwealth Grants Commission on relativities between the States. This is not a matter of financial concern to the Commonwealth because it affects the breakup of the sum that the Commonwealth would in any case be making available to State governments. All the States agreed that the Grants Commission should be asked to undertake this task.
The Grants Commission will be making a rc port at some time in June. I do not know what the Grants Commission will be taking into account. But I imagine that it will include the total circumstances of the States. It would not be unreason able to .expect that there has been some change since the present relativities were established in 1 959. Even in 1 959, the Commission was still vcry heavily influenced by the relativities that existed at the beginning of uniform taxation in 1 942. It would not be surprising if the Grants Commission recommended some change.
I do not believe that any of us should try to pre empt the arguments that might be adduced. I have no doubt that, in common with other States, Western Australia has argued its case vcry fully. I have no doubt that the States will have put before the Grants Commission the arguments about pro tection. That is an argument, of course, that flows in a number of different directions because significant Western Australian industries also have experienced some degree of protection. I could only suggest that all honourable gentlemen wait until the Grants Commission report is available.

Questions Without Notice

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 089

Then we can have an informed debate about this issue where meanwhile we are only speculating. I also add that this part of the subject is not up for debate at the April Premiers Conference because we will not have the Grants Commission report. I have noted a certain amount of sparring going on, getting into position ready to receive that Grants Commission report. But I suggest that that is on the assumption that the Grants Commission report will be coming down in a certain way. I have no idea whether that is so: I can only suggest that we wait to get the facts.
ASIA DAIRY INDUSTRIES (HONG KONG) LTD
Mr KERIN-My question is to the Prime Min ister. I refer to the current Senate inquiry into Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd when the Minister for Communications made the unsworn statement that when he was Minister for Primary Industry he did not know of the breaking of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ar rangements by Asia Dairy Industries. As the former manager of ADl, Mr Tony Webster, has now said in a sworn statement that the Minister did know, who does the Prime Minister believe?
Mr MALCOLM FRASERIf there is any in formation that I can give the honourable gentle man, I will give it.
BEEF SALES Mr HICKS-Is the Minister for Primary In dustry aware of claims by the New South Wales Chairman of the Cattlemen's U nion that Australia is not realising potential beef sales to Asian countries, such as Korea, because Australia's tariff policies are preventing these countries from earning sufficient foreign exchange to fund desired levels of beef imports? Mr NIXON-There is no evidence to suggest that there is any significant relationship between the purchases of beef by various Asian countries and the tariff policies of this country. Indeed, the purchases of beef by the various Asian countries vary quite considerably and for different reasons. If we take Korea, the fact is that the Korean Government reduced the importation of beef for a couple of reasons. It had pressure from its own beefproducers and at the same time it had a doub ling of its oil bill and was concerned about expenditure on foreign exchange. Indeed, on the Korean market we hope that, following the an nouncement of a tender being called by the Korean Government for some 1 2,000 tonnes, that countrymight be back on the market. Asian countries, apart from Japan, since the 1 970s have increased their levels of imports from

some 1 0,000 tonnes to some 55,000 tonnes. Again, for a variety of reasons they have not been in the market so strongly as previously. One of those reasons was that at the height of their purchases beef prices in this country were very low. They were taking advantage of the low beef prices in the country. Since the increase in price on export markets the Australian marketers have taken advantage of improved market opportunities in other countries to the cost of sales in Japan. There has not been an availability of beef to service all markets.
As to the other part of the honourable member's question in relation to tariffs, [ point out that the Government recognises the import ance of improved access for developing countries into developed country markets such as Australia. I believe that we have a good record in this regard, particularly in comparison with other advanced industrialised countries. For example, the Australian system of tariff preferences for developing countries is designed to assist them in competing for access to our market. A reflection of this pref erential treatment is seen in the fact that our per capita imports from developing countries are significantly greater than those of the United States, the European Economic Community and Japan. Similarly, even in regard to protected areas such as textiles and clothing imports, the Australian market reflects a much higher proportion of such imports than is the case in most major Western developed countries. Summing up, [ would say that there is not a great deal of substance in the claim made by the New South Wales Chairman of the Cattlemen's Union.

SPORT: NATIONAL GAMES

Mr COHEN-My question is directed to the

Minister Minister

.fworillHroemcaellAtfhfaaitrsbaefnodreEnthveirolansmt eenlet.cTtiohne

the Government adopted the Australian Labor

Party's policy on sport with regard to the holding

of a national games in 1 983. I ask: What progress

has been made towards holding those games in

1 9 8 3 , as a n n o u n c e d by t h e M in is t e r 's

predecessor?

Mr WILSON-Over the last 1 0 days I have had before me a vast range of issues on which it has been necessary to be fully briefed. I will ascer tain the current position in that regard and advise the honourable member.

CASEIN EXPORTS TO UNITED STATES Mr FISHER-Can the Minister for Primary
Industry inform the House of the latest position regarding efforts by United States dairying interests to have restrictions placed on Australian

1 090 REPRESENTATIVES 31 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

casein exports to that country, which, in 1 979-80, took 9,657 tonnes, or 70 per cent, of our total casein exports?
Mr NIXON-The Government is concerned about reports that advances are again being made in the United States Congress for the imposition of restrictions on casein and milk protein imports. The value of this trade to Australia is 'some $ 1 7.5m and represents some 70 per cent of our total exports of casein. We have made represen tations to the United States pointing to the ad verse impact of any such action on the Australian dairying industry and urging the Administration to resist pressures to introduce quantitative im port restrictions. J am pleased to note that the United States Senate decided not to amend the 1 981 Farm Bill to provide for restrictions on casein imports, but I understand that the Department of Agriculture is doing some work on this for the United States Administration. We will be making representations to the United States Government pointing out the Australian Government's position on the matter.
TUNA FISHING INDUSTRY

majority of members of the tuna industry of that State, want the freeze on licences in the industry lifted. The same thing applies in Victoria and Western Australia. The same thing does not apply in South Australia, that Government having changed its view about the situation which was considered last year. That Government and the industry want the freeze to continue. I met the President of the Australian Fishing Industry . Council in Perth on Monday morning and had discussions with him on the matter. He put certain propositions to me; I have those propositions under consideration and when I finally determine them ] will make an announcement.
THIRTY-FIVE HOUR WORKING WEEK Mr BURR-I s the Prime Minister aware of an
application by the Victorian Government to the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission to have its decision to grant a 35-hour working week to workers at the Altona petro-chemical plant reconsidered? Does the Federal Government sup p o r t the a pplication by the Victorian Government?

Mr WALLISMy question is directed to the Minister for Primary Industry. The Minister will be aware of the concern expressed by representa tives of the tuna fishing industry about the reported Government decision to lift the freeze on licences in that industry. Is the Minister aware of recent Press statements that fishermen in the industry were opposed to the lifting of the freeze, and of claims 'that the tuna industry was in a mess, and that now is not the time to lift the freeze, apparently only that foreign interests can be served'? I understand that the Minister was to meet the Australian Fishing Industry Council in Adelaide recently. Can he inform the House of the result of those discussions and whether there has been any change in the attitude of the Government to the lifting of the freeze on such licences?

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I discussed this matter with my colleague the Minister for Indus trial Relations shortly before lunch. The Minister was about to approach the Conciliation and Arbi tration Commission to strongly support the appli cation of the Victorian Government, but he has advised me that the Arbitration Commission had already turned down that application and there fore we had no opportunity to join with the Victorian Government in that matter. The honour able gentleman is quite right to draw the attention of the House again to the great concern we must all have for the repercussions if the Altona deal is repeated right around Australia and if there is a continuing move to a 35-hour week, leading to higher costs of production, and therefore leading to the sale of fewer Australian goods and so to the employment of fewer Australians.

Mr NIXON-Today being 3 1 March, I believe that it is 1 2 months to the day since this Government announced that the freeze would be continued until 3 1 March 1981 and would then be lifted. In the interim l 2-month period an economic survey of the industry was to be made and soundings taken as to the future of the freeze. The decision to lift the freeze was taken 1 2 months ago or more at a meeting I had with State Ministers with fishing interests. The present situation is somewhat mixed. Differing views are being taken by people interested in the tuna industry from the various States. For example, the New South Wales Government and, as 1 understand it, the

CO-OPERATIVE FARMERS AND GRAZIERS DIRECT MEAT SUPPLY LTD
Mr JOHN BROWN-My question, dirccted to the Treasurer, refers to a really dilapidated meat works. Does he reeall the provision in April 1 978 of a guarantee from this Government to support partly a loan of $9m to rescue the Victorian Co-operative Farmers and Graziers Direct Meat Ltd from bankruptcy? Does he also recall that in a speech I made in the House at that time. I predicted that this inefficient body would be back within three years looking for some more? In the light of statements made recently by the Victorian

Questions Without Notice

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 09 1

Premier, does the Treasurer agree that my fore

DEFENCE EQUIPMENT

casts of doom were accurate and prescient? What is the present situation with regard to the $4.5m of taxpayers' funds so recklessly pork-barrelled?

Mr SCHOLES-I ask the Minister for De fence: Is it a fact that the assessment teams con sidering the weapons systems required by the Aus

Mr HOWARD-I say to the honourable member with all due respect-he is a member I respect very much-that I do not have an instant

tralian defence forces, namely, replacement missiles for the obsolete missiles currently on the Mirage aircraft and helicopters for the FFG7 frig ates named in the list which the Minister recently

recall of every speech he has made. However, I re member that the general drift of his remarks on that occasion was critical of what the Government was doing. It was a situation where, frankly, the Government had to make a choice between the practice of providing a Government guaran tee in a commercial situation, which, as a matter of general principle, the Government and I do not support-I hope that the honourable member for Parramatta does not support it either-and, at the same time, recognising the very keenly felt views of a number of people representing a significant community in Australia who were concerned to secure growerparticipation in an enterprise which was fairly and properly seen by them at that time to have prospects of success if only it could be given a little assistance over some temporary

announced, are currently not able to visit France to examine the weapons systems which the De partment of Defence and the Minister have desig nated because of the interference of the Department of Trade and Resources? Can the Minister assure the House that trade considerations will not supersede the requirements of the Defence Force in vital areas where other equipment is not available to meet its needs?
Mr KILLEN-The answer to the honourable gentleman's question is no. My understanding is that one of the assessment teams is in the United States of America and will be shortly on its way to England and Europe, if not this week then next week. I think that the other one left Australia last Friday.

difficulties. As I recall the circumstances, although it was several years ago, in essence that is what was involved. As to the precise situation, so that I do not in any way mislead the honourable gentleman or the HOijse, I will find out exactly where things stand and I will further inform hini.

INSURANCE BROKERS Mr N. A. BROWN-Has the Treasurer seen the news today of the failure of another firm of in surance brokers in Victoria, coming on top of two other recent failures? Does he not feel that this is further evidence of a very disturbing situation

with respect to insurance brokers about which

BIOTECHNOLOGY

something must be done? Is he concerned about

Mr BARRY JONES-I ask the Prime Minis the implications of this series of failures, particu

ter whether the Government recognises the enor larly the most recent one mentioned in the news

mous economic significance of biotechnology today? Is he satisfied that the previous attitude of

which appears likely to be the greatest area of in waiting for inquiries and investigations is really

dustrial growth in the 1 980s. If so, what specific adequate? Is there not a more urgent need for

steps is the Government taking to promote bio some action to be taken?

technology in Australia and to study the major associated ethical problems, including cloning and aging? Is this another example of a high tech nology industry where once again Australia has missed the bus? Is the Government aware of the Spinks report in Great Britain and the Pelissolo report in France which raise the subject of bio technology and the importance of it to modern governments?

Mr Jacobi-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I draw your attention to Question on Notice No. 4 1 4 standing in my name on the Notice Paper. There are two questions involved. Had the honourable member for Diamond Valley restricted himself to the first part of his question, he would have been all right.
Mr N. A. Brown-Mr Speaker, I wish to speak
to that point of order. I referred to a specific

Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-I am afraid that the honourable gentleman has the advantage of me. I will certainly seek the latest report which is avail

company failure-a specific case of an insurance broker-which is not the subject of either of the questions on the Notice Paper.

able from officers of the Department of Science Mr SPEAKER-I will allow the question be

and Technology as to the advantage of the par cause part of it is not covered by the question of

ticular discipline to which the honourable gentle the honourable member for Hawker. Obviously, if

man refers. I will provide him with that infor part of the question is to be answered what the

mation as soon as possible.

Treasurer says may carry over into those areas

1 092 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

contained in the question asked on notice by the honourable member for Hawker. Perhaps I might indicate to the Treasurer that, in permitting him to answer the question, the answer to the question on notice of the honourable member for Hawker may be forthcoming shortly.
Mr HOWARD-My attention has been drawn to the most recent failure of a Victorian insurance broker. As recently as last week I met representa tives of the two broker organisations and dis cussed with each of them the views of their re spective associations regarding the question of Federal Government legislation in this area. I am bound to tell the House that there is not una nimity of opinion between those organisations as to what should be done. I think it would be fair to say that the knee-jerk reaction is to legislate in this area. I am not wholly convinced that legislation is as necessary as some urge. I would point out to the House that the Law Reform Commission's report indicated that the total amount of money involved in the brokers which had failed to the date of compilation of that report will be less than 2 per cent of the total premium income of insurance brokers throughout Australia. I can tell the honourable member for Diamond Valley, the honourable member for Hawker and others interested in this matter that I hope within the next two or three weeks to put a submission to the Government canvassing this issue. I can assure the honourable member for Diamond Valley that the concerns implicit in his question will be addressed in that submission.
COMMONWEALTH CENSUS Mr LES JOHNSON-I address my question to the Prime Minister. Has a circular gone to all departments and statutory authorities advising that approval has been given to public servants to supplement their income by acting as Commonwealth census officers? Will the Prime Minister exhibit similar concern about the income needs of the unemployed, especially young school leavers and means test affected pensioners, by giving simi lar priority to their employment as census takers? Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I will examine the matter that the honourable member raises. I was not aware that a circular of that kind has gone to all members of the Public Service. But I will seek advice in relation to it. I will see what advice can be given to the honourable gentleman. I will treat the question as being on notice.
FUTURE AIRPORT NEEDS OF SYDNEY Mr CONNOLLY-I direct my question to the
Minister for Transport. The Minister will be

aware of the allegation of Premier Wran regard ing the construction of a second airport for Sydney and his comments on the Major Airport Needs of Sydney inquiry. Could the Minister advise the House what in fact, as the Government sees it, are the needs for a second airport for Sydney in the coming decade?
Mr HUNT-As the honourable member would understand, after three years of deliber ation the New South Wales Government with drew State Government officials from the com mittee known as the Major Airport Needs of Sydney committee. The withdrawal of State par ticipation occurred in December 1 979. Since then, the New South Wales Government has not given any formal indication of its views as to its future requirements so far as the major airport needs of Sydney are concerned. This is despite repeated re quests from me. In the past, M r Wran and his Government have been reported as expressing a variety of views as to what should happen in regard to the future airport needs of Sydney. I understand from a newspaper report that there was a State Government report. Another newspaper report indicated that Mr Bedford de nied there was a State Government report. There have been suggestions_ that a second airport should be built at either one of four sites out in the wt:stern and northern fringes of Sydney. But, as the honourable member suggests, there is a very real interim problem as far as Sydney's airport needs are concerned. Even if a second airport site is chosen, it will take 1 2 to 1 5 years to complete the new airport. That will require some amendment to existing facilities at the Sydney airport structure. I hope that the New South Wales Government will sit down with the Commonwealth Government and talk about what needs to be done to overcome the interim problems involved in meeting the airport needs of Sydney. 1 hope that, in response to a request from this Government, we will be able to get on with mean ingful discussions. Too much time has already been lost. Decisions need to be taken; otherwise
Sydney airport will no longer hold its premier pos
ition as the major international gateway.
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF SPORT Mr CHARLES-My question is directed to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment. I refer to newspaper reports which state that the Director of the Australian Institute of Sport is 'furious' about the Government's string of 'broken promises' with respect to the Institute. Is the Minister concerned that, apart from a: lengthy list of teething problems noted in these reports, a major cause of concern in the Institute are the

Questions Without Notice

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 093

remarks attributed to a senior officer of the Department of Finance to the effect that the Government expects the Institute to become self sufficient? By what authority would any officer of a department other than the Minister's be able to make such remarks? Does the Government expect the Institute to become self-sufficient? If so, when? Will the Minister press for the Institute to be funded on a triennial basis in line with other higher education bodies?
Mr WILSON-I have seen the reports to which the honourable gentleman refers. In fact last week one of the early appointments I had was in response to a request from Mr Talbot. He had the opportunity to brief me on the present situation of the Australian Institute of Sport. I met him last Wednesday and had detailed discussions with him. He drew to my attention some of the problems that he perceived. 1 was aware that a meeting of the board of the Institute was to be held last Thursday. For a number of reasons, I was not able to meet the Chairman of that board either before or after its meeting last week, but I will be seeing him later today. Mr Talbot brought to my attention his concern at some of the difficul ties that have arisen in an organisation in its first year of operation. In its first year it has on its roll more than 1 50 athletes selected from 700 applicants.
One of the difficulties to which Mr Talbot referred was the matter of the use of certain facilities. I assured him that I would take up that matter with my colleague the Minister for the Capital Territory. I have had preliminary discussions with the Minister and will pursue those discussions in order to resolve the difficulties. The Government holds the view that the Australian Institute of Sport will form a significant part of our national sports program and provide unique opportunities for our leading sportsmen and sportswomen. The Government is committed to the sensible and mature development of the Institute. I hope that in the immediate future I will be able to discuss with the relevant authorities and officers of my Department the issues now raised by Mr Talbot, some of which he did not refer to in our discussions last week.

REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL Mr SPEAKER---Pursuant to statute, I present the report of the Auditor-General dated 30 M arch 1981 on audits, examinations and inspec tions carried out under the provisions of the Audit Act and other Acts and generally completed as at 27 February 1981 . Motion (by Mr Sinclair)-by leave-agreed to:
1. That this House, in accordance with the provisions of the Parliamentary Papers Act 1908, authorises the publication of the report of the Auditor-General upon audits, examinations and inspections under the Audit and other Acts, March 198 1.
2. That the paper be printed.
AUSTRALIAN WOOL CORPORATION Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Pri mary Industry) -For the information of honour able members, I present a report prepared by the Australian Wool Corporation on the financial and operational details of the limited offer to purchase scheme over the entire period of its operation from 3 October 1 977 to 30 June 1 980. The accounts included in the report have been audited by the Auditor-General.
AUSTRALIAN FISHERIES COUNCIL Mr NIXON (Gippsland Minister for Pri mary Industry)-For the information of honour able members, I present the resolutions of the Australian Fisheries Council's tenth meeting, held at Darwin on 1 2 September 1 980.
AUSTRALIAN CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION
Mr PEACOCK (Kooyong-Minister for In dustrial Relations) -Pursuant to section 70 of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1 904, I present the twenty-fourth annual report of the President of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission-year ended 1 3 August 1 980.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION Mr CAMPBELL ( Kalgoorlie)-I wish to make a personal explanation. Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?

As to funding, I simply say that there is an ex pectation that the board of management of the In stitute should endeavour to supplement government funding from private sector sources. I am confident that with a co-operative effort between the Government and interested people and organ isations within the private sector, we will build an institute of which this nation and all of its sports mcn and sportswomen can be justly proud.

Mr CAMPBELL-Yes. On Thursday last the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) said that I represented a museum of defects. I think that his words were most distressing and grossly untrue. The only time. I have had contact with the Minister has been in relation to the Eastern Goldfields War M useum. I did so on behalf of a group of vol unteers who are trying very hard to record our heritage for future Australians. I consider that

1 094 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 198 1

Mineral Leases

they are doing an excellent job and should be sup ported. I think it is wrong for people who approach a Minister in regard to a matter that is relevant to his portfolio to be treated in this rather cavalier manner. If he meant the remark to apply in a wider context to my electorate, I might also remind the Minister that my electorate is a very wide--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is entitled to state the misrepresentation and correct it. I ask the honourable gentle man to state the misrepresentation.
Mr CAMPBELL-I do not think it is entirely covered by that, Mr Speaker. My electorate is a very wide electorate with many vibrant interest groups who contribute a disproportionate amount to our export earnings. It may be that the Minister thinks that these people are museum defects.
Mr SPEAKER-I am sorry, I cannot allow the honourable gentleman to continue.
Mr CAMPBELL-I just make the point that it is a very poor show.
ASSENT TO BILLS Assent to the following Bills reported:
Shipping Registration Bill 1981 . Flags Amendment Bill 1981 . Navigation Amendment Bill 198 1 . Currency Amendment Bill 198 1 . Dairying Research Amendment Bill 198 1 . Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Bill
1981 . Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Bill 1981 . Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Bill 1981 . Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Bill
198 1 . Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Bill 1981 . Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Bill 1981 . Coal Excise Amendment Bill 1981 .

MINERAL LEASES Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The unsatisfactory nature of the granting of mineral leases in Australia resulting in a continuing concentration of Aus tralin mineral wealth in the hands of foreign corporations, particularly in Queensland.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (3. 1 5)- The Opposition has proposed this matter of public import ance for discussion because it is disturbed by the growing level of foreign ownership of Australian resources, particularly in the State of Queensland. I should like to quote initially from an Australian Bureau of Statistics publication entitled 'Foreign Control of the Australian Mining Industry1976-7T, which was the last year that the Australian Bureau of Statistics collected information un foreign participation simply because the Australian Government, the Fraser Government, dismantled the foreign participation section of the Bureau in 1 978. The table shows the foreign control of the mining industry. These value added percentages are listed as follows: New South Wales, 44.5 per cent; Western Australia, 47.8 per cent; Tasmania, 47 per cent; and Queensland, 84 per cent. The Queensland figures are almost double the participation figures of foreign companies in the other States. I seek leave to in corporate in Hansard this table from the Australian Bureau of Statistics.
Leave granted. The table read as follows-

FOREIGN CONTROL OF MINING INDUSTRY, BY STATES 1976-77

Establishments operating at end June

Value added

Total

Foreign control

Foreign Total control

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania

No.

No. %

$m

%

464

50 10.8

855.3

44.5

277

1 2 4.3

548.7

(a)

225

20 8.9

912.6

84.0

100

9 9.0

104.7

(a)

1 34

26 19.4

907.5

47.8

63

8 1 2.7

1 1 8.5

47.0

Mineral Leases

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 095

Establishments operating at end June

Value added

Total

Foreign control

Foreign Total control

Northern Territory and Australian Capital Territory

No.

No. %

$m

%

24

4.2

1 1 4.6

(a)

Australia

1,287 126 9.8 3,56 1 .8

59.0

v Notes: (a) Not a ailable for publication.
Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics; Foreign Control in the MiningIndustry, 1976-77.

Mr KEATING- -I thank the House. I have

looked also at the level of foreign ownership in the

various cess of

projects which are operating or in being built. These levels are as

tfhoell;owros:

Collinsville-New1ands mine 53.9 per cent; Oaky

 Creek 64 per cent;
Daunea and Norwich

Goonyella Park 80

erPecaeknt;DBolwacnks

water 89.2 per cent; Curragh 49.6 per cent; Sirius

Creek 1 00 per cent; Blair Athol 76.8 per cent;

Capella 76.8 per cent; Hail Creek 46.3 per cent;

German Creek 85.8 per cent; Tarong 6 1 per cent

and Dalby-Milmerran 1 00 per cent. It is disas

thioguhs

for a level

nation like of foreign

Australia ownership

to in

find this very Queensland,

one of the areas which will be burgeoning, in

terms of the development of our resources indus

try. It is disastrous to find these figures so high

particularly in the steaming and coking coal in

dustries. Last week the position was exacerbated

when we saw the Queensland Government grant

an authority to prospect to a consortium or

d companies which included British Petroleum Ltd
Drayton Mining Development Co. Pty Ltd an

Westfield Ltd. The position is that foreign owner

ship in Queensland is being exacerbated rather

than diminished. The behaviour of the

Queensland Government last week will not help

to change the position one iota.

Last week the Opposition raised in the House

the relationship between these companies and the

Queensland Government and the way in which

 the Queensland Government awarded the tender

inoVitePd,

Drayton and BP, amongst

Westfield. I n others-BP

that speech I is the foreign

company of that tender consortium-to answer

publicly a number of questions. The first one was

to make public its dealings with Mr Camm, the

former Queensland Mines Minister. British Pet

roleum has done so in a statement released under

 the name of Mr Alex Gorrie, its chief executive. I
bmylsvooSliylnrevdiLteWesltlBiePDTtroahlsetasoysn,hwoohwricaThnhidsieawsschoyimnittpecaraenmsyteso,wtoannebdde

Westfield. The questions I asked related to the

mechanics of this marriage between these companies for the process of the tender application.

British Petroleum failed to address itself to this

issue in its reply released late last week. I invited

? BP and the other companies involved, that is

Drayton had been

an paid

Wto ethstefiBelJ.de,lkteo-PseatyerswehneFthoeurndmaotinoeny.

Mr Gorrie replied that BP had not contributed

anything to political parties. At this point we have

heard nothing from either Drayton or Westfield.

They have remained silent throughou{ and have

made no response whatsoever about any financial

relations they may have had with the National

Country Party, the Bjelkc-Pctersen Foundation

or anything else. [ invited BP to make public its

pteonrdtuemr .styubtmoisesxioamnsm. soe

that we could them but BP

have failed

an to

op re

spond to his requesl. All it has said is that it does

not contribute to political parties. Whilst [ accept

that assurance-BP also referred to Mr Camm's

visit to the company's hcadquarters in May

1 978-no mention was made of the arrangements

with Drayton and Westfield and there was no

publishing of the tender. British Petroleum has re

ferred basically to what it suits it to refer to-the

issues where it felt it could give a definitive reply.

It has not referred to the arrangements entered

into with Drayton and Westfield or to the other

issues which I have just raised. The situation be

came clear over the weekend in an article by Mr

Allen which appeared in the Sunday Mail. The

article stated in part:

Mr Gibbs alleged in a press statement on March 24 that Dr Edwards was a party to the tender assessment.

'I took with me a supplementary 31 -page document to Cablllet. It had a summary of each applicant's offer'' Mr Gibbs said.

The Mines Minister said this document was examined in de tail by a Cabinet committee which included Dr Edwards.

'Officers from the Treasury were included in the final assessment of the document., before Cabinet announced its decision to award the authority to prospect to a consortium led by BP', M r Gibbs said.

1 096 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Mineral Leases

Yet twice in the state House, D r Edwards has denied that he was party to the evaluation of the 32 tenders.

status of that company is when its previous coal interests were so poorly managed that a takeover

On March 1 2, the Treasurer and Deputy Premier said: 'Neither 1 nor my officers were involved in the discussions in regard to the assessment of the tender'.
Then in reply to the Acting Opposition Leader, Mr D 'Arcy, in the House on March 25, Dr Edwards said:
'1 am unaware of the details of the proposals by other tenderers'.

was imminent and had been for some time before CSR finally took it over. Fortunately for Australia, the company remained in Australian hands. One wonders what the intelligence is now of saying to Sir Leslie Thiess and his company, Drayton, particularly at the twilight stage of his

If it is all above board, why does not the Queensland Government release all the tender documents? If the Queensland Government says that this matter was decided competitively in a Cabinet situation, with a complete understanding of all the details, why not make all the tender pro

active commercial life: 'Here is a major coal area in Queensland'. I have no doubt that Westfield is a substantial company but, again, what is the basis on which it has become involved? Those companies seem to be a most unlikely combination.

posals public so that the public is in a position to judge the comparative merits of each tender? Ap parently, the Queensland Government does not want to do this. If the Government says it has nothing to hide, what is the point of not making the tenders public? I find it very strange that the British National Coal Board was given a 1 6 per cent share of the German Creek major coking coal deposit in Queensland when the same British National Coal Board is opposing the Utah company's coal exports to Great Britain to the conglomerate steel maker there, the British Steel Corporation.

If BP knew of any arrangements which Dray ton or Westfield had made with any member or members of the Queensland Cabinet outside the tendering processes it would be as guilty as the other parties if the tendering processes had been subverted, whether BP was involved directly or indirectly. That is the issue. Drayton, Westfield and BP have been very silent on it. If we are to hear more from them, I would like to hear how they got together. I would like to hear some ex pressions from the three companies, particularly Drayton and Westfield, as to their dealings with the Queensland Government and members of its

It seems to me a curious way of expressing the Cabinet outside the normal tendering processes. I

British National Coal Board's gratitude for being invite them all once again to clear up this matter

allowed to participate in a substantial and import and not be reticent about telling the public of the

ant coking coal venture, to find that it, a state in situation.

strumentality of the British Government, opposes coal exports from Australia to Britain. Other British companies. have been awarded large and important areas of coal in Queensland, even though the British National Coal Board persists in this behaviour. The BP company is 46 per cent owned by the British Government. It is in part a creature of the British Government. We are awarding it a major coal lease. No one would object to this if we could establish that it was done in a competitive tender situation. That is not clear. It appears that Drayton and Westfield either jointly or severally have made arrange ments with the Queensland Government, or have come to agreements with the National Party lead ership of the Queensland Government, which are outside the terms of the competitive situation of the tenders submitted by these companies.
Drayton is owned by Sir Leslie Thiess and his

I repeat my assertion that the Queensland Government should table all the tenders and let a public judgment be made. This was the first major competitive situation for the awarding of a major coallease in a state of Australia. It was a competi tive situation which was essentially squandered in the eyes of most of the other participants, public commentators and people in the industry. That is a very bad precedent to have been established. I regard it most seriously, particularly when we are in this position of having British companies favoured in Queensland, where the companies have been generously awarded areas. We then find that their creatures in Great Britain-the Bri tish National Coal Board amongst others-are ve hemently opposed to British steel importing Australian coal. That seems a funny way of rewarding that kind of behaviour.

family. Westfield is owned by a property devel Overall we are seeing a general problem with

oper. It is no news to anybody that the mining foreign investment. The repatriated dividends

interests of Thiess were hived off and taken over which are flowing from investments in Australia

by CSR Ltd not so long ago. It is no longer a bur made in the 1 960s are now a substantial drain on

geoning mining company. No doubt Sir Leslie the balance of payments. Because we have been a

Thiess has experience, but he is now an elderly balance of trade deficit country for most of our

man, and one wonders what the management history since the war we have been keeping some

Mineral Leases

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 097

equilibrium in the balance of payments by bring ing in capital inflow. The more inflow we have, the more we are committed. Equity is a drain upon dividends forever while debt capital is a drain upon dividends for a while. While we aug ment out balance of payments with slabs of equity, we commit our country irrevocably to a continuing payout of dividends. In other words, foreign investment is addictive. The more of it we have; the more dividends we have: The more divi dends we have; the more capital we need to maintain the balance of payments. So we find ourselves travelling down this road. The only obvious benefits which must accrue to this country can come through a continuing and growing level of Australian ownership.
The Government talks about the 50 per cent policy. The unfortunate thing about the 50 per cent policy is that it now becomes a 50 per cent maximum, not a 50 per cent minimum. For years the Opposition has been encouraging the Government to adopt the 50 per cent policy as a mini mum. In some areas I believe that the Government is now trying to reach that objective. The figure of 50 per cent has now in the Government's terms become a maximum. Organisations of Australian companies or Australian companies with 100 per cent Australian equity are virtually invited to bring their foreign partners along to be considered in these major projects. I think this is a great shame for Australia. Certainly, a lot of benefits from the resources industry will simply dissipate if we do not lift the level of Australian ownership.
Handing out authorities to prospect at that basic stage to foreign companies is absolutely stu pid because Australian companies are then admit ted later, in some cases by paying a huge premium on the value of the shares, simply because a foreign company has been given the right to prospect to quantity a reserve and to come up with some preliminary engineering plans. It is not fair to Australians. It does not reap the benefit for Australians from foreign investment. I t squanders opportunities which the Australian people should have. The Government will have to be ever more vigilant about this authority to prospect issue to ensure that the States are just not handing away to companies some of the best and most important coal areas in the world. In this squalid situation one finds that tender processes for competitive bids are upset by political preferences. I ask BP, Drayton and Westfield-not one of them but all-to say what arrangements thay have had together, to say what arrangements they have made with the Queensland Cabinet and any members of that Cabinet either individually or

corporately, and to make this matter clear. I call upon the Queensland Government once again to table all the tender documents and let a public evaluation be made.
Mr BAUME ( Macarthur) (3.30) -ln case the House has forgotten the topic of the matter of public importance raised by the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating)-which he hardly touched on-it is:
The unsatisfactory nature of the granting of mineral leases in Australia resulting in a continuing concentration of Australian mineral wealth in the hands of foreign corporations, particularly in Queensland.
The honourable member spent 90 per cent of his time complaining about alleged deals in Queensland, whereas this is a very serious matter which affects the whole of Australia and should be examined on that basis. After all, State governments grant these licences. It is not a federal matter at all. It is a farce for the honourable member to beat his breast in this Parliament about matters that, constitutionally, are specifically under the control of the State parliaments. I wonder whether the allegation of stupidity which the honourable member, at the conclusion of his re marks, directed at State governments relates, for example, to the former Dunstan Government of South Australia. Mr Dunstan clearly took the view, and stated it repeatedly, that he wasquite in favour of allowing foreigners to explore for min erals to their heart's content in South Australia provided the actual mining was carried out on a basis of 50 per cent Australian ownership. Appar ently, according to the honourable member for Blaxland, Mr Dunstan is stupid, although perhaps that might be an unkind comment to make about him. A similar comment might apply to New South Wales. The fact is that as long as under the present Federal Government guidelines, the ulti mate ownership is at least 50 per cent Australian, it seems that this Government's role, which is what we should be discussing here, is proper and reasonable.
Some of the grants of mining licences in Australia certainly fall far short of what is totally desirable. I refer especially, of course, to what has happened in New South Wales, a subject which was avoided by the honourable member, who is the President of the New South Wales Branch of the Australian Labor Party. Obviously, he would be terribly embarrassed to acknowledge the reality of the granting of mining and exploration li cences in that State. I refer him especially to a company called Energy Recycling of Australia. It is not a multinational. It is one which was given by the New South Wales Government, in the course of a deal, the reasons for which I hope will be

1 098 REPRESENTATIVES 31 March 1981

Mineral Leases

made public sooner o r later, a mining licence in thing for Australia. My view is that it is wonderful

the Ulan area, a very rich coal area, simply be for the development of this country that inter

cause it had managed to convince the Premier national corporations are prepared to invest their

that it had a magic formula for converting coal money, in partnership with Australians, in such

into some super fuel. I do not know what special activity.

arguments or inducements of an intellectual kind enabled the Premier to come to the curious con

Mr O'Keefe-Hear, hear!

clusion that this straw company had the capacity, the knowledge, the skill, and the licences to justify the granting to it of such an enormous benefit.
Mr Keating-The authority has now been withdrawn.

Mr BAUME-I am glad that the honourable member for Paterson agrees. In his electorate, as in my own, immense development of natural resources has been undertaken by Australian oriented companies in particular. In fact, the alle

Mr BAUME-The honourable member has gation made in this matter of public importance awakened from his sloth and states that it has that there has been domination by foreign corpor

been withdrawn. Certainly it has, after for some ations certainly is not substantiated by what is

time blocking other corporations from developing the area and only because the corporation was exposed by the honourable Ted Pickering, a col league of mine in the Upper House of the Parliament of New South Wales, as one which had no capacity to undertake this work. The granting of

happening in the electorate of Paterson-except to the extent that the New South Wales Government has invited multinationals to participate in its own development, to provide funds and ex pertise. One has only to look at how the Elec tricity Commission of New South Wales finds

the licence was a farce in the first place and is a itself sufficiently in need of assistance to offer 5 1

typical example of the way in which a State per cent of some of its developments in the government can be seduced. 1 do not know what Hunter Valley to overseas consortiums. I am not the seduction was, or its terms. I cannot under criticising overseas consortiums. I am dramatising

stand why a man who presents such a reasonable the fact that they are useful, and to Australia's

face as does the Premier of New South Wales advantage. One has only to note that the New

should be seduced into providing a company of South Wales Government actively seeks their

straw, comprising nothing but hot air, with such a participation in its mining ventures.

licence. Certainly, it demonstrates that there may be some accuracy in the point raised by the honourable member for Blaxland. Perhaps some States, such as New South Wales, do not indeed follow the proper course; that the way in which mining licences are granted in some States is of an unsatisfactory nature. I have particularly drama tised the position in the State of New South Wales in that example.
It was interesting to listen to the usual diatribe against foreign investment in Australia from the honourable member, who would notice, I sup pose, that in New South Wales a lot of explo ration is being undertaken by foreign multi nationals. Although it might offend and upset the honourable member, I draw to his attention an area in the Riverina district where the Mitsubishi organisation is undertaking the actual work of ex ploration. Surely, a consortium is involved but it seems to me that the very principle espoused by the honourable member for Blaxland, that it is stupid to allow foreign multinationals to perform exploration, is in conflict with the approach taken in New South Wales, where Mitsubishi Development Pty Ltd, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Mitsubishi Corporation of Tokyo, is carrying out the drilling being performed by the Corporation.

For example, the honourable member for Blaxland might consider the granting of the min eral lease in respect 'of Tender Area No. I , which recently was dealt with by the New South Wales Government. Costain and Mitsubishi, in partner ship with a consortium, are developing an area at, I believe, Warkworth in the electorate of Pater son. Thus we have the reality of a partnership developing mineral resources in Australia. I refer especially to the coal industry because the honourable member for Blaxland did so, but one can see the same thing happening in other indus tries at the hands of a range of corporations. One can cite an enormous list of major Australian corporations which have major influence and control in the mineral industry. r refer to such huge corporations as BHP which may be said to dominate the coal industry. To my knowledge there is no bigger underground miner in Australia. It is a wholly-owned Australian corporation, but we do not hear the Opposition complaining of that. All we ever hear is its criticism of the fact that BHP earns profits. That is the typical knocking, belly aching approach of the Opposition in this Parliament and in the other parliaments of Australia in which it is represented.

Frankly, I believe that such activity is a great Mr O'Keefe-They do not like profits.

Mineral Leases

31 March 1981 REPRESENTATlVES 1 099

Mr BAUME As the honourable member for Paterson says, the Labor Party does not like profits. It maintains a consistently anti-profit approach to the Australian corporations in the min erals area which are working for Australians and providing dividends for Australians. Opposition supporters continually attack such corporations when they make a profit. That attack was cer tainly manifest when Labor was in government and wiped out Peko-Wallsend's tax-free reserves which had been properly earned as a result of a deal and understanding reached with the Government. The same happened to many other Australian corporations, which were massively disadvantaged by the anti-profit attitudes of Labor, which are maintained now that it is in Opposition. Those corporations have suffered their greatest assault not from the competition offered by foreign-owned multinationals but at the hands of the Australian Labor Party, which has attacked their profitability, reduced their capacity to com pete with multinationals and has done what it could do to hamstring the development of a strong and effective Australian mineral industry. That is pretty evident when one examines the level of mineral activity, search activity, development in the oil industry and so on when Labor was in office. If one does that one sees the reality of what I am saying. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard, to show a somewhat different trend, two tables from a study of profitability in the Australian mining industry called 'Minerals Industry Survey 1 980'. The tables relate to aggregate profit and loss, as well as to government and taxation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)Is leave granted?
Mr KeatingWho were they compiled by? Mr BAUMEThe tables were compiled dur ing a survey conducted by Coopers and Lybrand. I sought t h e approval of t h e Opposition spokesman. Mr KeatingThat was compiled for the mining industry. Does the honourable member understand that?

Mr BAUMEDoes the honourable member want to debate this topic?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKERIs leave granted? Mr Keating Yes. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKERLeave is granted. The tables read as follows
AGGREGATE PROFIT AND LOSS STATEMENT ($m)

Year ended June

1 977 1978 1979 1 980

Mining Sales Smelting and Refining Sales Other Revenue

2.721 2,852 3,397 4.240 1 ,377 1 ,48 1 1 ,860 2,472
106 103 90 1 1 8

Total Revenue

4,204 4,436 5.347 6,830

Suppliers
Labour Cost Government Services Depreciation and Amortiza-
tion Interest Exchange Losses (Gains) Sundry Taxes

1 ,252 982 1 70
469 207 50 22

1 ,453 1 ,042
194
462 203 23 31

1 ,8 1 1 1 . 1 94
246
581 221 27 38

2,372 \ .J64
268
622 253
19 44

Costs Before Resources Based

Taxes and Income Taxes

3, 1 52 3.408 4. 1 1 8 4,942

Operating Profit Before Re

source Based Taxes and In

come Taxes

1 ,052 1 ,028 1 .229 1 ,888

Mineral Royalties, Tenements

and Mining Licence Fees

1 26 1 1 2 1 5 5 225

Coal Export Duty

9 1 8 1 84 76

Income Tax

385 390 410 7 1 2

Direct Taxes
Operating Profit After Re source Based Taxes and [n come Taxes
Extraordinary Losses (Gains) Tax on Extraordinaries Extraordinary Losses (Gains)
Net of Tax

602 583 649 1 ,0 1 3

450 445 580 875

36 (22) 53

2

(8) 5 ( 1 2)

28 ( 1 7) 4 1

Nel Profit

421 462 539 874

GOVERNMENT AND TAXATION

Year ended June

1 977 1 978 1 979 1980 1 977 1978 1 979 1 980

$m

Percentages

Taxes paid by companiesMineral Royalties, Tenements and Mining Li-

cence Fees

1 26

1 12

1 55

225 1 4.0 1 2.3 1 5.5 1 5.6

Coal Export Duty

91

81

84

76 1 0. 1

8.9

8.4

5.3

Resource Based Taxes Income Tax
Direct Taxes

217

1 93

239

30 1

24.1

2 1 .2 23.9 20.9

377

395

398

7 1 2 42.0 43.6 39.8 49.3

594

588

637 1 ,0 1 3 66. 1

64.8 63.7 70.2

1 1 00 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Mineral Leases

Year ended June

Land Taxes and Rates Payroll Tax Other Taxes

Total Company Taxes

Taxes paid byEmployees-Group Tax

.....

Lenders and Shareholders for Withholding Tax

Total

Provision ofGovernment Services

1977 1978 1979 1 980 1977 1978 1979 1980

$m

Percentages

13

19

22

21

1.4

2. 1

2.2

1 .4

40

43

50

56

4.5

4.7

5.0

3.9

9

12

16

23

1.1

1.3

1 .6

1 .6

656

662

725 1 . 1 1 3 73. 1

72.9 72.5 77. 1

232

236

262

313 25.8 26.0 26.2 21.7

10

10

12

18

1.1

1.1

1.3

1 .2

898

908

999 1 ,444 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0

1 70

194

246

268

Mr BAUME-J thank the honourable member for Blaxland for his usual skill. The survey was an independent study, conducted by an independent auditor. I suggest that if the honourable member for Blaxland wants to impugn the integrity of the auditor he should do so honestly instead of making his usual snide, sneering remarks.
Mr Keating-That is an industry survey. If you are happy to quote that report, keep on quoting it. If you want to make a clown of yourself, keep on doing it.
Mr BAUME-The survey was conducted by Coopers and Lybrand, independently of the industry, at the industry's request. Coopers and Lybrand are, as the honourable member for Blaxland will not be able to understand, a separ ate group with a very high level of integrity. [f he wants to impugn their integrity and damn them he is welcome to do so. I wish he had the honesty to stand up in the House and do so, but he does not have the integrity or the capacity.
Mr Keating-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. I did not think I would hear too many jibes about honesty at my side of the House from the honourable gentleman after his career in the stockbroking industry.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar) Order! The honourable member for Macarthur and the honourable member for Blaxland are being somewhat provocative and are bringing the House into disrepute by the extravagance of their remarks. I ask them to refrain.
Mr BAUME-Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek a withdrawal of that disgraceful statement by the honourable member for Blaxland.
Mr Keating-You can go and jump in the lake. There will be no withdrawal from me.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Chair is obliged to require the honourable member for Blaxland to withdraw.
Mr Keating-What for?

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member is required to withdraw the reflection on the honesty of the honourable member for Macarthur.
Mr Keating-In deference to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, I withdraw, if the withdrawal is reciprocated by the other side.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I call on the honourable member for Macarthur to withdraw the reflection he has made on the honourable member for Blaxland.
Mr BAUME-I withdraw the reflection on the honourable member for Blaxland. I congratulate him on his deviousness in taking up three minutes of my time on a non-existent point of order by abusing the forms of the House. I now proceed to outline the fact that the multinationals and the Australian corporations in the mining industry have been able to contribute significantly to the Australian industry, the Australian people and the Australian taxation revenue. The contribution by these corporations has been very significant.
The study by the independent auditors, Coopers and Lybrand, whose integrity the honourable member for Blaxland sought to im pugn, indicates that very significant taxation con tributions were made in relation to the total profit earned. For example, last year the operating profit of the companies surveyed-the survey did not include all of them, but a very large pro portion of the companies in the mineral industry in Australia-totalled $ 1 ,888m. I imagine that most Opposition members will be appalled that the companies earned that sort of profit. However, those companies paid direct taxes of 1 ,0 13m on those earnings. That is a massive contribution from the $ 1 ,888m in gross profits which they earned. Of course, that left them with a total operating profit after tax of only $874m. But that is only part of the story. On top of that contribution, far more money was paid in various other taxes, for example taxes paid by the employees,

Mineral Leases

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 10 1

which would not have been collected otherwise. whether we are getting the best deals from the

Instead of a total of $ 1 ,0 1 3m being paid in taxes, transactions taking place in Queensland? Is it not

the survey indicates that $ 1 ,444m was esrned by also fair to ask questions in this House about the

the taxpayers of Australia from the activities of recent Queensland Government coal deal with

the Australian mining industry. That figure is the British Petroleum, Drayton and Westfield

about 40 per cent more than the amount paid in consortium? The lack of answers to these ques

direct taxes. Yet Opposition members criticise the tions strikes at the very heart of the concept of

Australian mining industry.

honesty in government. Did Mr Camm meet with

Mr DEfUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HUMPHREYS (Griffith) (3.45) -How the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) can condone the sellout of Australia's natural resources and our heritage is unbelievable. I hope all his constituents in Macarthur are listen ing to him today. He said that the honourable

Mr Thiess or Drayton officials in London during his overseas visit? Recently he refuted accusations in the Queensland newspapers. A newspaper article stated:
He had spoken to 27 companies and 12 government and semi-government bodies. He said BP possibly had beenamong them but he could not recall exactly.
The article also stated:

member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) was talking about the Queensland issue, yet all he did was talk about the New South Wales issue and condemn the New South Wales Government. He had nothing to say about the matter of public im

BP's executive director and managing director, Mr Alex Gorrie, said yesterday that Mr Camm hadspoken to company officials in London last May.
The discussions were on the international energy and min erals situation, Mr Gorrie said.

portance before us today. The Federal Opposition That article is very interesting. Mr Camm does

and, I would say without fear of contradiction, all not even know that he met with company

Australians are genuinely concerned about the officials. Yet the manager of BP said that he did

unsatisfactory nature of the granting of mineral meet them. I wonder who else was at that meet

leases in Australia and the continuing concen ing. The Queensland Government has refuted the

tration of Australian mineral wealth in the hands accusations. It will be very easy for me to prove

of foreign consortia, particularly in Queensland. them later on. Is it not also fair to ask questions in

The honourable member for Blaxland referred to this House about recent Queensland Government a table from the Australian Bureau of Statistics deals, allegations about its involvement in the

indicating the extent of foreign ownership of the Winchester lease and the fate of Mr Sullivan. Mr

Australian mining industry. The mining industry Sullivan lasted only a few months in his new port

in Queensland is 84 per cent foreign-owned. How folio. Was his tenure cut short because he

can honourable members condone such a sellout declined, as a matter of principle, to rubber stamp

of our heritage? The report contains no figures for the decision already made to grant the BP consor

South Australia. Those figures would be very tium a lease? Why was the consortium's bid

interesting. There are also no figures for the pushed so hastily and with such great secrecy be

Northern Territory. The latest figures available fore a Cabinet which had no prior knowledge of

are for 1 976-77. Why do we not have more recent the merits of this or other tenders? All these ques

figures? They would be very interesting. The per tion have to be asked. Why does the Queensland

centages would probably be much higher. As the Treasurer not undertake an economic evaluation?

honourable member for Blaxland pointed out, the As Mr Hartwig has asked, why did the Govern

figure of 84 per cent foreign ownership cannot be ment not follow the procedures established years

defended by people on the other side of the ago and open all the tenders in front of all con

House. It is disastrous and disgraceful.

cerned? Do we not think that all these questions

In view of those alarming figures, as old as they are, why should the Opposition not propose this

should be answered? I am sure I do, and I am sure all Australians feel that way.

matter of public importance in the House today? But, this is not all. The ramifications of the

How can the Government possibly defend the Queensland Government's actions are endless.

Queensland Government for s e l l in g off Have other major tenderers now been muzzled by

Australi a 's n a t ural r es ources to foreign thinly veiled threats that they will not be con

companies? I f this is the case and if the sidered as tenderers for future coal leases if they

Queensland Government is to be allowed to con release details of their Winchester bids? As a re

tinue its disgraceful record of selling off our heri sult of this, and of the fait accompli manner in

tage to overseas consortia, is it not fair to ask why which the BP group's tender was rammed

we should not ask questions in this House and through, have some major companies decided that

why the people of the nation should not know they will not again go to the huge expense and

J 1 02 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Mineral Leases

effort of tendering for Queensland coal ? I s the statement by the State's National Party President, Sir Robert Sparkes, that leaking of details of BP's flimsy tender was almost enough for a Royal Commission nothing but a cover up for corrup tion on a massive scale? Some of the unsuccessful tenders cost between $250,000 and $500,000 to prepare but were rejected by the Queensland Minister for Mines, Energy and Police without his colleagues in Cabinet ever having a chance to consider them. I have since learned that one of these tenders involved the construction, free of public cost, of a power generating station. Another would have ensured that no matter how much the price of steaming coal escalated, industry and private consumers in Queensland would have benefited in future years by the provision at cost of millions of tonnes of coal to generating plants.
What is frightening about the foregoing situation is the secret and arrogant alienation of pub licly owned energy resources by the Queensland Government, which seems to have massive under hand obligations to a small group of powerful companies. The concept of free and open tender ing has been reduced to the status of fraud. The concept of communal wealth and the rights of Australian companies to share competitively in its exploitation died in Queensland when Winchester South was handed on a platter to a consortium dominated by a big oil company. Other companies tendering for the Winchester South lease in the Bowen Basin volunteered Australian expertise and Australian majority shareholding in the ex ploitation of this rich field. They defied contemporary wisdom by securing foreign loans to finance the mining of vast lodes of steaming coal instead of selling off dominant equity to multina tionals with massive political patronage. Their bids would have ensured that Australians con trolled their own resources. Before closing my re marks, I would like to point out how the Premier of Queensland has called for the right of public reply to remarks made by politicians under Parliamentary privilege. That is reported in the newspapers of Australia today. Under the head ing 'Public reply right-Joh', it is stated:
The Premier'S concern, raised yesterday in State Cabinet, followed attacks in Federal Parliament last week on Sir Edward Lyons a businessman and National Party trustee.
Mr Bjelke-Petersen said it was unfair that politicians could make slanderous statements that gained maximum exposure and then retract the following day.
The Premier also wanted to gag the Press, and called for the right of reply to such statements to be reported in the Press. The article continued:
The Premier denied he was trying to strangle the freedom of the press.

That is exactly what he was doing. Would it not be much easier for the Premier, if he wants to prove once and for all how marvellous the Winchester coal deal is, to table all the documents and tenders? Only in that way will he clear the names of all his friends and the credibility of his Government. In 1 960 Mr Bjelke-Petersen's more distinguished predecessor, Sir Frank Nicklin stated:
One of the cardinal principles of public administration that my government holds paramount is that all connected with it should be like Caesar's wife, entirely above suspicion.
He went on to say: Speaking for myself and my government colleagues, I say
we will not for one moment countenance or condone any act or omission on the part of any member of government
. . . on which there rests the slightest breath of suspicion.
Queenslanders deserve nothing less than the ap plication of these principles today, so that the suspicion surrounding Winchester South may be confirmed or disproven once and for all.
Mr KATTER (Kennedy) (3.54)- Mr Deputy Speaker, I feel confident that the honourable member or whoever selected this matter of public importance-it might have been your good self had no idea that we would hear the same tirade and innuendo of deep scandal in relation .to the Winchester South affair that we have heard before. One can see from reading the matter of public importance that it is a confidence trick. It reads:
The unsatisfactory nature of the granting of mineral leases in Australia--
That is the general granting of mineral leases in Australia-
reSUlting in a continuing concentration of Australian mineral wealth in the hands of foreign corporations, particularly in Queensland.
Why did the Opposition not have the guts to suggest that we talk again and waste the time of the House on the Winchester South matter? Having said that, I say that if I found that my party was in the least way connected with a scan dal such as this, as is suggested, I would be the first to hand in my resignation. I make no secret of that. Honourable members well know that the Australian Labor Party in Queensland was once a great party. I do not know of any section of the Australian Labor Party that contributed more to the industrial and political life of this nation than the ALP in Queensland did many years ago. But, there is no resemblance, with few exceptions, between that party and the party of today. [f there has been a deterioration in the quality and capacity to put forward an argument, it has been in the sphere of the mining industry. [ come back to

Mineral Leases

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 03

the matter of the raising of these scandals from time to time. I say quite decisively that I know no more of the Winchester South affair than what I have read in the newspapers and heard on the programs Today Tonight and A State Affair. This alleged great scandal has emerged, it is peter ing out. Will someone suggest that the Courier Mail is favourably disposed towards the National Party?
Mr Ian Cameron-Never. It is a Liberal paper. Mr KATTER-Oh, brother! If honourable members feel that it is at all disposed towards us, they should read today's editorial. That is all they need do. No one covers up the most powerful mouthpiece in Queensland, the Courier-Mail. If these great scandals that come forward from time to time have some substance, why do they not reach the ultimate? Why is conclusive proof never brought forward? It never happens. In speaking to this matter of public importance, I refer first of all to the capacity of the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) to appear in this House and to put a pretty good argument from time to time. On this occasion he has fallen flat on his face. I regret to say that my good friend the h o n o u r a b l e m e m be r f o r G r i ffi t h ( M r Humphreys), who shoots so well-he made the headlines last weekend with his rifle shooting-is not quite so good in this House when talking on this subject because, as the honourable member for Blaxland would know, the matter of mineral leases is precisely a State affair. If the honourable member has not been so informed, I will read to him from the publication A ustralia's Mineral Resources. He can get one; they are all around the House. It states:
The Federal Government is responsible under the Consti tution for external trade matters, and international trade and commodity matters are increasingly important to Australia's international relationship.
It then states:
The powers of the State governments include the responsibility for the granting of exploration rights and mining leases, the approval of mining operations and the levying of royalties and other like charges.
He well knows that this matter has nothing to do with this House at all. It is a pretty shabby and sneaky way to again revive the Winchester South affair. If there is something sinister about the Winchester South affair, let it be pressed forward in Queensland. The honourable member for Blaxland showed the capacity to evaluate his fel low man, and particularly his fellow party man, because he realises that in Queensland those of his party on the benches of State Parliament do not have the capacity to find their way from the chamber up to the fourth floor of that beautiful

building unless someone shows them the way. They are totally incapable of producing an effec tive opposition. This is the sad commentary on what has happened to the Labor Party in Queens land. They had the case and brought it forward, but it has fizzled out. Now they bring it into the Federal sphere and waste the time of this House. Towards the latter part of April and into May Parliament will deal with numerous Bills, not waste its time talking about something contained in a matter of public importance, and not con tained in legislation.
I ask the honourable member for Blaxland, through you, Mr Deputy Speaker: Does he want to interfere with the rights of the States? Does he want to have them reduced and perhaps finally disposed of altogether? Does he want to see the States go ahead with the establishment of this h ydrocarbons corporation? Let him state specifically that he does if that is the position? As Opposition spokesman for minerals and energy, he denied it in this House on a previous occasion when he was cornered. Does he want to see the hydrocarbons corporation established and does he want to see everything that is involved, including petroleum, taken over and dealt with by the States? Did not the honourable member for Reid (Mr Dren) not so long ago suggest in this House that Mt Isa Mines Ltd should be nationalised? That suggestion would not be very popular in the city of Mt Isa? It would be no more popular than the Australian Labor Party's policy on uranium as it affects the people and the miners of Mary Kathleen. The miners of this country have detected something about which they are very much aware. When people live among, mix with and know the miners, they know this to be true: The greatest enemy they have in this country is the group that allegedly is putting the case on be half of the workers. But the Labor Party is cer tainly not putting the case on behalf of the miners of this country; not one damned bit!
I ask honourable members to look at what happened in Chile. A government took over the run ning of the country very temporarily, even more temporarily than the Labor Party goes into office here against pretty fair competition. In no time the great mining industry in Chile was brought to its knees. There was absolute chaos and honour able members know it. In no time, the Chilean Government had to call back free and private enterprise to take over and bring those vast mining operations back into action to restore the economy of that country. The miners of this country are a wake up to this fact. Let honourable members opposite come to Mary Kathleen and

1 1 04 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

TariffProposals

talk to the miners about the cessation of their operations. I know how popular the honourable member for Blaxland will be out there. 1 move on to the matter of mineral leases. Let me say one thing very decisively. I know that I speak on be half of everyone on this side of the House. If we thought that the capital and the expertise could be found in this country to develop these great mining resources, why in blazes would we want any of these overseas corporations? But we need them. Good heavens, a Labor government back in the early 1 920s realised this. I will pay credit to it. That Labor Government produced the sum of  500,000, an awful lot ofmoneythen, which per mitted Mt lsa Mines-I do not know what it called itself in those days-to hang on long enough to attract overseas capital. The present Opposition betrays the people who suffered and worked for the original Australian Labor Party.
Mr KeatingThat was 60 years ago. Mr KATTER1 do not care if it was 600 years ago. Principles and human attitudes will never change. Mr KeatingThings change. Mr KATTER-Some things never change, my friend. The honourable member for Blaxland will learn that. There is something that changes, and that is the numbers in this House, as the honour able member has learnt over the years. Mr John Brown-What party were you in then? Mr KATTER-As Churchill once said: 'Not only did I rat, I re-ratted, and if necessary I 'll re-rat again'. Let me develop this subject. I have only about half a minute left. The point is that we have had to bring the expertise and the capital into this country which have produced thousands of jobs. If the Labor Party is suggesting that we should confine the development of our existing mineral resources to the capital and expertise that is available in this country, it has betrayed in an even greater way the workers and the miners of this nation. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar) Order! The discussion is concluded.
TARIFF PROPOSALS Mr MOORE ( Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.5)-1 move:
Customs Taritf Proposais No. 4 (l98 1 ) .
The Customs Tariff Proposals I have just tabled relate to proposed alterations to the Customs Tariff Act 1 966. Proposals No. 4 which operates from 1 April 1981 contains decisions by the

Government on recommendations by the Tem porary Assistance Authority in its report on certain works trucks and stackers, and the lndustries Assistance Commission in its reports on cheese; crushing or grinding machines; fluorescent and filament lamps- -short term assistance; and manufactured tobacco. Certain administrative changes are also included in the Proposals. The Government has decided to accept recommendations by the TAA in its report on certain works, trucks and stackers to continue import licensing controls on these goods for a further 1 2 months. The TAA concluded that this was necessary to ensure stability in the market and to maintain the current position until the lAC reported on the long term assistance arrangements for the industry.
Following consideration of recommendations by the lAC in its report on cheese, the Government has decided that existing levels of assistance should be maintained except for Canada, where rates of duty on certain cheeses will rise from $80 per tonne to the general tariff rate of $96 per tonne. I n its report the lAC recommended a duty of $200 per tonne on imports from all sources which would have required that cheese be re moved from Schedule A of the New Zealand Australia Free Trade Agreement. Failing agreement with New Zealand on this action, the lAC recommended an equivalent bounty. Following consultations between the New Zealand Dairy Board and the Australian industry, agreement was reached on the export of New Zealand cheese to Australia. The New Zealand Dairy Board has given assurances that it has no intention of disrupting the Australian market and will follow a policy of reasonable restraint towards cheese exports to Australia. The Government also noted that a multilateral trade negotiation agreement with the European Economic Community has secured guaranteed access for Australian cheese to the market in return for which Australia agrecd to allow specified quantities of EEC cheese entry into Australia.
In respect of the lAC's report on crushing or grinding machines, the Government considered that the reduction in assistance for jaw and vcr tical rotary crushing machines, having a working weight of less than 50 tonnes, to the level of 1 5 per cent as recommended by the Commission, could lead to significant disruption to activity and employment in the industry and has decided that a duty rate of 20 per cent would be more appro priate. The remainder of the goods under reference will continue to be dutiable at 1 5 per cent as recommended by the Commission.

Tariff Proposals

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 05

In its report on !iuorescent and filament lamps the lAC, in a majority recommendation, suggested that no short term assistance be provided. The Government has, however, decided that the rates of duty on fluorescent discharge lamps be increased from 1 5 per cent to 25 per cent and that for filament lamps a duty of 1 0 per cent be applied. This is in line with the minority rec ommendation by the lAC and should enable the present balance between the local industry and imports to be maintained pending the Government's decision on the lAC's report into the long term assistance needs of this industry.
Following the report by the Commission on manufactured tobacco, the Government has de cided that the existing primage duty of 1 0 per cent applying to the goods under reference should be incorporated with the present substantive rates of $ 1 4.23 per kilogram general and $ 1 4.01 per kilogram preferential. It has also been decided that a duty rebate of 10 per cent be given on im ports of manufactured cut tobacco, contingent upon importers making specific purchases of Australian leaf. The Government considered that the mechanism put forward by the lAC-that is, a full rebate of the protective portion of the tariff would have resulted in an unduly generous rebate for imported manufactured cut tobacco.
The Government has decided that a reference covering the tobacco growing and manufacturing industry would be sent to the lAC in order to determine the assistance arrangements for the industry after 1 983 when the current Tobacco Stabilis ation Plan expires. The Proposals also contains administrative changes in relation to: Firstly, the elimination of the 5 per cent margin of preference provided for New Zealand under an Interim Agreement between Australia and New Zealand on Preferences, to certain tall oils and glycerol this change follows consultation with New Zealand; and secondly, a revision of the descrip tion of video games to ensure that the correct levels of assistance are applied. No change in rates of duty is involved. A summary setting out the nature of the duty changes has been prepared and is being circulated to honourable members. I com mend the Proposals to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
Mr MOORE ( Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the reports of the Industries Assistance Commission on the follow ing subjects:

Fluorescentandfilament lamps-short term assistance. Crushing or grinding machines. Cheese.
REVIEW OF AUSTRALIAN DEMOGRAPHIC TRENDS
Ministerial Statement Debate resumed from 25 March, on the follow ing paper presented by Mr Macphee:
Australia's Demographic Trends Review.
And on motion by Mr Fife:
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr FALCONER (Casey) (4. 1 2)-The House is debating a paper entitled 'Review of Australia's Demographic Trends' presented to the House last Wcdnesday by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee). The Minister at the end of his statement to the House said:
Wc should not be misled into believing that issues arising from future population developments can be left to the future.
I believe that it is in that spirit that the Minister presented the paper. He has given the House an opportunity to debate some of the implications of future population growth for policy development in various areas of Australia. With that in mind, I compliment the spokesman for the Opposition, the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) , for the way in which he responded to the Minister's statement and for the very constructive comments he made about the paper.
The paper reviews Australia's demographic trends in the light of recent data and it comments on some implications for the next 20 years. Nat urally one of the major facts commented on in the paper is the aging population in Australia. The situation is summarised at page 3 of the paper. The following comment is made:
Persons in the older age groups are also of particular interest to policy makers. The number of people 65 and over is expected to increase by about two-thirds by the end of the century, while the number of persons over 75 is expected to roughly double. The absolute size of these groups affects social welfare planning, including the provision of pensions and special medical care and accommodation.
Those large increases will take place without there being a commensurate increase in the work ing age groups in the population. Obviously that has implications for the sheer rate of expenditure on social security payments and on a number of other benefits.
I link that aspect of the aging of the population to another aspect which is commented upon on page 6 of the paper where reference is made to the number of divorces taking place in Australia. The paper points out that, in 1 975, 24,000 divorces were registered but that in 1 976, the year after the

1 1 06 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Review ofA ustralian Demographic Trends

commencement of the Family Law Act, there was a substantial upturn to 63,000 divorces. The number fell back to 38,000 in .1 979. I do not want to get into a protracted argument about the mean ing of the figure of 63,000 in 1 976 because to a very substantial extent there would have been an element of pent-up demand-if that is an appropriate phrase to use with respect to divorce-in that a number of people were waiting for the Family Law Act to come into operation before they pursued their applications for divorce. However, in the last 1 0 years or so there has been indisputably an increase in the rate of divorce. I link this with the aging of the population because it may have implications of the degree to which government agencies will have to become involved in the care of the aged.
It appears to me that one of the implications of an increasing divorce rate may well be that hil dren of divorced parents who have perhaps gone into a second or third family-a reconstructed family-as a result of a second or third marriage, may not have the same degree of emotional com mitment to their parents; they may not have the same sense of obligation to look after their elderly parents as has been the case in the past. I think that is a matter that we ought to explore in greater detail. It is not touched on in this paper. Perhaps the authors of the paper did not feel it was their responsibility to comment on this matter. But, as well as looking at the sheer numbers of elderly people in the population-the sheer percentage of elderly people-I think we need to look at the extent to which there will be that sense of obli gation between the age groups that has in fact enabled large numbers of aged persons to be cared for in the past in the homes of their children and families. So, I think that is a matter of some sig nificance for the future.
The Minister in his statement commented that the net reproduction rate of the Australian population in 1 979 was 0.92 per cent, that is, a figure below the long term level of replacement of the population, the replacement figure being one per cent. The Minister commented that there had been a decrease in the reproduction or the re placement rate of previous years. The honourable member for Port Adelaide in commenting on the Minister's statement said that he did not think that, economic demands being what they are in the home, there was likely to be an uptake in the fertility rate in Australia which would markedly alter the figures given by the Minister for Immi gration and Ethnic Affairs.

There is some evidence in the paper tabled by the Minister that there may in fact be some up surge as a result of revised attitudes to child bear ing. I refer to a comment on page 6 of the paper that there was an 'upturn in birth rates of women aged 30 years and over (suggesting that births postponed at earlier ages were being made up) '. Some commentators have pointed out that there are some indications, which perhaps are very early at this stage and one cannot draw firm con clusions from them, that young couples who had decided they would both work to establish themselves first are now getting to the stage where they want to have families. They have made this decision after having developed the economic security they were looking for in the early years of their marriage.
There are also some indications that people who had perhaps decided that two children were enough, have decided after a few years that per haps they would after all like another child. They have decided that, havingdone a number of things they wanted to do without the ties of a large fam ily and after thinking about it again, it would be nice to have more children. I am certainly not going to suggest that we will get to the stage of having the very large families that were common many years ago. But r am going to suggest that there is some evidence that in the coming few years we are likely to see an increase in the number of families who have three or four chil dren when perhaps their original intention was to have only two children. So I think that that is a possible change in community attitudes that we will want to watch. The Minister also pointed to the fact that on present assumptions it would appear that over the next few years the average annual gain to the population through migration would be at a rate of about 0.5 or 0.6 of one per cent of the population.
I refer now to some aspects of our migration selection program and point to some of the problems that have arisen. One of the major initiatives of our immigration program in recent years has been the implementation of the Numerical Mul tifactor Assessment System, the point score system whereby applicants for migration to Australia, outside refugee categories and outside trans-Tasman migration-that is, N ew Zealanders-are assessed. That system has been the subject of many criticisms, particularly from people who have friends and relatives whom they want to bring into the country and who have not been approved under NUMAS. The Minister has announced that NUMAS is presently the subject of a major review. He has invited migrant and eth nic community organisations-indeed, a wide

Review ofA ustralian Demographic Trends

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 07

range of interested groups-to comment on NUMAS and have some input into the review, if theywish to do so.
I think that many of the criticisms of NUMAS arise from those who understandably are disap pointed at being rejected. This will happen under any system of selection. As a member of parlia ment who deals with many migration inquiries, I can report that NUMAS has produced more con sistency in migration approvals than was pre viously the case. After all, the factors that NUMAS encompasses have always been part of Australia's selection process. I refer to factors such as job skills, ability in English, accommo dation guarantees by sponsors, and formal qualifications that might be recognised in Australia. Before NUMAS was introduced, I always had the feeling that some of our selection officers overseas gave greater weight to one factor than to others. For example, one officer may have given undue emphasis to current knowledge of English and ignored excellent qualifications and an intellect which would enable the applicant to learn English quickly. Another selection officer may have been mesmerised by formal academic qualifications without properly assessing personal settlement factors.
NUMAS has the effect of forcing all selection officers to go through each of the factors and give them an appropriate numerical weighting accord ing to a set scale. Obviously there is room for dispute about what is an appropriate weighting but there is, it seems to me, a basic integrity about the system itself which minimises the exercise of personal preferences on the part of departmental staff. It has also given members of parliament a better basis for describing to constituents the cri teria that their friends and relatives will have to meet when they apply to come to Australia.
One personal criticism that I have of the present application of NUMAS is that insufficient credit is given to non-formal job qualifications. It is easier to allocate points for a trade certificate or a diploma than it is to allocate points for what might best be described as entrepreneurial flair. I think that all honourable members would agree that many of the migrants who have made the most significant contributions to the develop ments of the Australian economy and to our cul tural fabric are people who have lacked formal qualifications but who have had the initiative, enterprise and personal robustness which has en abled them to succeed very well in Australia. I think that there are potential migrants still with little formal education who have the energy and enterprise to create their own employment in

some form of small business. I hope that the re view of NUMAS will enable greater credit to be given for such attributes.
On the broader debate about immigration pol icy, it is difficult to obtain a comprehensive objective assessment of the economic and employment effects of a migrant intake. One gets the im pression that most of such assessments are made to support a predetermined attitude; that is, pro ponents of more immigration point to the employ ment-creating effects of the increased demand for goods and services by new migrants and opponents of immigration enlist arguments about competition for scarce jobs and pressure on already overtaxed community facilities. What ever the economic benefits, and they are probably mixed in the short term, I think it is fair to say that immigration is not solely about economic advan tages to Australia.
I should state, just to make sure that my own view is clear, that I believe that the net economic effect of migration is of particular benefit to Australia; but the benefits are not just economic. Our refugee resettlement policy, for example, must be based on some concept of Australia's re gional role and our humanitarian responsibilities. In the short term, this part of our intake cannot be justified on economic grounds, although I suspect that in the longer term we will owe as much to the Indo-Chinese refugees as we now recognise we owe to the refugees of post-World War II Europe.
Many family reunion cases have no economic justification, but become the cause of the strongest emotional and political pressure. Mi grants already here want their relatives to join them, and often they are supported strongly by neighbours and workmates in approaching parlia mentarians for special consideration. In other words, stronger political pressure often tends to be applied to cases with less economic justifica tion and this is understandable. In practical terms, any Australian migration policy must maintain some balance of these elements, whatever the total intake. Certain skilled people from overseas are required on immediate employment grounds. Some family reunion cases must be permitted if the immigration policy is to have the necessary electoral support, and Australia's place in the world requires it to respond positively to the hu manitarian needs of our region. Taking all these factors together, I believe that most Australians will continue to support an active immigration policy.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

1 1 08 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Review of Australian Demographic Trends

Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (4.27) -Before I make my main contribution to this debate, I shall deal with one of the points raised by the honour able member for Casey (Mr Falconer); that is, the question of whether the N umerical Multifactor Assessment System makes it easier for immi gration officials to judge the appropriateness of a particular person to come to Australia. In theory, it does; in fact, it does not necessarily do so. May I give one example of how it as clearly badly applied. I had representations in Sydney from a young woman from Ireland who was working here on a special permit. She worked as a special ist type of secretary in the accountancy field in a very large Australian organisation. Her one-year or two-year work permit had expired and, rather than apply for permanent residency, she was advised that if she went back to the United King dom or, for that matter, New Zealand and applied under NUMAS she would immediately become eligible because of her qualifications. She had a job, she had accommodation, she had money, she had a ticket to come back here, and she could speak English. Obviously she would have been selected. She was quite prepared to visit her rela tives in Northern Ireland.
I am pleased to be able to say that I told her that if she had any trouble she should contact me by a reverse charge call. I said that because one never knows what will happen with our De partment of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. She went back to Northern Ireland and applied under NUMAS. Within two weeks she was rejected as unsuitable to be a migrant to Australia. This per son was in the appropriate age group being aged 26. I understand the maximum points are awarded to applicants between 26 and 30 years of age. She had money, she had a fiat, she had a job, she had worked here before, and she obviously fitted into the local scene. I then contacted the ap propriate person in the Department of Immi gration and Ethnic Affairs, and within a very short time this lady was admitted under NUMAS. The point I am making is that if she had not been here before and if she did not have a contact such as myself in Australia she would have been rejected and that would have been the end of the story. She would have been told, as she was told, that she:< was unsuitable to come to Australia.
I am pleased that we are debating this matter today. It is an important topic. I have always taken a great interest in immigration. At the same time, we have to realise that the reason we are de bating this matter and the reason later today we will be debating the Address-in-Reply to the Governor-General's speech, a debate which com menced last November, is that this Government

has no legislation available to introduce into the House. I do not consider that to be a bad thing, but the Government certainly considers it to be a bad thing. I consider it to be a good thing because I believe that most legislation falls into two categories: Either it is bad or it is unnecessary. The first category is important as far as this Government is concerned. Most of the problems with which we are dealing are caused by so-called solutions to previously perceived problems. The most obvious example is found in the health field. We must establish whether the alleged proposed changes are necessary. Previously solutions which were applied obviously did not turn out to be the correct ones. Therefore I believe that government in Australia may be better after J uly when this Government will face a hostile Senate and when it will no longer be necessary--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Orde r! The honourable member is digressing somewhat. I would like him to come back to the question before the House.
Dr KLUGMANThat is the reason for this debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-That is not the question before the House.
Dr KLUGMAN-I will deal now with the demographic changes which affect us in many ways. I do not know whether I will ha'.'e time to get down to specifics, but I wish to make a general statement. I believe Australia should accept im migrants to increase its population, both for selfish reasons and to help those who want to come here. I am sure this world does not believe that 14 million people in this country are entitled to occupy one of the richest continents on this earth. As popUlation pressures and all kinds of political pressures increase in other areas people will look to this continent and say: 'We do not believe that relatively few people are entitled to occupy the whole of this continent and make de cisions as to who will come to it'. At present we have the ability to make that decision. It is important that we should use that ability responsibly to allow other people to come to this country and to increase the population. The most obvious example is the United States, a country which started with a very small population and, over the last 200 to 300 years, increased its population to 220 million.
People who advocate zero population growth, and zero economic growth which often goes with it, are active opponents of iill' ,igration and, for that matter, active opponents of a higher birth rate. It is remarkable how often these two matters coincide. If honourable members were to look at

Review ofA ustralian Demographic Trends

3 1 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 09

many of the pecple associated with organisations such as the government funded Australian Con servation Foundation-an obvious one, although it surprises me that it is Government funded they will find people who hate people. Basically those people oppose immigration. One gets the impression that they would like to award orders of the heroin of Australia to women who have had more than three abortions. They consider that to be a terribly impressive performance. I am one of those people who objects to such awards or titles to highly fertile mothers as was done in nazi Ger many and is now done in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics; mother of the order of Lenin, or whatever it may be called. As it happens I do not .object to abortion as a last resort. It is the woman's own decision. I object to people who feel strongly that women should be embarrassed into feeling, when they have conceived, that they have done something wrong and, therefore, should have a termination of that pregnancy. It always surprises me that people who get terribly excited about saving the whales, seals, chickens, kanga roos, parks, or individual trees and buildings are never prepared to allow a larger population in Australia so that more human beings can have a good life. I remember the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) , who was not at the time a member of this House, pointing out during an election campaign how it surprised him when driving behind cars to see on one side of the bumper a sticker which read, 'Save the whales', and on the other side a sticker which read, 'Abortion on demand'. There seems to me to be a contradiction there. Both he and I can see that contradiction but it is obvious that a large number of people cannot. It is my view that leaders of the movement opposing immigration in Australia in many cases are dishonest in their arguments. Some years ago when Australia was experiencing overemployment Paul Sharp, one of their leaders, said:
Immigration reduces our rate ofeconomic growth per head of population, while increasing industrial unrest and social problems.
It has also tended to move us away from being a capital intensive economy to a labour-intensive one.
He claimed:
. . . the cost of adding one extra person to the population ofSydney or Melbourne is in the vicinity of$20,000.
This was back in the early 1 970s. He said further:
. . . immigration lowers the material standard of living by lowering the ratio ofproduction capital to labour.
It does this in two ways:

It diverts our limited capital resources away from pro duction and into areas such as housing and roads and;
It increases the number of people over which this reduced amount of capital has to be spread.
Immigration, therefore, moves us toward being a labour intensive country with low standards ofliving and low rates of growth instead of toward being a capital-intensive country with high standards of living.
It is a reasonable argument. But exactly the same people-I am not suggesting Mr Sharp but the people associated with him-are now arguing exactly the opposite. They are arguing that by allowing immigrants into this country we are causing unemployment. Yet they want labour intensive industries and want to get rid of capital intensive industries. These people cannot see the obvious contradiction that is there. When [ was preparing my contribution to this debate [ could not think of a better source of reference than my submission to a national population inquiry held by Professor Borrie in about 1 97 1 . [ will quote from some of the statements I made then. I said:
Whilst most thinking people must obviously support zero population growth or even minus population growth for the globe's population, this does not necessarily mean the same for Australia. Many of the ZPG arguments in Australia rest much more on value judgments about what makes for a toler able life style than on what [ would call pseudo-scientific pre dictions. To my mind growth-economic and population - tends to threaten traditional middle class values. It is felt to be disruptive and unpleasant precisely because it turns minority privileges into majority ones, because it means crowded roads. crowded beaches and fishing spots. It has overtones of a strong historical anxiety about being overwhelmed by Asia's population. The local ZPG movement collects the Asian-horde worriers. Recruitment in the schools is spreading, with eco logical politicsreceiving an uncritical embrace--
I object to that very strongly-
not given to any other political movement-probably because of the combination of scientific jargon and doomsday religion. There is the theme of apocalyptic catastrophe-the threat of doom to come-and the theme of milennial hope with the promise of human perfectability, zero population growth plus a repudiation ofworldlygoods.
These are the sorts of people who move up to the North Coast of New South Wales. I said further:
We have the combination of complete pessimism that scien tific technology could not be the saviour, with a completely unjustified optimistic faith in social technology. There is the assumption that mankind would carry out the social revol ution demanded, that underdeveloped nations would not aim to reach our levels and that those in our society who already consider themselves close to subsistence level would join with the affluent in reducing their consumption.
Basically they-the ZPG and zero economic growth advocates-make one of two alternative sets of assumptions: Firstly that, broadly speaking, the global distribution of income will remain in the future as it is now or secondly, that there will be a voluntary massive redistribution of income from the rich nations to the poor. Both seem very unrealistic. The advocates of global equilibrium throw up their hands in horror at the assumption that what they consider such minor political problems as the redistribution of income among countries or within individual societies cannot be overcome

1 1 1 0 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Review of Australian Demographic Trends

under the threat of catastrophe. Suddenly it appears that although the technologists and scientists cannot solve the problems ofincreasing food yields, recycling raw materials or stopping pollution, politicians can square the circle by recon ciling everyone to the social and economic consequences of global equilibrium. This, of course, is a nonsense assumption.
Just as growth was once seen as the magic formula, so now non-growth replaces it; one over-simplification takes over from another in a depressing dialectic of slogans. The empha sis on repudiating wordly goods is, of course, drawing on a very deep well of Western tradition. And the final irony is per haps that what is basically a religious impulse now feels obliged to reinforce itself with scientific predictions from a computer, the 20th century version of the apocalyptic vision. But in the past the choice was seen as a personal one. It was the individual who chose to join a mendicant order of friars or give part of his income to the poor. Now, however, the choice is presented as a communal one. It is society as a whole which is expected to take a pledge of voluntary poverty, or more ac curately, to abstain from enriching itself still further. And the sanction is not the traditional one of retribution in the next life but ecological catastrophe in this one; present affi.uence and future squalor, the contemporary version of visiting the sins of the fathers on the sons.
I would like to conclude by appealing to my fel low members of the Labor movement not to for get that worthwhile socialism is an international movement and wherever it has become highly nationalistic it has become authoritarian and, therefore, to me the very antithesis of socialism. Similarly, if socialism is about anything it is about people as individuals. We must always consider them more important than trees or private profit.
Mr LES JOHNSON (H ughes) (4.4 1 )- The Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, in my view, should be congratulated on the pro vision of this excellent report entitled 'Review of Australia's Demographic Trends'. It is a very fine compilation of statistics and analyses of things that have happened and which are likely to occur in the future. In the short time that I can speak, because many members of the Opposition would like to share the time which is available, I wish to emphasise that the Opposition regards this report, previous reports and future reports, which we ca reliably anticipate, as providing a basis for policy and planning. We have considerable enthusiasm about the need to plan for Australia's future in respect of employment, the needs of industry, education, social welfare and urban services. These matters have been spelt out in the report. These statistics obviously have that application, as has been conceded by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) . We are on common ground in this regard.
It is very unlikely that if we let all the free forces go to work, fortuitously everything will fall in its place. Things just cannot be expected to happen that way. We do have a laissez-faire approach to political and economic matters in

Australia. The casualties which result therefrom are very evident in the Australian community today. It is absurd to think that industries can be created in various locations around this country as a result of capital being received from overseas, that they can commence without any pre planning and that subsequently everything will fall into place so that people can have the sewer age services, water reticulation, roads, houses and schools that they need. r think that this is one of the most important kinds of debate that can come before this Parliament.
Mr Deputy Speaker, as you come from Queensland, you remind me of the dilemmas confronting us in respect of the dramatic and spasmodic development patterns that are occur ring in Australia. 1 read only the other day that in Gladstone-a city with which you are very well acquainted, Mr Deputy Speaker-whatever the cost private enterprise might represent, infra structure costs of some $ 1 20m are being called for by public instrumentalities following in the wake of the development of industry. The call is being directed to this Parliament-in other words, to the taxpayers of the nation. That kind of problem will be increasingly evident as time goes on.
Australia's population growth fell during the 1 970s from around 2 per cent to a little above 1 per cent in 1 975-76, before recovering to 1 . 35 per cent in 1 979-80. Yet we have still had a dramatic increase. I can well remember the population around the War years and in the immediate post war period sitting at between 7 million and 8 million. It has almost doubled in the interim period. In 1 980 it reached 1 4.6 million. As a result of the analyses before us, we are able to anticipate a population of some 1 7.6 million by the year 200 1 . It is interesting to note that the net repro duction rate, which is referred to as the N R R , has continued to fall from 1 .39 per cent to 0.92 per cent by 1 979. I note a comment made in the report beside these figures that:
This is bc!owthe long-term level of replacement, 1 .00.
I regard this is as alarming. It cannot be a hearten ing fact for any culture, any group of people, any nation, to observe its incapacity to reproduce itself. In Australia we can observe a trend of the traditional Australian families jettisoning the old values and standards. They are not thinking in terms of extended families. They are not even bothering to get married. They are not bothering to have children to the same extent. While that trend is in evidence among the traditional Australian families, I think the pattern is being distur bed by the fact that other ethnic groups are coming to Australia and maintaining standards which contributed to the greatness of our country

Review of Australian Demographic Trends

3 1 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 1 1

in previous years-that is to say, those ethnic cite. Some nine out of 1 0 Australian women will

groups are having influences brought to bear by probably become widows. We must take on board

peers in the family and generally are upholding here the obvious indicator that far more planning

the things that they regard to be worthwhile. and provision of resources should occur in respect

They are not throwing out the baby with the bath of the need to care for aging people who will be a

water, as it were. I think that traditional Aus much larger proportion of our population in the

tralian families might have to take some stock of future than they have been in the past.

themselves in this regard.

r was interested to note the statistics about mar

We are told that the reason we are not doing so riages and divorces and the fact that marriages well in reproducing ourselves is due to the partici peaked in 1 9 7 1 at some 1 1 8,000 and fell steadily pation by women in the work force. That has hap to 1 04,000 in 1 979. In 1976, there was a sudden

pened. Heav_en knows the extent to which it has happened and the extent to which it was sensibly planned and thought about. If women are to be employed in the work force, obviously there will be social consequences if we do not ensure that backup services for the family, such as pre-school,

upturn in marriages. We could have all been hear tened by this development to think that there was a trend in the community to revert to the tra ditional processes. But, if we study the figures, we learn that the 1 976 upsurge is attributed to the re marriages that occurred following the very high

kindergartens, child minding and so on, exist. I divorce rate after the introduction of divorce re

think we were lackadaisical in that respect. We form in Australia in the early 1 970s.

are told that one of the reasons is the general de I think it is important to note that there is a sig

cline in the marriage rates. I do not know whether nificant shift in migration patterns in Australia

that is a good thing. Whether we are a little and that there is a declining proportion of intake

indifferent about the influences which we bring to from Europe. Back in 1 9 7 1 -72, European-born bear on our own children is something which we people were 70 per cent of the intake and, by

should perhaps contemplate. We are told the 1 979-80, that proportion had dropped to 39 per

reason is that couples are delaying having chil cent. The main reason, of course, was the sig dren. Undoubtedly, that is a result of the use of nificant falls in intake from the United Kingdom,

contraceptives. There may be beneficial and poss Eire and also Yugoslavia whence in an eight year

ibly some deleterious consequences also. We are period the intake had dropped from 10,700 to told that the reason is the state of our general 1 ,700. There was a drop in respect of the intake of

economic conditions-undoubtedly that has a migrants from North America and Canada. There

bearing on the situation-and that there is now, was a much higher proportion of intake from the

among our younger people, a greater emphasis on Middle East and Oceania and especially from

individual freedom. I put it to the House, without Asia. The increase was represented by the figures

having time to discuss these matters fully, that so of 1 2 per cent of our migrant intake which came

many of these things are occurring. There are ob from Asia in 1 97 1 -72 and 39 per cent of our intake

vious trends. Too little time is given to this Par which came from Asia in 1 976-77 reflecting, of

liament and to the people of the nation generally course, the refugee problem and the like. We are

to determine the extent to which licence, encour told that, compared with 2 . 1 per cent in 1 978, by

agement and support should be given.

the year 2008 6.8 per cent of Australians will have

In the limited time that is available to me, I wish to make one or two points. I noticed that the forecast is that a much higher life expectancy rate in Australia will apply in the future. Whereas in 1 947 on average males could be expected to live to 66. 1 years, I am happy to say that in 1 979 they

Asian or Middle Eastern origins. This, of course, can only have very good consequences for Australia in that we are relating in this practical and effective way to our Asian neighbours and regarding them as people with the ability to inte grate effectively into the Australian community.

were expected to live to 70.8 years. In 1 947 fe Let me conclude by saying that we hope these

males could be expected to survive, on average, to figures are available. I hope that they do not go

an age of 70.6 years. In 1 979 the expectancy was the same way as the products of very searching in

77.8 years.

quiries such as the 1 965 Vernon Committee of

Dr Jenkins-I thought they wanted equality.

Economic Inquiry, the Crawford Commission to Advise on Assistance to Industry, the Jackson

Mr LES JOHNSON-Regrettably I do not Committee to Advise on Policies for Manufactur

have time to reply to these very stimulating inter ing Industry and so many others which came in

jections. We are going to see this aging of the their large numbers only to be pigeon-holed and

population. There are some very interesting to be enveloped by cobwebs and governmental

figures in that regard which I will not have time to indifference. What is needed in respect of this

1 1 12 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 198 1

Review ofA ustralian Demographic Trends

demographic forecast and the others that will follow is a continuing and ongoing process of study and analysis to determine the effects that the changes in our population will have and the way the Australian Government will need to moderate its programs to ensure the well-being of the Australian people.
There can be little doubt that there is a lot of merit in indicative planning processes. I had the privilege of introducing one of the first indicative planning processes that the Australian Government has ever been involved with and that was an indictive planning council about the housing needs of Australia. In so many parts of the world, indicative planning is now the order of the day certainly in the East European countries and cer tainly in a number of West European countries, particularly in France but also in the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Belgium and many other parts of the world. People are not just wall owing in the mistakes that occur through acciden tal developments. They are really planning and setting out with objectives and making things hap pen because they can be made to happen for the benefit of the people. I hope that this report will be the subject of that continuing examination. The Government might even constitute a new authority made up of representatives of industry, government, the trade union movement, aca demics and the like so that we can really work out the directions which we consider will be beneficial to future Australians.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (4.55)-A lot of what the honourable member for Hughes (Mr Les Johnson) said made a lot of common sense. I re member when a year ago I attended a conference on population and development in Colombo. After listening to all the problems of the develop ing world as compared with the problems associated in the developed world, I started to re alise that population and development will be one of the most difficult problems to be overcome to the satisfaction of all people living on this earth. At that time. I thought that Australia was becom ing a very selfish country when I considered that by the year 2000 we could have zero population growth. It is well known that we abort about 90,000 babies each year; yet, when we think of the number of migrants that we allow into this country and people we allow in for humanitarian reasons, we are going backwards rather than ahead.
Of course, this Review of Australian Demo graphic Trends and the trends that have devel oped in Australia are something that we all should have a very good look at. Politicians particularly should be aware of the shift in population because

we will be confronted in years to come with some mammoth problems. My friend the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) , who is at the table, hould realise that Tasmania, for example, is having hardly any increase in population. In fact, we are going backwards fast. We have all known that, quite apart from the few people who have stayed in Tasmania to fight for the good of Tasmania, many of our good brain's have left Tasmania to develop this great Australia as we know it. Unfortunately, the shift in population has placed a very heavy responsibility on the people in Tasmania to look after the aged. We should start to realise that the problems of the aged are starting to multiply. People, particularly the ladies, are living a lot longer. They need special assistance, special help. When we have a State like Tasmania that is dependent on only a few industries, this raises some real problems. Sometimes I, the Minister and the other good col leagues from Tasmania are criticised because we start to say that they need special assistance. I think when we look at these trends and start to re alise the problems in Tasmania we realise that they are a bit unique and a bit different.
At that conference in Colombo I remembered some of the facts. I stopped and thought about this great country that we have. What should we do? We have high unemployment today. We have many people from the United Kingdom who would love to come to Australia. One starts to wonder whether if they come here, it will make it even more difficult to employ the young people that we have. I remember listening to a radio program. Two people were interviewed who wanted to come to Australia, the land of milk and honey.
Mr Les Johnson-And apples. Mr GOODLUCK-And apples. They wanted to come here because they thought that jobs were readily available. They thought that they could get the best of two worlds. On listening to that program, I started to think to myself that we have unemployment running at a fairly high level , a lot of young people cannot get jobs. What should we do? Should we stop them coming into this country? We know that they are leaving a country that is depressed economically. If they come here, they will add to the problems that we have. I talk about the developed world when I talk about the United Kingdom. We have the grave problem of trying to reconcile whether we are going to look after our own with the problems that we have now with whether we should open the door up and allowother people to come to Australia.

Review ofA ustralian Demographic Trends

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIYES 1 1 1 3

At the conference in Colombo, a declaration The point that I would like to make very clearly

was considered. A few of the points in that declar is that in Australia we do not have the problems of

ation were interesting. One should consider them the developing world. We should have a good look

very carefully. As to the need, in the 25 years to at what is happening in Australia. We should

1 975 the total world population increased from begin to precondition ourselves for the problems just under 2,500 million to more than 4,000 ahead. If, by the year 2000-1 shall use that rnagi

million. By the year 2000 it is expected to reach cal year-we are to have zero population growth,

6,200 million, of which-this is important-four what are we going to do about it? Are we to con

fifths will be in the developing countries with a tinue to allow young babies to be aborted, to have

substantial majority living in desperate poverty. our population diminish and the elderly increase

So, of course, the shift has been to the developing in numbers to such a degree that the young ones

countries and we, in a developed country such as coming on will not be able to assist them to the

Australia, have seen our population decrease. The extent that we would like? These are national

implications of such increases in the developing problems and I would like to see formed a com

countries are staggering. Between now and the mittee to look not only at population but also at

end of the century 800 million additional jobs will development. Population and development are

have to be created. This is more than are now inextricably bound together. We should look at

actively employed in the entire developed world. them both in the context of the problems that

they will pose in years to come.

Problems of similar magnitude will be posed in regard to the provision of food, water and shelter. In the developed countries the per capita con sumption of resources which is so much higher than that in the developing world, has been the cause of much pollution, waste and environmental degradation. It has also contributed to world wide shortages of key resources.

Dr JENKINS (Scullin) (5.03)-There is no doubt that the presentation to Parliament of a periodic report on demographic trends is to be applauded. These trends are highly important in our approach to planning for governmental inter vention in a variety of fields. Comparative studies and discussions in this Parliament over the last decade or so indicate just how rapidly the base on

Other questions, such as the aging of the population and internal and international migration, are bel;oming important. At the global level, con tinually expanding human demands have created intolerable pressures on resources, particularly energy. The pressures on biological resources, such as fisheries , forests, grasslands and croplands, are mounting steadily and will continue to do so. Human needs have also begun to outstrip the productive capacity of many local biological systems, as currently managed. Peace itself, which is the precondition of development, will be put in jeopardy but one of the principal threats to peace is the social unrest caused by the accumulation ofhuman fear and hopelessness.

which such projections are made can change. My colleague the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) suggested that Parliament should consider appointing a standing committee to monitor the demographic trends and their im plications. Honourable members are probably aware that I believe that too many permanent standing committees of the House are a waste of manpower and facilities; that subject matter com mittees of short duration, dealing with specific questions and reporting on them, paying due regard to our limitations and resources, represent the most efficient approach. However, I believe these particular reviews leave unanswered so many questions having important implications that the appointment of such a standing com

It is also noted that forced migration and the deliberate encouragement of citizens of countries to become refugees are disruptive to the economic development and political stability of countries ill-equipped to receive them. Moreover, it is clear

mittee would be worthwhile. Its main task could be to categorise the questions which arise from the reports. Parliament itself could determine those which required in-depth examination by honour able members.

that we can no longer afford to limit our view In this discussion, I can raise only a few ques

point just to the year 2000, which seems to be the tions. The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic

year to which everybody looks. Unless effective Affairs (Mr Macphee) has commented on the

action is taken now in regard to population and projected effect of population aging on consumer

development, world population could continue to demand and similar matters. I would like to go to

rise to 8,000 million or even 10,000 million. A the top end of the scale and to his comment that in

delay of just one generation in bringing world the next 20 years the number of people aged 65

popUlation to a stable level implies its increasing years and over will increase by about 70 per cent.

by approximately 3,000 million.

This represents a very substantial increase indeed.

1 1 1 4 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Review ofA ustralian Demographic Trends

Interest in the subject by honourable members member of the Victorian Parliament and had

would no doubt have been stimulated by today occasion to examine this problem faced by the

having received the paper 'Sixty-Five Not Out: aged. The fact is that nearly 20 years later in that

Consequences of the Aging of the Australian State the number of names on waiting lists for

Population' by D. T. Rowland, issued by the Insti geriatric institutions is just as great and the wait

tute of Public Affairs of New South Wales in ing time is just as long. No public institution for

February 1981 . In that paper, after a deal of dis the aged as such has ever been built in the Mel

cussion, a number of questions are posed. How bourne metropolitan area; all the institutions have

ever, the principal question is posed in the intro taken over buildings that were used for other pur

duction. It is: What is the division between poses. The Bundoora geriatric complex was

collective and individual responsibility? I do not started, but building stalled through lack of

believe that any honourable member so far during finance and there is only a big hole in the ground.

this debate has failed to acknowledge this ques We have a rash of private nursing homes, but they

tion of collective and individual responsibility, are expensive and cannot supply the wide range of

which varies with the type of family structure rehabilitatory and other services necessary if this

which prevails in the community from time to increasing number of aged persons is still to have a

time. A family structure which involves zero sensc of belonging in this society.

population growth may well produce a situation in which the elderly cannot expect support from the large family group. As a father of four, and so far grandfather of four, I could hope that under this individual responsibility concept I might be well looked after but the 65 years and over age group does have special need for continuing care in the welfare field, and in many other fields also. The Institute of Public Affairs quotation on the subject from the report of the National Superan nuation Committee of Inquiry of 1 976 is still per tinent. In part, it states:

This Government commissioned a report from a committee inquiring into the aged and infirm. That rcport was presented in January 1 977. One of the major recommendations of the report was to adopt a team approach which envisaged teams for assessment and rehabilitation, in conjunction with placing emphasis on domiciliary care. Some of the comment on domiciliary care in the community is too glib and optimistic. However, the fact remains that this recommendation has not been acted upon. It provides some hope of allevi ating the social effects of increases in the number

We regard the distinction between subsistence and belong ing as a useful characterisation of alternative sets of attitudes to social welfare policy. Support for the present austere and means-tested age pension seems to us to accord more nearly with the goal of subsistence than with the goal of belonging,

of persons aged over 65 years. We are deeply con scious of the contribution made to Austral ia's population growth by overseas migration. This in itself adds a further dimension to the problem of

whereas the emphasis of the recommended National Superan nuation Scheme is the reverse.

belonging to society which is experienced by those over 65 years of age. Many of the immigrants who

This is not the time or place to discuss a national arrived in the immediate post-war years are

superannuation scheme. [t does concern us that already aged over 65 years. The number will rise.

most comment on the 65 years and over age group Various migrant groups have examined the prob

consigns them, as if undeniably they were no lem of the aged. For example, the director of the

longer productive, to the scrap-heap. Of course, Villagio G. Vaccari at South Morang in my elec

this is arrant nonsense. One has seen, in the calling torate provided me with a copy of a report on

of politician, for example, many after the age of aging in the Victorian Italian population. The

65 years who have made substantial contributions honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) had a

to government. The same can be said of many report of a similar nature on Yugoslavs in the

other fields, such as those of science, education, Geelong area.

arts and medicine, but we are structuring a society where there is no place for the person over 65 years to be productive. This can only result in a great loss to society. As their numbers increase the loss will be even greater-unless we break out of our present attitude and devise means to harness the accumulated wisdom and skills of years of ex perience for the benefit of society.

There are added problems for such Australians who migrated to Australia. A number of studies of their problems have been carried out. Some honourable members will recall that a number of those problems were outlined in publications such as 'The Migrant Worker', edited by Brennan and produced by the Good Neighbour Council of Victoria,and 'Towards an understanding of the

The statement provides also an opportunity to Greek Immigrant' by Cox. In our society we have

discuss the austere provision of funds for accom neither complete integration of the migrant nor

modation to meet the needs of this increase in the the mosaic type of integration which seems to be

number of aged people. In the 1 960s I was a more fashionable nowadays. The fact that the

Review ofA ustralian Demographic Trends

31 March 1 981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 1 5

great majority of migrants, particularly those from southern Europe, were unskilled workers means that the family group has no high financial means to care for the elderly. So the true dimen sions of even just welfare services is not readily known and that requires urgent present and for ward planning by the Government. If the Government is to be inactive, let it say so in order that a judgment can be made.
] undertook to round off my remarks now and cut them short, but the report refers to other problems in a section which describes internal mi gration within Australia. People are moving from New South Wales and Victoria to Western Australia and Queensland. As all honourable members would know, the migrant intake of New South Wales and Victoria was largely urban. In the 1 960s that caused many problems by placing a strain on urban services. That raises the question of whether in these other States we will face the same urban pressures, the need for an injection of Federal funds to provide health services and education services, and to meet simple needs such as providing sewerage facilities. Unless we take note of this now we may well build up a debt in years to come.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (5. 1 7) -1 wel come the opportunity to comment on the statement by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) , especially in view of my migrant background. The Minister's statement was intended to be general in nature in that it sought to predict Australia's population by the year 200l . Naturally, anyone attempting such excursions into futurology is likely to bring to the exercise certain presuppositions and values. I want to subject to scrutiny some of the assump tions in the Minister's statement.
Firstly, the Minister told us that the net repro duction rate in Australia is currently 8 per cent below the replacement rate. In other words, taking into account birth and death figures and excluding i mmigration for the moment, Australia's popUlation is actually shrinking. The Minister did not seem to express any concern about this trend; he stated it as a matter of fact and went on to the next item. The reason is that the Minister assumes that the problem can be dealt with through immigration policy.
It is this subject that I want to say something about. It leads me to the second assumption in the Minister's speech which needs to be more thoroughly examined. The Minister admitted that in the last 1 0 years immigration levels have fluctuated widely, yet at the same time he based his projections on the total level of population by

the year 2000-he predicted 1 9 . 5 million people-and on the likelihood that the net gain in people through immigration will be 73,000 to 88,000 per annum. Given that the report on Australia's demographic trends recognises that over the next few years there will be an increase in the number of people leaving Australia, the Department's figures on the total population which will be achieved by the year 2000 seem to be over optimistic. J argue that a greater increase in immi gration than the Government is presently admit ting will be necessary for the projected figure to be realised. ] will return to this point later.
What is the philosophy which led the Government to accept the 19.5 million figure in the first place, a figure which represents an increase of five million in 20 years, including increases due to a birth rate which may, on the Minister's ad missions, not be realised. J argue that the acceptance of this figure indicates an acceptance of a lower rate of growth in population than that to which we are accustomed, especially the acceptance rate of the 1950s and 1 960s. The questions that arise are: What kind of a philosophy are we advocating when we seek to reduce the rate of population increase, including the increase through immigration; and what are the long term implications for the future of this nation?
Of course there are no simple answers to these questions, but T raise some of the issues involved. I begin with this question: What are the implications in social and human terms of the restric tive policies on family reunion which the Government is engaged in at present? I will cite some statistics on the present direction of family re union policies, which I am sure will surprise at least some honourable members. In 1 977-78 under the family reunion program there were 20,372 arrivals - -26.9 per cent of the total ar rivals. In 1 978-79 there were 1 7,225 arrivals, 25.1 per cent of the total arrivals. In 1 979-80 the figure was 1 8,359, or 22.6 per cent of the total arrivals, and in the period July to December 1 980 there were 1 0,239, which was 1 9. 5 per cent of the total arrivals. In other words, the proportion of arrivals under the family reunion program is rapidly decreasing. We have to ask ourselves what is the reason for this substantial reduction in family reunions.
Mr Falconer-It is an increase in real terms; a decrease in proportion.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-There may be a marginal increase in real terms, but in relation to the overall proportion it is still very inadequate. There has been a reduction in the proportion of people coming to Australia in family reunion

1 1 1 6 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Review ofA ustralian Demographic Trends

programs yet, as every member of Parliament increased immigration on the ground that the cur

knows, there is strong pressure from many immi rent economic situation in ihis nation, especially

grants to have their brothers, sisters, cousins and the unemployment crisis, does not permit it. I

other close relatives brought to Australia. The have sympathy with this argument; of course we

enormous social and emotional costs of separation must take account of economic factors in any

of families must surely have been brought to the jUdgment on immigration and population. How

notice of every honourable member and of the ever, we must not, as unfortunately some do, seek Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs to blame immigration and immigrants for 'our

many times. We have a moral obligation to re economic problems. Nor should we see these

spond to the heartbreak created for these families. economic problems as inevitable, with the atti

The Australian Labor Party advocates an im tude that we can do nothing about them. Rather,

mediate extension to the family reunion program we should see them as a consequence of the poli

and an immediate relaxation of criteria for famil cies of governments, especially the policies of the

ies to come and live together in this country. This present Federal Government. There is nothing

extension would be at little cost and often of great sadder than the fact that the policies of the cur

benefit to the Australian community, for when rent Government on unemployment, which have

people arrive on family reunion programs they resulted in the present level of unemployment,

have support groups around them to help them have severely restricted our room to manoeuvre

become established and to take their place in our on immigration and population policies. Indeed, if

society. The Government should act with fore the honourable member for Franklin (Mr

sight and vision on this matter and help rather Good1uck) is as concerned as he maintains about

than hinder the process of reuniting families. I add population trends, then he should pressure his

as a footnote to that point that I have been Government more for a change in economic pol

informed that no statistics are kept which show icy so that we can afford to be more generous to

what proportion of immigration applications are those people who are keen to come to this land

made in the family reunion category and are and make their contribution.

rejected. It is time we found that out.

We should not let the temporary economic

Mr Kent-It is a great proportion, I can tell trends created by this Government cloud our

you. I get them in my office.

vision on this matter. When the Labor Party re

Dr THEOPHANOUS-The honourable member for Hotham said that it is a great pro portion. I agree with him. Another question we need to ask when giving overall consideration to population policy is whether we have a moral ob ligation towards the hundreds of thousands of ref ugees in many countries. I believe that, as a young and growing country, we have a very substantial obligation to help as many of these people as we can to come and live here. This does not mean that I agree with the current Government policy on refugees, which has been very discriminatory. There has been much action in favour of Vietnamese and Kampuchean refugees, to the vir tual exclusion of those from many other countries.

turns to government in 1 983, it will restore nor mal economic circumstances and it will increase dramatically employment in the economy and provide the circumstances for genuine growth, especially in the public and manufacturing sec tors. This will open up opportunities for us to take a bold and imaginative view towards immigration policy. A point often made on the relationship of economic factors with immigration policy is that during the period of highest immigration to this country we had the greatest growth in the economy. That is because immigration helps to con tribute to the overall health of the economy. That factor has to be taken into account when we make an overall estimation of the relationship between our immigration and economic policies. As the Minister has acknowledged, without further im

Mr Humphreys-There are no Lebanese, migration our population will shrink. We need to

either.

adopt as a matter of principle a renewal of an im

Dr THEOPHANOUS-In particular, ref ugees from Middle Eastern countries-especially Lebanon-and from Latin America and Africa seem to be discriminated against. We need to move towards a more responsive, fairer and more humane refugee policy which does not discrimi

migration program similar to that which we had in earlier times. We need to ensure that we create economic circumstances which will allow us to implement that program and to help increase the population growth of this nation from below the zero level.

nate on the basis of political beliefs. Certainly that Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (5.27)-1 want to

seems to be the basis of the present policy. Prob confine my comments on the Review of

ably many honourable members will object to Australia's Demographic Trends to two aspects.

Review ofA ustralian Demographic Trends

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 1 7

The first deals with the aging of the Australian population. Of course, this is relevant to all areas of Australia but page 1 0 of the report highlights the particular problem of the Australian Capital Territory. It says that in the Australian Capital Territory there has been a greater rate of increase in the proportion of the population aged over 65 years than elsewhere in Australia. Demographic trends towards an aging population will have enormous implications for the provision of care for the aged. We can now expect that at least 55 per cent of males and 73 per cent of females will attain the age of 70 years.
This means that a higher proportion of Australian families will have agedrelatives to care for, and Government policies towards the aged do not encourage their independence because the age pension is a miserly amount, representing only about 20 per cent of average weekly earnings. Therefore, most pensioners are forced to rely on their families for assistance with accommodation, transport and social activities and to spend a great deal of their time trapped in their homes because they do not have sufficient facilities. This appal ling state of affairs was demonstrated in the Australian Capital Territory recently when there was an increase of 66 per cent in bus fares for pensioners. That may not seem a great deal to people on normal incomes but it makes substantial in roads into the weekly allowance of pensioners, many of whom are living below the poverty line. The current pension levels are insufficient to provide age pensioners with comfortable and relaxed lifestyles, which is their right after a lifetime of contributions to Australia's development. They are forced into a dependent situation which leads to loss of dignity for them and for their relatives. It is time for this Government to give elderly citi zens a fair go and to stop treating them as second class citizens.
At present, insufficient policies and funds are directed towards the aged and, as the Australian population ages further during this century, the needs of our aging population will increase. Demographic factors alone will necessitate a much greater expenditure for the aged, but if we are also to include the need for humane and com passionate policies, we will have to re-think seriously the rationale for current policies towards the aged. There is no doubt that the costs of pro viding for the aged in Australia must escalate in the future. We must ensure than any increases in pensions represent real advances in relation to prevailing living standards and that the position of our pensioners does not fall further and further below the poverty line. Providing subsistence funding for our pensioners is not good enough.

Our goal should be to enhance and extend the lives of our elderly citizens, to allow them to be long more fully to our society without being de pendent on their relatives for support. For the re mainder of this century there will be a relatively small elderly population compared with the number of people working, but it is clear from this paper that the economic dependency ratio will de teriorate next century, causing severe problems in the financing of welfare benefits for the aged. The next two decades will give us a brief respite when I hope that we can accumulate funds and develop strategies for dealing with this issue. This demo graphic paper illustrates quite clearly the grave problems facing governments in the provision of and funding for the care of elderly citizens in a cli mate where the population is aging and where there are fewer working people to support them. This matter deserves our serious consideration if Australia is to continue to provide adequately for its citizens.
I wish to refer very briefly to another aspect of the report. Table 2 on page 1 1 of this report high lights the sudden decline in the rate of population growth in the Australian Capital Territory. By looking at that chart, it can be seen that the de cline was from an increase of 6.51 per cent in the population in 1 975 to a sudden drop of 2.41 per cent in 1 976. This proved to be too much, too soon. Obviously the drop was caused by direct government policy. As we all know that had a dramatic effect on industry in Canberra leading to a very high unemployment, a massive increase in bankruptcies, empty schools and a loss of faith in the future of Canberra. No other State or Terri tory, with the exception of the Northern Terri tory, whose sharp decline in population growth can be attributed to Cyclone Tracy, had anything like such a decline. Their greatest decline was about 0.4 per cent. We have already seen the dra matic effect caused by such a decline. I think that this should be a clear warning to the Government and to Opposition parties to ensure that this does not happen again in 1 988 when the Federal Government completes the new and permanent parliament house project. Every other State and Territory has steady population fluctuations and it is only fair and reasonable to expect that the Australian Capital Territory should have a long term plan based on steady population variations rather than on the massive variations since 1 976. That is the only environment in which Canberra can prosper and in which its citizens can have a se cure future.
Mr HOWE (Batman) ( 5.34)-The paper on Australia's demographic trends has a number of major themes which I want to refer to briefly.

1 1 1 8 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 198 1

Review of Australian Demographic Trends

Firstly, I think that essentially it suggests that the security, independence and economic develop

doubling or the rate of increase in the population ment. The reason for that policy has not been due

which we have seen in the post-War period is particularly to social goals and it has not been rel

likely to continue to the turn of the century. So we evant particularly to any assessment of the kind of

have the revision of the Borrie estimates upwards society that we have wanted to create. It has not

and the estimate that, given increased levels ofmi had a kind of value base. Whilst we adopted very

gration from those levels which persisted in the recently the idea of multiculturalism, we did not

1 970s, the overall population is likely to reach set out in the 1 940s to create a multicultural so

about 20 million by the turn of the century. Sec ciety. Rather, we set out to build up the popu

ondly, there will be further and significant lation because we thought that it would give this

changes in the compositon of the population, with country a much more secure society. I believe that

the most dramatic changes being to the age struc as a result of that process, our society has become

ture of the population as well as changes in re a very complex one and that built into it there are

lation to the ethnic composition of the popu very serious strains and tensions.

lation, particularly as a result of the vastly increased rate of migration from South East Asia. This movement of population from South East Asia will result in a situation in which a very significant proportion of the Australian population will either be ofMiddle Eastern or Asian origin by the turn of the century. Thirdly, the sharp decline in net reproduction rates, which occurred during the 1970s, is likely to be a continuing character istic; that is, we are not likely to achieve very much over one per cent net reproduction rates through to the turn of the century.

Given the levels of growth that this report suggests and given the new complexity which will be introduced by having a very much higher pro portion of the population drawn from Asiaa fact which I welcomeanother dimension will be added to make what is already a very complicated population structure even more so. Whilst in the post-War period we have not had violence associated with our migration program and the signs of tension have been very much under the surface, I believe that we can expect that those tensions will grow in the future unless we learn

The historic distribution of Australia's population, particularly in terms of urbanisation, is likely to be a continuing characteristic of the dis tribution of the Australian population through to the turn of the century. Eighty per cent of the population lives in coastal areas. The report re minds us that 65 per cent live in major urban areas of over 1 00,000 people; and 60 per cent live in the great conurbations associated with Sydney, New castle and Port Kembla in New South Wales and Melbourne and Geelong in Victoria. No other country has as high a degree of urbanisation as Australia. The changing distribution of the population between the States is not likely to alter this fact. People will still live on the coast. Generally they will still live in large cities. The vast majority of the population will live not only in large cities but also in the metropolitan areas such as Sydney and Melbourne.

from our experience of that period. I think that experience would suggest that migration brings with it very great costs which need to be addres sed. I believe that, as a society, we have not really faced up to these costs and been prepared to com mit that expenditure. It is very easy to talk about Australian society as if it is united as one. If one looks at the reality, we are in fact a society which is very divided, particularly along class lines. If one looks at the working class areas of this country, one finds that migration has not been addressed socially in the way it might have been.
I believe that, if we are genuinely to move towards a multicultural society, there is no more important question than the question of language; there is no more important issue in this country than that of bilingual education. In the past we have not taken seriously in terms of education the languages of the people who have come to this country and there is no sign that we intend to take

This report raises a number of issues. I have just received a message which indicates that I have very little time to canvass any of them. I would like to make one more point, which I think is fun damental, and perhaps conclude my remarks. This report suggests that any increase in the Australian population over the next 20 years is going to occur very largely as a result of migration. If we look at the migration policy which we have his torically adopted in the post-War period, we will

Asian languages seriously in the future. I believe that this issue of language, given the complexity of our society, is more important perhaps than any other single issue. I regret that, as a Parliament, we have not devoted ourselves to the question of bilingual education. I would hope that, if we are to continue to develop as a multicultural society, the question of the teaching of community languages will be taken much more seriously in the future.

,ee that the reasons for that policy were national Question resolved in the affirmative.

Governor-General's Speech

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 1 9

PUBLICATION OF PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS
Mr SPEAKER-The Government Printer has advised the Principal Parliamentary Reporter that members of the Printing and Kindred Indus tries Union employed at the Government Printing Office have imposed a ban on the working of over time and will stop work for 24 hours from 8 a.m., Wednesday, 1 April. The probable result will be that Hansard for today's sitting will not be available until Thursday morning, Hansard for Wednesday's sitting will not be available until Friday morning and Hansard for Thursday's sitting will not be available until Monday, 6 April. The print ing of the Notice Paper for Thursday will also be affected.
GOVERNOR-GENERAL'S SPEECH
Address-in-Reply Debate resumed from 26 March, on motion by Mr Spender:
That the following Address-in-Reply to the Speech of His Excellency the Governor-General be agreed to:
May it please Your Excellency:
We, the House ofRepresentatives of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled, desire to express our loyalty to Our Most Gracious Sovereign, and to thank Your Excellency for the Speech which you have been pleased to ad dress to Parliament.
Upon which Mr Kent had moved by way of amendment:
That the following words be added to the Address: " but note that the Government:
( 1 ) has failed to adequatelyrespond to (a) recordunemployment; (b) a high and worseninglevel ofinflation; (c) reduced and falling family living standards, and (d) the highest taxation burden in the nation's history;
(2) allows unsatisfactory administration of foreign investment guidelines which permit an uncritical and open door policy to the takeover of Australian industry and resources to continue, and
(3) makes no long-term provision for assistance to manufacturing industry and farming industries, which are likely to be severely disadvantaged as a result of suc cessive exchange rate revaluations and substantially increased imports in the context of resources development'.
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (5.43)-1 have much pleasure this afternoon in entering the Address-in-Reply debate and supporting the amendment moved by the honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent) . Five months ago today, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) delivered his policy speech at the opening of the 1 980 Federal election campaign. The Prime Min ister said on that date in the introduction to his speech:

Today, a new spirit, a new enthusiasm, a new dynamism, is at work in Australia.

It is amazing to see how hollow those words ring five months after the date of delivery. Since this Government came to office, we have seen an assault on the Australian people the like of which we have not seen for many, many years. Since the delivery of the Prime Minister's high sounding words, the living standards of Australian families have declined markedly.

The ideal of home ownership, which is some thing dear to the hearts of all Australians, has been virtually put out of the mind of any young person living in the city of Sydney and in most of the capital cities of our country. Interest rates have increased rapidly under this Government. In fact, at present they are more than two per cent higher than the level pledged in the Prime Minister's policy speech only five months ago. One wonders at what level interest rates will be when this Government goes out of office in 1 983. Will Australians be able to afford the Fraser Government for much longer? We have seen health costs spiral. The report of the Jamison Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals, which was set up by this Government, recommends a significant curtailment of health ' programs which are provided to Australians at present. We are watching the Government take the last hatchet to what is left of Medibank which was probably one of the greatest social reforms ever instituted by a government in this country. I am very proud to say that this reform was insti tuted by an Australian Labor Party government. Many people in my electorate would face incred ible financial hardships if there were any further changes to Medibank.

Whilst the Prime Minister has done all those

things-whilst he has destroyed Medibank, whilst he has destroyed the chance of Australians to pur-

:

chase their own home and whilst he has taken

away any of the benefits that people can gain through hard work-he has the hide to say that

"

while achieving all this we have enchanced the

dignity and self-esteem of those in need. My good

ness, if that is the way a government tries to en

hance the dignity and self-esteem of those in need,

I would hate to see what would happen if this

Government took the stick to them. We are ap

proaching the same sort of rationale under this

Government that we see in America at present.

This morning's edition of the Sydney Morning

Herald contains an interview with the Director of

the White House Office of Management and the

Budget in the Reagan Administration. When

asked by a reporter from the Sydney Morning

Herald what rights people had for services from

] 1 20 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

government he said that they had absolutely no Barton (Mr Bradfield) has put forward a plan

rights. He said that the idea of people having a which he says the Government is seriously con

right to some sort of service from government was sidering. His plan would allow pensioners to in

absolutely absurd. That is the sort of attitude that vest in government savings bonds and the interest

the Fraser Government is approaching in earned would not be subject to taxation or affect

Australia. How long will it be before all the the level of pension benefits. That might be a

programs that governments have provided as a reasonable plan for those who have money. I sup

safety net for the needy of this country are dis pose most of the pensioners in the honourable

mantled by the government that is in power in our member for Barton's electorate do have a fair

country today?

amount of money. Unfortunately, the people in

Between 1 972 and 1 975, some real changes my electorate do not have much money and they were achieved in the attitudes of Australians, as can try to supplement their income by small earn

well as the attitude of government, towards those who were not as well off as others were. Australians have been made to go back into their shells and that to my mind is the most insidious effect that this Government has had on Australians. This Government has made the middle class take a certain approach to people who are

ings only. The Government has said that it has nothing of any interest to offer to those people at all. In fact when recently I put to the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in the Parliament that the Government should review the taxation situation with respect to pensioners prior to the Budget and intro duce retrospective legislation, the Treasurer said:

less able to fend for themselves and say: 'If they 'Well, that does not matter; we will look at this

are not doing as well as I am, bad luck for them'. I matter when the Budget is brought down'. What

.think that is a deplorable state of affairs; I think that attitude which is abroad in our country today is deplorable.
Earlier this afternoon, a number of honourable members debated a paper on a Review of Australias Demographic Trends and a statement made by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee). One of the most significant features to come out of that review is the rapidly aging factor in the Australian popUlation. We are the most rapidly aging population in the world. This Government does not have any proposals or policies to deal with that development. It now has the facts and the figures before it and it cannot shirk its responsibility. It must come up with a co-ordinated policy for the aged. Rather than having a co-ordinated policy, the present Government unfortunately has found ways to tax the meagre earnings of pensioners who the De partment of Social Security says can earn $20 a week without affecting their pension fringe benefits. The Government has found ways to tax pensioners who wish to put some money away to pay for their funerals. I wish that some Ministers would take some cognisance of the absolute fear that many old people have of not being able to

will happen is that in June of this year any pen sioner in Australia who earns the $20 a week that the Department of Social Security says he may earn and not affect his pension fringe benefits will get a bill for $ 100 from the Commissioner of Taxation. Most of those people will not be able to find that money and it will cause them much grief and pain. Of course, the Government has nothing to say for those people. The Government has no pol icy on nursing homes or the provision of domicili ary care for aged people. All it says is that it will provide more nursing homes for private entrepreneurs to get rich. I have pointed out in this Parliament on a number of occasions the great rip-offs that are occurring in private nursing homes. The Government is willing to provide about $200 a week to keep a person in a private nursing home, but if one wants to keep one's aged relations at home, all the Government allows is less than $30 a week as domiciliary nursing care benefit. Where are the Government's priorities? As was said in the Sydney Morning Herald this morning, this Government's policies are very much the same as those of the Reagan Administration in America; its policies are to soak the poor and feed the rich.

afford the high cost of burying themselves. At In his rather amazing policy statement aired

present the minimum cost in Australia of a burial five months ago, the Prime Minister also had

is $2,000. However, the Government taxes the something to say about Australia's international

interest earned if a pensioner has that much affairs. He said:

money to put in a bank.

And, under the Fraser-Anthony Government, Australia

In recent weeks, one of the most humane has won a respected place in world affairs.

members of the Government backbench put forward a plan which may help some pensioners who have some money. Unfortunately the plan does nothing for the poor. The honourable member for

Let us look at the record of this Government in international affairs. We have seen the fiasco of the Prime Minister's stance over Afghanistan; we have seen his bullying of and attempts to stand

Governor-General's Speech

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 21

over Australian athletes who wanted to go to the Olympic Games in Moscow. He has seen that his policy on Afghanistan was absolutely incorrect. The line he took had absolutely no relevance to modern international affairs, and the Prime Min ister was &llOWn to be one of the few people step ping down the lane with the Americans on that proposal. Once again we see the Prime Minister posturing on the international stage. We are to go all the way with the United States in relation to EI Salvador.
I believe that Australians should have defence ties with the Americans and that our ties with the Western allies are important to our survival in the world. However, I do not believe that an ally is a good ally only if he is critical when there is need for criticism. To my mind the present perceived policies of the American Administration regard ing EI Salvador are absolutely ridiculous. When a government goes to the extent of propping up a dictatorship that it says is anti-communist just because it alleges it is anti-communist it is a ridicu lous situation, particularly when the same government shoots to death, in the cathedral of San Salvador, the Catholic Archbishop of that country. 1 do not know how anti-communist one has to be to shoot Catholic Archbishops, only to find the American Government saying that that gives one some sort of seal of approval.
I should think that the solution in EI Salvador would be to provide for great land reform in that country. I commend to any member of this Parliament who wants to see a somewhat unbiased view of the situation in that cout1try the recent 60 Minutes television program by George Negus. I think that that is incontrovertible evidence that there are great inequities in EI Salvador and that a government cannot be propped up by military force alone, that there must be some sort of social justice in EI Salvador. It would be much better for the Australian Government if it took the view that it would support a social justice line in that country rather than just being willing to give mealy-mouth support to a rather corrupt extreme right wing dictatorship which does not have the support of anyone in the country with the excep tion of the 1 4 or 1 5 families that own most of the assets of the country.
Finally, the Prime Minister said in his policy speech that business expectations are high. The Prime Minister may have thought that they were high five months ago, but since the campaign he has waged against the unions over the last five months, I think even the business community in Australia is willing to give away these industrial hatchet men. We had the ridiculous situation in

this Parliament some weeks ago of the Government bringing in a motion to disallow a determination of the Australian Conciliation and Arbi tration Commission, which was a rather hypocritical approach from a government which has always said that people should obey the decision of the umpire. As a sideline, it was very interesting to note that, while that debate was in progress, the industrial relations spokesman for my party was wearing a Victorian Umpires Feder ation tie. It was interesting to see the shoe on the other foot. The Opposition is willing to support the decision of the umpire, but the Government will support the decision of the umpire only when it suits it.
In the few minutes remaining to me, I should , like to say a few things about my electorate, in particular about Sydney airport. I am pleased that the Minister for Education (Mr Fife), who rep resents the seat of Farrer, is the Minister at the table. I know that on a number of occasions the Minister for Education has acted as Minister for Transport. It would seem that his expertise in transport has not washed off to a gentleman by the name of Schipp, who masquerades from time to time as the Opposition's spokesman on Transport in theNew South Wales Parliament.
In the Sydney Daily Mirror of 30 March 1981-yesterday-Mr Schipp had a rather amaz ing article headed 'Airport delay causing jams'. I think the Minister for Education should take Mr Schipp aside and either write his speeches and articles for him or tell him a little about Commonwealth responsibility. In his article, Mr Schipp says:
After all. it is principally a State decision .
That is, to decide on the site of a second airport
and that responsibility cannot be ducked.
Mr Schipp ought to know-if he does not know, the Minister for Education, who has acted as Min ister for Transport on a number of occasions, should point out to him-that the Commonweath Government has responsibility for civil aviation in this country, and that the decision about when and where anything will be done to the Sydney Airport is a matter for the Commonwealth Government. It is not a matter for the New South Wales Government. In my view the Commonwealth Government should accept its responsibility. It may be that what Mr Schipp was saying really relates to the Commonwealth Government. It should accept its responsibility and make a decision about Sydney Airport.
Mr Fife-As a member of the Commonwealth Parliament, what do you think we should do about it?

1 122 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 198 1

Governor-General's Speech

Mr LEO McLEAY-1 have made my position quite clear. The Minister, I think, is a little more intelligent than Mr Schipp. He can read some of my speeches and find out what I have said, but obviously Mr Schipp does not know what he is saying.
I am very concerned about a number of proposals which have been floated by supporters of the Government about what will or will not hap pen to Sydney Airport. An inspired editorial in the Daily Telegraph of Tuesday, 24 March had a lot to say about the curfew at Sydney Airport. As the Minister is concerned to know what other people know and think about it, I should like to know what is this Government's attitude to the removal of the curfew at Sydney Airport. I am concerned that there are far too many supporters of the Government who are saying at present that we ought to get more traffic into Sydney Airport and the only way in which to do that is by remov ing the curfew. To my mind, the worst thing that could happen at Sydney Airport would be the re moval of the curfew. The people who live around the airport probably bought their houses long before the airport was anything like it is at present. Many of them bought their houses there before the international airport was extended to where it is presently. They have a terrible noise problem with that airport.
Mr Fife-Tell us how to overcome the problem.
Mr LEO McLEAY-What is the Government going to do about the curfew? Will it take it off? It will try. It has been caught out on this matter. The Government should make an unequivocal statement that there will be no attempt to remove the curfew at Sydney airport and that there will be no attempt to cause more hardship to the people who live under the flight path and who in the main live in my electorate and the surrounding electorates. I would like to hear the opinion of the right honourable member for Lowe (Sir William McMahon) , who never makes a statement about Sydney airport. The flight path runs right over his electorate.
In conclusion, I should like to make two comments on matters relating to the portfolio of the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) . I am concerned, and I have written to the Minister about this recently, that the Government's proposals for quotas for immigration into this country in 1 980-8 1 provide for a quota of only 2,500 people to come to Australia from the Middle East. My electorate has an extremely large number of people who have come to Australia from the Middle East in the last 1 0

years. In the main these people have made excel lent migrants to this country. They have involved themselves in the life of my electorate and have brought up families which fit in extremely well with Australian society. I think the proposal to allow only 2,500 migrants of a total quota of about 80,000 to come to Australia from the Middle East needs to be reconsidered. There are many people who would like to sponsor relations to come here from the Middle East. There are many people in my electorate who have good and cogent reasons for needing to have members of their families in the Middle East join them.
The Government has a commendable program for refugee resettlement in this country. However, I think it should seriously consider the position of refugees from the Middle East. If those people living in the camps in Cambodia are in great strife-as 1 believe they are-then those people living in the civil war situation in the Lebanon are in even worse straits. The Government should take a more humane attitude to those people. It should allow the same immigration and refugee status to migrants from the Middle East as was allowed in the latter 1 970s. Those people should be allowed to seek a haven in this great country of ours. Their compatriots have shown that they make excellent citizens of this country. A higher percentage of Middle Eastern people takes out Australian citizenship than do many other mi grant groups in Australia. They should be encouraged. The paltry figure of 2,500 migrants for this year should be reviewed. I hope the Minister will sympathetically review that situation. Finally, I thank the House for its courtesy. I believe the Government should have a look at the Prime Minister's policy speech once again to see how badly he has failed to live up to any of the points he put forward to the Australian elector ate. If any of the High Court challenges on unfair electoral advertising had been upheld it would have been interesting to see whether that document would have got into court. In my view it is one of the greatest shams we have seen in this country for many years.
Sitting suspended from 6.2 to 8 p.m. Mr STEELE HALL (Boothby) (8.0)-1 am pleased to support the Address-in-Reply to the Governor-General's Speech. Of course, 1 was not in the Parliament to listen to it because I have come recently to this place as the new member for Boothby. I am pleased to be the member for Boothby and to represent that district. It encom passes some of the eastern and southern suburbs of Adelaide and some of the more delightful aspects of the Adelaide Hills. It is a district with much variety and, as I have said, one that I am

Governor-General's Speech

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 23

pleased to represent and to continue my represen tation on a local basis. I wish the previous member, John McLeay, the very best in his rep resentation of Australia in an official capacity in the United States.
The results of the by-election were somewhat gratifying to the Liberal Party. Those results were unexpected by some commentators and some Lib eral Party members in the local electorate. They showed a reversal of the normal trend against a government and, in fact, a reversal against the Labor Party. It was gratifying to find that support for the Labor Party declined by about 3 per cent. It was a most unusual result. It needs a great deal of conjecture to arrive at its cause. I remember travelling through the electorate one day during the election campaign with the Minister for In dustrial Relations (Mr Peacock) . We went into the front bar of one of the local hotels. We found that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) had been there the previous day. The person tell ing us of his visit said that he had been on the wagon and was drinking Claytons tonic. The Min ister for Industrial Relations looked at him and quickly said: 'Claytons, that is the drink you are having when you are not having a drink. The Leader of the Opposition, that is the leader you are having when you don't want a leader'. Perhaps that summed up the voters' views in the electorate ofBoothby.
After the election we tended to believe that perhaps the result was due to the lack of leader ship qualities displayed by the Leader of the Op position until, of course, we looked more deeply at the Labor Party and understood the divisions within it and the confusion which is now recog nised by the general pUblic. I will refer to several documents which show quite clearly that there are deep divisions within the Labor Party. Re cently the Leader of the Opposition in South Australia, Mr Bannon, put his toe in the water again with a pro-uranium stance. He started to elucidate a program in South Australia for the Labor Party by saying that uranium was now safe to mine. He was soon brought back to earth. An article in the Advertiser stated:
However, the criticisms have resurfaced following Mr Ban non's statements to a meeting of the Australian Petroleum Ex ploration Society that the ALP should make an objective examination of its uranium policy and that it was now possible that mining of uranium could be placed in the 'safe category'.
Supporters of the ALP's anti-uranium policy have been alarmed further by the views expressed by the Opposition spokesman on the environment, Dr Cornwall, that the stage has been reached where it is relatively safe to mine, process and enrich uranium.
It was soon pointed out by the incoming President of the United Trades and Labor Council that all

sub-branches and unions would consider similar motions. He said:
We believe that the policy of the party is clear and the only place thispolicycould be changed is the party convention.
The contrast in those attitudes resembles the con fusion at the federal level when last October the Leader of the Opposition tended to take the same pro-uranium stance. The honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) soon brought him back to earth. He said:
Only the whole of the Labor party at all levels can make that decision through the decision-making processes of the party.
That is where it will bejudged whether the nuclear industry is guilty or innocent.
Individuals cannot decide whether the problems are re solved. A Labor Cabinet cannot make that decision. The Labor caucus cannot make that decision.
Those types of divisions, running deeply within the Labor Party, on one of the most important issues in the community are the basis for its loss of support. I am alarmed, however, that the new honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott) made some accusations against the South Australian Government in relation to the Australian Mineral Development Laboratories, known as AMDEL, at Thebarton. He accused the Government of covering up reports on the uranium industry. He said in this House that the South Australian Government had endeavoured to cover up and bury a report on the health hazards associated with AMDEL. He said:
Fortunately, there were public servants who had enough conscience to make sure that the report got out.
I was able to get a copy of the reply given by the State Minister of Mines and Energy in the South Australian House of Assembly. After repeating the statement made by the honourable member for Hindmarsh he said:
That is patently untrue. The report was made available, as is the policy of the Health Commission, to the unions involved as a matter ofcourse.
There was no way in which that report could be secret. It was made available to the PSA and another union was concerned although I forget its name . . .
There was no attempt to cover it up and Mr Scott's sugges tion that it had been leaked by public servants and commend ing them for it is a reflection on their integrity.
The claims and charges of the honourable member for Hindmarsh are utterly baseless. They reflect on him, not the South Australian Government.
This evening I want to mention a subject which is of great importance to South Australia. I hope the House will excuse me if J am somewhat parochial in my remarks. It concerns an area in which South Australia has been treated unjustly for many years. It ought not to have been treated

1 1 24 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

in this way. I refer to the allocation of the Federal road grants and their distribution among the various States. South Australia has received a very poor allocation in the last decade. In 1969, in another capacity, I attended a roads conference in Canberra. It was held in this chamber. Allocations were made to the various States. Mr Gorton was then Prime Minister. South Australia received a very bad allocation. It was an allocation which the local Dunstan Government and all subsequent Federal governments have been pleased to continue. The allocation is the basis of unjust treat ment of my State and I will deal with it in some detail.

in later years. We now suffer one of the most in equitable and unfair cut-ups of Commonwealth funds that have existed since Federation. It has been, and exists today as deliberate discrimination as a matter of government policy against the South Australian people and the States economy. We resent that for these comparative reasons. I make these comparisons without any ire or with out wishing to reduce the funds allocated to other States. I use these comparisons with Western Australia and Queensland because they are the other two mainland States which are in our type of road situation, as distinct from Victoria and New South Wales.

Firstly, 1 refer to the cut-up of funds in 1 969 by Mr Gorton when he was Prime Minister. One might have thought that with the divisions between the political parties being what they are the new federal Labor Government would have rec tified the position, particularly as South Australia had a Labor Government. That was not so. When the new Labor Government was forming its policies on roads the expert advice was again pre sented by the Bureau of Roads to the Commonwealth Government on the allocation among the various States. I draw comparisons with Western Australia, in particular, and sometimes with Queensland. In 1 973 the recommendation of the Federal Government's expert body, the Bureau of Roads, was that South Australia should receive 77 per cent in money terms of the amount that West ern Australia received. In a speech introducing the Bill on 1 8 July 1 9 74 the then Minister for Transport, Mr Jones, announced that the allocation for South Australia would be $ 1 00m and for Western Australia $ 1 50m. South Australia received the same proportion, two-thirds, which it had received under the previous Gorton arrangement. When the Labor Government came into office, for comparative purposes, it did nothing but continue and, in fact, increase the disparity between South Australia and the other States. The tables and graph show that in 1 968-69 South Australia received 1 1 . 1 per cent of the total road funds granted to all the States in Australia. In 1 980-8 1 , it received 8 . 5 per cent o fthe Funds. The progression downwards since 1 969 has almost been a straight-line graph of reduction. It is no wonder that Western Australia with its road con struction teams, was able to reach the Western Australian/South Australian border before South Australia could complete its share of the Eyre Highway. This disability by South Australia was brought about by the disastrous Gorton decision and the meek acceptance, as I have said, by the South Australian Government of that false base

I f we refer to the funds which are allocated, for example in 1 974-75, we find that South Australia received 53.2 per cent of Western Australia's Commonwealth road grants. Yet on a self-help basis-the amount spent by our State and local government authorities, compared with the amount spent by State and local government in Western Australia-we accomplished 93 per cent of what Western Australia accomplished. Yet we received 53.2 per cent of what Western Australia received in Commonwealth grants. In 1 978-79another four years on-we received 65.3 per cent of what Western Australia received in road grants, yet our self-help position was 78.8 per cent of the self-help that Western Australia was able to provide. That is the position on a per vehicle basis. If we turn to a per capita basis we find that for that same two-year comparative period, we received 57.4 per cent in 1 974-75 of Western Australian funds, yet we exactly equalled that State when it came to self-help in State and local government expenditures. On a per capita basis, in 1 978-79 we received 60.7 per cent of Western Australian funds and our self-help relationship was 74.7 per cent.
I f we compare South Australia with Queensland for those same years, we find that on a per vehicle basis for 1 974-75 we received 58 per cent of what Queensland received, yet our self help amounted to 73.7 per cent. In 1 978-79 we received 59.6 per cent of what Queensland received in the form of Commonwealth road grants and our self-help component was 73.5 per cent. On a per capita basis for 1 974-75, in com parison with Queensland we received 64.2 per cent. Our self-help amounted to 8 1 . 1 per cent. In 1978-79 we received 64. 1 per cent and our self help was 79 per cent. The figures may be boring but they are incontestable. There are plenty more of them.
If we look at the estimates for vehicle kilo metres of travel on a State by State comparison

Governor-General's Speech

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 25

basis, we find that in 1 975, 8,734,000 vehicle kilo metres were travelled in South Australia and in Western Australia the figure was 8,743,000. The estimates for 1 980 show South Australia as having 1 1 ,355,000 vehicle kilometres travelled and West ern Australia as having 1 1 ,775,000. The estimate for 1 85 is 1 3,753,000 and 1 5,25 1 ,000 respect ively. Comparing those figures on a percentage basis, the figures are 99.8 per cent, 96 per cent and 90 per cent. If one turns to the comparison of motor vehicles per thousand of population, one will see that in 1 974, South Australia had a total of 464 vehicles per thousand of population and Western Australia had 466. In 1 979 the figures were 504 and 542. The estimate for 1 984 shows South Australia as having 535 and Western Australia 6 1 5. It is estimated that in 1 989 South Australia, will have 69 1 vehicles per thousand of population compared with 680 vehicles per thou sand of population in Western Australia. Fore casts of average annual kilometres per vehicle show the same position. The forecast indicates that by 1 990 we should be almost equal with Western Australia. Forecasts of motor vehicles on the register show that for the year 1 979 South Australia had 65 1 ,000 and Western Australia had 650,000. The forecast for 1 984 indicates the figures to be 727,000 and 799,000 respectively. For the year 1 989 the figure is estimated at 864,000 in South Australia and 969,000 in West ern Australia.
I have a table which indicates the amount of money that the South Australian Government, through its Highways Department, has spent on national highways. How do we eventually meet up with Western Australia's Eyre Highway which is bitumenised to the West Australian border? We meet up with it by spending State funds, not by spending the money which we ought to have re ceived from the Commonwealth Government in the discriminatory grants which are being made to my State. Over the years from 1 974-75 to 1 980-8 1 we spent $29. 1 m on those national highways. In 1 976-77 $9. 1 m was spent on finishing the Eyre Highway. It is disgraceful for the Commonwealth to sustain that low figure which we now obtain. The situation is worse than that. I invite honour able members to look at the amounts that are re paid to the States in comparison with the fuel taxes which are collected. In 1 977-78, Queensland supplied $ 1 39m in fuel tax. It received 7 1 .9 per cent of that back in grants. South Australia sup plied $82m and received 48.8 per cent back in grants. Western Australia supplied $ 1 02m and received 59.8 per cent back in grants.

The only consideration that emerges from those figures is that South Australian motorists are sub sidising Western Australian and Queensland motorists by the fuel tax that they pay. This is a disgraceful situation. [n addition to that, the States of South Australia, Victoria, and Western Australia have now brought in, under the business franchise legislation, taxes on fuel which will yield $20m to South Australia in 1 980-8 1 . Whilst West ern Australia is also involved in that, Queensland is not. Therefore, the per capita and per vehicle comparisons with Queensland will be much worse than I indicated a short while ago. The warranted or justified road program for the years 1 979-80 to 1 983-84, as presented to the Minister by the Bureau of Transport Economics, has recommended that South Australia should complete in that period of five years 94.8 per cent of Western Australia's program. Yet if we are to proceed with these inequitable votes, we will receive 66 per cent of Western Australia's vote. 1 want to know why. What discriminatory measures, attitudes and activities have acted against my State over the last 1 0 years-as carried on by the Labor Government when in office; meekly complied with by the Dunstan Government-to allow the situation to continue in this way?
We are facing a new decision in the next few weeks. The remaining four years of the current five-year program will be allocated between the States. 1 want the Minister to stop what amounts to a rip-off of the South Australian motorist. As 1 have said, South Australian motorists are subsidis ing motorists in other States. We want to be treated as Australian citizens and not as citizens of a colonial outpost which is not yet admitted to the federation. The Minister is a clean skin in this matter. He has had nothing to do with these past events, this discrimination and this attitude against South Australia. I put it to him: He can be the first Minister in a decade to put right what is one of the greatest wrongs in administration federally of funds disbursed under this or any other government in that decade.
Mr HUMPHREYS (Griffith) (8.20) - After listening to that conglomeration of thoughts by the honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall) in which he slandered Australian Labor Party and Liberal ex-Prime Ministers, it is not difficult to understand why he lost his seat easily and also lost government in South Australian to the Australian Labor Party. If he continues in that fashion, I think he will even lose his seat for the Liberal Party. All the honourable member did was slander the Liberal Party and tell us how good Don Dunstan was in South Australia.

1 126 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

I congratulate you, M r Deputy Speaker, on being elected to your high office. I ask you to pass on my congratulations to the Speaker and to all the other Deputy Speakers. I congratulate all honourable members on being returned or elected to this Parliament and all those honourable members who have made maiden speeches. I have enjoyed their speeches.
In his opening address to the assembly of the thirty-second Parliament, the Governor-General referred to the theme on which I am about to expand-the International Year of Disabled Per sons. We were told on that occasion:
These policies are designed to work for the well-being ofall Australians and to develop a society which maximises the re wards of individual effort and initiative, and which also re spects the right ofindividuals to shape their own lives.
Under the heading 'Caring for People', the Governor-General went on:
In what J have said about unemployment, youth and the economy, I have stressed my Government's concern with the human dimensions of the issues involved. It believes that the only legitimate yardstick for assessing any policy is not con formity to an ideology, not the strengthening of the state, but the effectiveness of that policy in enhancing the lives of people. Thisis the fundamental concern ofmy Government.
He continued:
It is evident in the programs developed in the context of the International Year ofDisabled Persons 1981 to assist the education of severely handicapped children and to increase employment opportunities for the disabled.
The International Year of Disabled Persons seems destined to enjoy short-lived prominence in our day to day affairs. With almost one-quarter of this year behind us, we find that this present Government has yet to initiate fundamental or far reaching legislative changes in order to break down the barriers between the disabled and the non-disabled in our community. It will be extremely regrettable-indeed it will be to this Government's everlasting discredit-if the words spoken at the opening of the thirty-second session of Parliament were mere gloss to enhance the ceremoniousness of the occasion.
Yet there seems fairly clear evidence at this stage that the Government's attitude to legislative change with regard to disabled persons is 'hasten slowly'. Between now and June, this Government will no doubt unleash all manner of undemocratic tactics on both Houses of Parliament in order to ram through some unwanted and unsalubrious legislation. I am predicting with utmost con fidence, however, that none will concern the dis abled. Of course, this Government has never been known to act assiduously in the area of welfare re form, and there is already ample evidence that this year will be no exception. I am told that a

working paper on the subject of anti discrimination legislation in respect of the rights of the disabled is presently buried somewhere in the Attorney-General's Department. If this is the blighted path on which the Government has chosen to launch the International Year of Dis abled Pe"rsons-the year specially designated by the United Nations-I ask: What will happen in years to come?
The United Nations proclaimed 'Full Partici pation and Equality' as the theme for the Inter national Year of Disabled Persons 1981 . [ ask again: Where is the participation and where is the equality? Participation suggests to me that dis abled persons themselves should have a say in what legislative changes are to be contemplated. Yet what do we find? We find no participation but more paternalism, government and insti tutions deciding what is best for the people involved. The Handicapped Persons Assistance Act is a prime example. The past paternalism displayed by this Government has meant that only organisations that provide service on their premises are eligible for Government fil1ancial as sistance, while self-help groups pooling their resources are ineligible. The thoughtlessness and the heartlessness of this Government are demon strated once more in the overlapping provisions of the National Health Act, the Nursing Homes As sistance Act and the Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act. With characteristic insensitivity, the Government has ignored the conflict that arises in attempting to strike a balance between encourag ing the integration of the disabled within the community and providing much needed regular ther apy in institutions.
I have been advised by multiple sclerosis sufferers who must undergo intensive therapy once or twice a year as occasional in-patients in nursing homes that they are lucky to find their fare out of the home on completion of the treat ment. After paying the nursing home fee of $60.20 a week, they are left with the grand sum of $8 a week in pocket money. Frequently these unfortu nate souls have commitments outside the nursing homes which must be kept going when they are in the homes. What account has the Government taken of their predicament? In its generosity, it has provided a further bureaucratic hurdle how ever, not one that is available to all disabled per sons so afflicted. But-and here's the rub-there is provision for the patient's contribution to be waived, if the patient is suffering financial hard ship. Under the circumstances I have previously described, that is when $8.00 is all a nursing home patient is left after paying nursing home fees, surely all disabled persons in such circumstances

Governor-General's Speech

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 27

are suffering financial hardships. It is typical of reach. At a recent national conference to discuss

the Government to treat all the under-privileged employment of the disabled, it was asserted that

in our society as an aberration. What I have de Australia is the only English speaking country

scribed is a perfect example of this policy slant. which has not legislated for conditions in shel

Clearly the Government has two options, if it is to tered workshops; further, that sheltered workers

rectify this situation: Either it must increase the did not get the benefit of national wage increases.

nursing home subsidy or it must lift invalid This in itself is a tragedy. However, even more re

pensions.

grettable is the fact that national wage increases

With no opportunity to participate in decisions taken to influence their welfare, what chance have the disabled to receive equality of opportunity? At present, their chances are very slim indeed, due to the disjointed and fragmented patchwork quilt of Federal and State laws which directly or indirectly impinge on the lives of the disabled. The International Year of Disabled Per sons presents us with an opportunity-no, more than an opportunity-an obligation, to bring

would not profit a disabled pension recipient, given the application of the means test I mentioned above. Every dollar earned in excess of $20 per week is reduced by half. If this were a humane and caring government, it would index the shel tered workers incentive allowance, which is not means-tested but which presently stands at a pa thetic $5 per week. This would ensure that dis abled persons would get the benefit of consumer price indexs increases.

some rationality and uniformity into the set of existing Federal and State laws dealing with the disabled person. It is imperative that the Federal and State legislators join together in immediate consultation to ensure that the laws affecting the disabled are comparable right across Australia. Legislation relating to human rights and citizen ship rights for the disabled should be the point of departure in which all other reforms find their reference. It makes sense to locate this legislation in the Federal sphere. At the very least the Government should already be observing the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of the Dis abled. These rights include the promotion of higher standards of living and full employment for those disabled persons able to work, while assur ing their welfare and rehabilitation. When it comes to equality for the disabled, it is self evident that we must start from a basic threshold, such as a guarantee of access to welfare and rehabilitation.

With some 28 areas of legislation under which disabled persons receive direct or indirect assistance from the Government, there is plenty of scope for reform and I do not intend to give an exhaustive account of all areas. However, there is one matter on which I think this Government should act swiftly if it is not to attract censure from this side of the House. I refer to providing the disabled with legislation to prevent their being discriminated against in their employment on the basis of their disability. There is still no legislative backing for the National Committee on Discrimi nation in Employment and Occupation. Disabled persons, who may also be Commonwealth public servants, or those employed in the States where there is no protective legislation, are being kicked about and down-trodden because of the Government's failure to act in this sphere. The National Committee on Discrimination in Employment and Occupation each year receives many com plaints from employees who believe that they

One has to look no further than the Social Ser have been discriminated against because of a dis

vices Act for evidence that this Government has ability. However, it can do no more than wag its

little regard for the disabled. The Social Services finger at guilty employers. In these difficult times,

Act can only be described as grossly discriminat made even more difficult by the Government's

ory and ill-conceived, especially with regard to the economic policies, what prospect does a disabled

payment of invalid pensions. It is ill-conceived be person having once been retrenched, have of

cause only the blind are allowed means test free finding another job? One has only to consider the

invalid pensions. Countless disabled persons are extent of the number of what is now cruelly

thereby forced to live squalid and second rate termed 'hard-core unemployables' who are not

lives, trying to eke out a desperate existence at disabled to know the answer to this question.

near poverty level. Frequently those disabled per

sons who are able to work discover that full em There are other facets of anti-discrimination

ployment extends only as far as the nearest shel legislation which should be enacted for the dis

tered workshop. With the average wage of abled, among them measures dealing with aspects

sheltered workers frozen at $20 for a 40-hour brought to our attention by the National

week-that is, the maximum permissible weekly Women's Advisory Council. These include the

earnings without the loss of pension-the possi abolition of the need for the disabled to qualify for

bility of higherstandards of living is forever out of superannuation schemes as a means of becoming

1 1 28 REPRESENTATIVES 31 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

eligible for employment; the protection o fthe dis abled in relation to the imposition of compulsory abortion and sterilisation procedures; the pro vision of a promotional appeals avenue for Commonwealth public servants, one which is sensitive to the rights of the disabled; and the provision of legal support and advocacy services to give the disabled representation in legal matters in their role as private citizens.
The Government would do well to look at handicap legislation in the United States where, to quote Mr Justice Kirby, Chairman of the Australian Law Reform Commission, 'handicap law is being hailed as the new era of law'. Mr Justice Kirby has praised the United States Vocational Rehabilitation Act of 1973 under which nobody in the United States may receive supportive fed eral funds if it is shown that the body discrimi nates against an otherwise handicapped individual . . . solely by reason of his or her handicap. The Act has been used in precisely the areas where handicapped people are at a particu lar disadvantage, such as those of housing, employment, education and access to public fa cilities. There will be no shortage of inspiration and example available to the Government when it is finally moved to exert itself.
Yet another area where the Government is dragging its feet is in regard to the hearing impaired. It seems it has now become common place for persons suffering hearing impairment to wait three months or even longer for the supply of hearing aids through the National Acoustic Laboratories. There seems to me to be an awful irony in this state of affairs. To say the least, it is symbolic of the Government's callous attitude, its downright inability to hear the pleas for assistance coming from the less fortunate in our community. In turning a blind eye and a deaf ear, the Government is revealing the deficiency in its policy toward the supply of welfare services to the seven out of 1 00 Australians who suffer from serious hearing defects.
The IYDP deserves a co-ordinated approach at the national level, not only in regard to legislative reform but also in regard to funding. To date, the Government's efforts with regard to the supply of television services to the hearing impaired has been characterised by demarcation disputes over departmental jurisdiction, by ministerial buck passing and by intervention from media monopolies. At least four government depart ments, those of the Prime Minister, the Minister for Social Security, the Minister for Communi cations and the Minister for Health, are involved-strewing red-tape, pigeon-holing and

procrastinating as only they know how. Their in eptitude has caused much concern among many wonderful people who assist the disabled persons in these areas. Either the Minister for Communi cations or the Minister for Social Security should decide which of their two departments will accept responsibility for a national captioning centre. The Australian Deafness Council met with rep resentatives of each of the above-mentioned de partments to decide Australia's options with regard to such a captioning centre in October last year. The proposed national captioning centre re quires special funding initially but the Australian Deafness Council believes that it can be self sufficient thereafter. Although the Minister for Social Security currently has responsibility for the IYDP at the national level, the responsibility for this particular issue is clearly causing some im pairment, not only to Government hearing but also to its vision. Since it also involved the Minister for Communications, who was asked to take a decision as regards policy for standardisation of a video-text technique, it is anybody's guess where the buck will finally stop. The United Kingdom, the United States and Canada are already well established in the provision of closed captioning for the deaf and the hearing impaired. If the delays in Australia hinge on who is prepared to accept min isterial responsibility, I suggest it is time the Min isters involved introduced themselves to one another and began to work together.
Furthermore, the policy on the standardisation of a video-text technique is too important a decision for market forces or, more to the point, for media monopolies to decide. I understand also that at the meeting held last October, at which the four government departments were represented, it was pointed out that 1 0 out of 1 7 metropolitan television stations have Teletext. However, it is also true that research is needed into what programs people want captioned. To date the necessary research, like the decision as to the type ofvideo text to be used, is still in limbo.
The fragmented and disjointed approach which has characterised legislation relating to the dis abled is also evident in the Government's funding program. In the 1 980-81 Budget Speech, the Government stated it would spend $ 1 1 m in the first year of a three-year program for the establishment of new services for handicapped children and adults. To date, only $3.8m of this allocation has been made available and $ l m of that has been spent on publicity. If such a lag in the disburse ment of funds occurs at the beginning of the fund ing program, what will be the fate of the program overall? As at this date, if we disregard the $1 m which has been made available to the Department

Governor-General's Speech

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 29

of Social Security for publicity purposes, it appears that only $2.8m has thus far been chan nelled through four government departments. Honourable members are bound to agree with me that this sum is a mere trifle and substantially be neath the level of funding that we have been an ticipating given the great fanfare of publicity associated with the Government's intentions toward the IYDP. The time and effort spent in trumpeting the Government's achievements, or lack of them, would be better spent providing concrete benefit to the disabled. As it stands, it is arguable how much of the $2.8m mentioned will filter through to the disabled themselves.
If the IYDP is not to go down in the annals of welfare reform as a gigantic public relations and self-congratulatory exercise by and for, the Fraser Government, let us see more funds, more co ordination and more communication from the Ministers responsible for administering it. Let us hear clear and regular reports as to the overall progress of the IYDP.
Mr CARLTON ( Mackellar) ( 8 . 39) -Mr Deputy Speaker Millar, may I begin by congratu lating you on your re-election, by thanking you for your wise surveillance of this chamber over the last three years and by wishing you a happy sur veillance over it during the coming three years. I would be grateful if you would convey to Mr Speaker my congratulations to him and my wishes for a successful forthcoming term for him also. May I also congratulate those honourable members who made maiden speeches during the course of the Address-in-Reply debate and other debates. I note in particular that there were two women maiden speakers and also one who was returning to the House. Much as I regret the loss of my former party colleagues from those seats, I nonetheless believe that it is a useful balance within this chamber to have three women members-ifonly three.
His Excellency the Governor-General in his Speech to the Parliament on 25 November last, made particular reference to the problem of un employment and the importance attached by the Government to a solution to this problem. His Ex cellency said:
My Government believes that the long-term solution to it undonbtedly lies in the creation of new jobs by restoring healthy economic growth, and in this respect Australia is much better placed than many other industrial countries.
He went on to say:
But the mattercannot be left there, has not beenleft there, and will not be left there.
I agree with that and I would like to say something tonight about the kinds of things we have to do. First, I will dispose of some excess baggage that

the ideological Left is trying to load on to us as we tackle the problem of unemployment. It has become fashionable, indeed it seems to be a political imperative of the Left, to try to frighten the wits out of people over the job-reducing etTects of technological change. The honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) joined the band wagon in his book I Want to Work, published a couple of years ago, and the present opposition spokesman on employment and industrial relations, the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), has skated dangerously around this subject over the last two or three years. On the far Left we have M essrs. Wheelwright and Windschuttle purveying highly questionable material that suggests that a complete collapse of elT'ployment is imminent. According to these b .ltlemen it should have occurred already, but the statistics of the last eighteen months or so have been rather inconvenient for them.
For a balanced view of the effects of techno logical change on employment I refer the House to a paper given by Professor F. H. Gruen of the Australian National University to the forty seventh Summer School of the Australian Insti tute of Political Science earlier this year. Professor Gruen is an economist respected by both sides of politics, and he acted as an adviser on some matters to the Whitlam Labor Government. He gives three substantial reasons why we should be sceptical of the suggestion that technological change will destroy employment. Firstly, in Australia the growth of unemployment was too great and too sudden to have been caused by new technology. In 1 974-75 unemployment grew by 1 50 per cent in less than twelve months, and it most certainly did not result from an inrush of microprocessors during that period. Secondly, if unemployment is to result from rapid technologi cal change, then one would expect it to be ac companied by a rapid increase in productivity; that is, higher output per worker through the use of machines. However, on the contrary, the rate of growth in productivity has actually declined in most Western economies, including Australia, over the last decade. Thirdly, unemployment in Australia after 1 974 moved from one of the low est in the developed economies to one of the highest, yet Australia introduced fewer microprocessors or industrial robots over these years than these other countries. How, then, could our increased rate of unemployment be explained by the use of high technology?
Of course, no one argues that jobs are not lost in particular firms or particular industries because of technological change. What seems clear, however,

1 1 30 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

is that there is no evidence to show that on bal ance there is a net loss ofjobs through technologi cal change. On the contrary, there is more evidence to show that unless we do have technological change we will become interna tionally uncompetitive, will not seIl our goods abroad and as a result will lose more jobs in the end. The real reason we have lost so many jobs in Australia since 1 9 74 is that we halved our rate of economic growth. Some of this was caused by overseas factors, such as the rise in oil prices, but we would have done a lot better if we had not had such bad economic management under the Labor Government. I know it has become boring to say this, but it is true nonetheless. It is even more bor ing to follow a responsible policy of economic re covery, but over the last 1 2 months that policy at last has borne fruit. We are getting economic growth again and more jobs are becoming available, but there is a real danger that the least able, the least skilled or the most disadvantaged, could be passed by when the new jobs are handed out.
It is clear from Professor Gruen's paper that the two essential components of full employment in the pre-1 974 sense are, firstly, economic growth and, secondly, labour market flexibility. The two are intertwined, for although we now have the in gredients of better economic growth in Australia, labour market inflexibility will in various ways reduce the size of that growth, and thereby also reduce the availability of jobs. Honourable members should understand that we cannot blame the economists for our high rates of unemployment. Their job is to point out why unemployment is high and what is stopping it from going down. This the better economists P rofessor Gruen is one-have done. What econ omists cannot do is prescribe simple economic sol utions to the essentially political problem of shaking out entrenched interest groups. It is only by doing just that that we can reach a solution. One may well say that the problem is political and passes on to governments. In a way that is true, but the Federal Government gets little help from the business sector, the unions, State Governments or the constitution of the Commonwealth in its efforts to deal with the situation. It is cer tainly not blameless itself, as it has bowed too often to sectional interests on certain issues and has not admitted publicly in unmistakeable terms that it has no control whatsoever over one of the main determinants of employment, that is the set ting of industrial awards.
Nonetheless, the Government deserves credit for reintroducing sound fiscal monetary and en ergy policies compared with those of the early 1970s, and creating a receptive climate for the

kind of investment that is giving us the improved growth rate that we now see. Given the size and nature of the pressures exerted on the Government by sectional groups and the comparative ab sence of counter-pressures from those waiting in the queue for their own slice of assistance, it is not really surprising that some important structural decisions have been ducked. The most obvious is protection. It is true that protection can slow down, but not halt, the decline of employment in inefficient industries, such as textiles and motor manufacturing. However, there is hardly an econ omist in the country of any school who claims that protection improves overall employment. Yet the trade unions, the Labor Party and J regret many in my own party, link arms with protected manu facturers to preserve the privilege of the few at the expense of the many. The textiles battle was lost, and we now shape up to the bigger issue of the motor industry and the general survey recom mended by the Crawford report, but shelved 1 8 months ago. Will those prepared to speak out on behalf of consumers and the unemployed please gird their loins, for the motor chiefs are already at work and they carry big sticks.
The political issues relating to the question of labour market flexibility are more complicated because the Government has no direct power. [f we could shake the devil out of the labour market tomorrow we could employ most people who want to work. I am informed that one of the growth industries, a so-called leisure industry that of take-away foods-does 85 per cent of its business outside the traditional five-day working week. Under our crazy labour system one pays a severe economic penalty if people are employed outside these traditional hours. It is all right for the few who get the higher rates, but the ham burgers and the fried chooks cost a lot more. Ordi nary people eat out less than they would like, fewer people go into the business and probably only half the number of people who could be employed are employed.
I refer now to m y oid friends the banks. Most industries in Australia are forced to squeeze their work into a set of rules set out in the 1 920s and 1 930s but the banks contrive to maintain practices set in the nineteenth century, when it was necess ary to close at 3 o'clock to handwrite the ledgers. It seems to. have escaped the attention of the banks and the banking unions who support all the protective privileges enjoyed by the banks, that the leisured gentry comprise only a minority of their customers today and that a machine gobbles up the tedium of the ledgers at dead of night. What possible justification is there for de terminedly keeping those expensive retail outlets

Governor-General's Speech

3 1 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 3 1

, closed at the very times the customers want to use

I them? Last year on television I saw an advertise

ment for a bank. It showed all the clocks chiming

in the village square at 10 o'clock and a happy

young couple rushing through the totally empty

I
-

village square. They were manager with not another

greeted by the bank soul in sight because

, everybody else was at work, which is where they

should have been at 1 0 o'clock in the morning. As

soon as the people come out of their offices, the

bank shuts its doors and no one can do business.

How many more people would be employed if banks opened at times convenient to their cus tomers rather than to themselves or their unions? Indeed, retailing overall in Australia is a transparent nonsense. The only shops that actu ally serve their customers are those operated as family businesses, that can afford, or are allowed to stay open when people are not at work. Con sumers, you should rise up in rage when you are forced to cram your shopping into one evening or a Saturday morning under unbelievably un pleasant conditions! If you are able to sneak some time off work you can observe acres of expensive space in store after store all ready to be snapped shut and lights turned off as soon as the main rush of potential customers emerges from offices and factories. Every time. I think of this I feel the fury that must.have gripped the early reformers; a fury directed then against the owners of the satanic mills and now directed against the mock arguments and skirmishing that form the ritual dance of the employer organisations and unions before the high priests of the conciliation and arbitration system as they proceed to deliver consumers and the unemployed for further sacrifice. Clearly, labour market flexibility would not only share out existing work equitably but also it would create new work, particularly in labour intensive service industries. All those imaginative goods and services that people think of offering to people for extension of their knowledge or their leisure at times when they are not at paid work, could pro ceed without the crippling burden imposed on them by having to follow work rules considered appropriate for manufacturing industry in the first half of this century. I n moving towards a sol ution, I suggest that there should be no minimum award working week. There should be a premium for night work but none for weekend work. There should be overtime paid for working over, say, 7 hours at a stretch, but not otherwise. There should be no fixed retiring age. There should be no fixed shopping hours, banking hours, baking hours, or any other restraints against serving a market. That will do for a start. Let us try it and see then if anyone is still left on the scrap heap.

The second major area of labour market rigid ity is, of course, price. In his paper Professor Gruen raised the question of the price of labour in relation to unemployment amongst low achievers. The Secretary to the Treasury, Mr John Stone, also rattled this skeleton in his address to the National Agricultural Outlook Conference in Canberra recently. Let me be a little more dog matic. The unskilled or less presentable will not be employed in any numbers until the minimum rates of pay prescribed by law are roughly in line with what prospective employers think such ap plicants are worth. If the rates are silly, then expanding work opportunities will continue to be taken up by increased participation rates; that is, those not presently seeking work will take the new jobs available before the young or the unskilled. Also, unemployment in places like South Australia and Tasmania will remain high while laws prescribe the same rates of pay for those lo cations as for more profitable locations for enterprise such as Sydney or the Gold Coast.
The convolutions indulged in by social scien tists, social workers, bishops, editorialists, and governments of all persuasions to avoid these facts of life fill volumes of learned texts, lobbying submissions, pastoral letters, newspapers and regrettably, legislation. All the bureaucratic sol utions to unemployment, such as job creation schemes, wage subsidies and the like will never approach the effectiveness of market solutions. Employers in a free society, like consumers, continue to exhibit that surprising tendency to avoid paying more for goods or services than they think they are worth. Come to think of it, that might also be a reason for sluggish sales and falling employment in the motor industry.
I will touch only briefly on the third area of labour market rigidity, that is, in the availability of skills. Forgive me, Mr Deputy Speaker, if r re main profoundly sceptical of national manpower planning forecasts. Manpower planning or man power forecasts in any individual area such as a business, a corporation, a government department or education system are absolutely essential. However, I am sceptical about the national ones. The pursuit by DOLAC, the Department of Labour Advisory Council, and the Melbourne In stitute of Applied Economic and Social Research of the will-o-the-wisp of the future balance of the market for skilled tradesmen tends to confirm my view that the real objective must be to loosen .the trade union stranglehold over the supply of skilled labour, which the unions want to have so that they can dictate the price. If there is a surplus as a result, it will not matter much. Tradesmen are always moving into small businesses, often

1 1 32 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

unrelated to their skills. If the market is in surplus, they will do so at a faster rate. In the meantime, let us try harder to break down trade union oppo sition to sensible skill training systems; for example, opposition to the training of mature aged people for skills. One way of doing this is to import the skills from overseas in the short term. This breaks up the market. The other action required is to pay skilled tradesmen a better mar gin. Some of those liquor store proprietors and taxi drivers might return to their original trades. Of course, employers are frightened to do this because of the flow on effects to the less skilled, and we are back on the roundabout of the crazy infle xible system.
To summarise, then, it seems to me that we have quite enough analysis of the problems of future work to tell us what needs to be done. The economists have had their say. It is up to us to see how we can break up the established, entrenched systems of those powerful groups, be they workers, industrialists, public servants or any other groups who currently enjoy the privilege of good work and the promise of future work but who, by their holding on to entrenched and privi leged positions, prevent those who are less skilled and less able, the young and possibly the prema turely old, from participating in the economic growth which the Government's policies have now led to. What we want in Australia is not a Nobel Prize winning economist, but a modern Wilberforce.
Mr HOLDING ( Melbourne Ports) (8.57)-Today, in expressing the concern of the House at the assassination attempt on President Reagan, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) again condemned terrorism. However, less than a fortnight ago, in answer to the honour able member for Fraser (Mr Fry) the Prime Min ister gave unqualified support to the decision of President Reagan to supply arms and advisers to the present rulingjuntain El Salvador. Thatjunta regards State sponsored terrorism as a legitimate political weapon, and a weapon that has had genocidal applications against the people of El Salvador. The thrust of the remarks that I want to make is to dissociate myself and I believe thousands of Australian citizens from the present blinkered support of the Prime Minister for a pol icy which, while he condemns individual acts of terrorism on the one hand, in fact involves support for the concept of State sponsored terrorism on the other hand when that is carried out in a genocidal way, as it has been in El Salvador. Presi dent Reagan perceives El Salvador as the first test case for his Administration to demonstrate West ern willingness to draw the line against what he

perceives as Soviet expansionism. The Assistant Secretary of State, Mr Engleburger, set off to tour Europe and to marshal support for this Presiden tial perception. Mr Engleburger presented intelli gence reports that are said to show that the Soviet Union, Cuba and other communist nations have been providing arms to left wing Salvadoran guer rillas and that proves that the insurgency in El Salvador has been, to use American terms: 'Pro gressively transformed in a textbook case of in direct armed aggression by communist powers through Cuba'.
France, West Germany and other European powers have, unlike our own Prime Minister, to date responded very coyly to United States as sertions. Mexico, which is far closer than the United States to this problem, has expressed its concern and a former American ambassador to El Salvador, Robert White, faces dismissal by the Reagan Administration for publicly stating that increased United States military aid is simply rein forcing in power a militarist right wing junta. In his testimony in late February before a House committee, Mr White, who was dismissed by Gen eral Haig after 1 1 months as ambassador, con tended that the provision of United States arms and advisers was not necessary to deal with the weakened leftist guerrillas. He indicated that such armaments would allow rightist influenced se curity forces to assasinate and kill in a totally un controlled way. Recent history supports Mr White. In the last 12 months, over 1 0,000 people have been killed in El Salvador-9,000 of these murders are attributed to right wing paramilitary 'hit squads'. Trade union leaders, peasants, student and political leaders, priests and nuns who have supported reform have been targets for assassination and murder.
El Salvador is the smallest and most densely populated nation in Latin America. It has a population of 5.5 million with 60 per cent of the population classed as agricultural workers. Some 64 per cent of rural families are regional workers with no land or with less than a hectare of land. Seven per cent of the population owns 40 per cent of the land; 67 per cent of the people receive no medical attention; and there exists a malnutrition rate among Salvadorean children of 70 per cent. Some 30 per cent of families have no access to water while 50 per cent of the population are illiterate.
Since 1 932, the armed forces have ruled El Salvador in the interests of what is known locally as 'the fourteen families'-in reality probably closer to 3 8-who have dominated the El Salvadorean economy for over a century. These families own most of the land, control the coffee,

Governor-General's Speech

31 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 3 3

cotton and sugar cane trade and own most of the peasantry many of whom have been deeply in

industry as well as controlling the banking of EI volved in the struggle for land and social reform

Salvador. In 1 973-74, it was estimated that 8 per for many years. The Church has created Christian

cent of the population received 50 per cent of the camps in which in early February this year some

wealth while 30 per cent of the population was 6,000 peasants had sought sanctuary from the

subsisting on less than $US2.70 a month. While supposed agrarian reforms of the present junta.

that economic domination has continued, various Archbishop Romero, who had increasingly ap

factions within the armed forces have from time proved the radicalism of his clergy, added his own

to time replaced each other. But irrespective of very significant voice to the chorus of protest. It

who succeeded in office the basic control has was he who stated: 'A land ir.rigated in blood can remained the same and the inequity if anything not be productive'.

was compounded.

On 23 March, Archbishop Romero called yet

The new Reagan Administration has falsely en deavoured to portray the military based regime of President Duarte as a well-meaning reformist group caught between the escalating violence of the Left and the Right. That portrayal does not stand with the facts of history. In 1 972 the more repressive General Molina became President. In 1 977 he was replaced by an even more ultra-right wing group headed by General Humberto Romero. He encouraged right wing death squads whose principal targets were local political acti vists, including peasant leaders, trade unionists and priests. On 1 5 October 1 979, Romero was, with United States encouragement, overthrown by army officers whq established a civilian mili tary junta. The new Government was backed by moderate Opposition parties. Most political par ties supported the new junta's plan for agrarian

again for the end of repression and said that no soldier was obliged to obey an order to kill if it ran contrary to his conscience. A day later, the Arch bishop was murdered by right wing gunmen as he said mass. Since his death, the Church has been under increasing pressure as Church refugee centres have been assaulted and more priests and nuns murdered. The assassination of Romero led to further polarisation and emergence of the Democratic Revolutionary Front. That front has the backing of militias in the countryside, urban street committees in the towns, students, unions, Catholic priests and professional associations. Its leaders were all well known politicians from the centre. It is a movement that owes more to the social encyclicals of the Catholic Church and the teachings of Popes Paul VI and John Paul II than to Karl Marx.

and fiscal reforms as well as the pledge that the It should not come as a surprise or fill us with

fascist paramilitary hit group, and other groups shock and horror that the democratic revolution

that violated human rights, would be opposed. An ary front has lost confidence in producing effec

amnesty was proposed for political prisoners and tive social change through free elections. There

free elections were to be held in a reasonable time. have been no free elections in EI Salvador for the

Three months later, with violence unchecked and last half century. It is not surprising that they

right wing death squads being used to repress the should seek arms as, in the past year alone, right

popular movement and all attempts at economic wing death squads protected and encouraged by

reform blocked by the economic elite, the civilians sections of the present junta have murdered the

in the junta resigned.

Archbishop, the rector of the university, the

entire leadership of the Opposition, the principal

Following the assassination by right wing peasant union leader, four American nuns and

guerillas on 25 February 1 980 of Mario Samora, two American land reform experts as well as insti

i the Attorney-General and popular Christian gating a reign of 'white terror' that estimates a

Democrat politician, the Government showed minimum of 1 0,000 to 1 2,000 Salvadoreans

signs of breaking up. Napolean Duarte became executed. That is the kind of junta which the

President, suspended the Constitution, anPrime Minister of Australia, who talks about

, nounced proposed land reforms and a state of terrorism-indeed, who blithely mouths state

siege. What has emerged in fact is 'reform with re ments about terrorism-expects this House to

pression', the military occupying expropriated support. Confronted with political repression,

land and using its new powers to repress radical why should EI Salvadorean patriots not decide

peasant organisations. In EI Salvador, human that only a national armed insurrection could

, rights organisations, the Opposition arid the lead challenge the army's long monopoly of power and

I ership of the Catholic Church renounced the re the constant abuse of this power. As further evi

pression taking place behind the facade of dence of the reign of terror in EI Salvador, I seek

agrarian reform. Jesuit priests created a vast net leave to incorporate in Hansard at the end of my

work of Christian communities among the speech evidence given by the Commission of the

1 1 34 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

Churches o n I nternational Affairs to the Thirty abuses, went out the back door as far as the candi

seventh session of the United Nations Com date for the presidency was concerned. That rhet

mission on Human Rights.

oric has now been maintained by President

Reagan in office. To view the crisis in El Salvador

Leave granted.

as simply a Soviet-Cuban plot is to fail to recog

nise the social and economic processes that have

admMirnistHraOtiLonDs,IwNiGth-ASuustcracleias

sive Am following

erican loyally

been suppressed in El Salvador for decades by the simple process of corruption and state-sponsored

behind, have seriously misjudged the nature and terrorism and torture. It is interesting to note that

complexity offorces for social change in the Third no European power of significance has responded

World and have continually supported regimes to United States arguments and that Mexico has

that even with American financial and military publicly queried the logic of United States policy,

support have had only a limited potential for sur but our Prime Minister, without any hesitation,

vival. Until the day the United States ignomini has blindly supported the thrust of President

ously abandoned its Saigon Embassy, it continued Reagan's policy and declared this Government's

to argue that Vietnamese revolutionaries had no support for United States policy on El Salvador.

popular support. Our own and the United States It is interesting to note the view of United States

people were told the same about Zimbabwean citizens in relation to El Salvador. The Age of 26

guerrillas until they actually won the election. We March 1981 , quoting a poll of United States citi

had to be told that obviously someone must have zens, states:

voted for them. Despite the formidable United

States military, economic and intelligence pres ence in Iran, the United States and Australia were unable to discover a simple and now well estab

Only a third of the people interviewed by a 'Los Angeles Times' poll believe that the United States should continue to support the Salvadoran regime, which is under attack from both Left-wing and Right-wing elements.

lished and indisputable fact of history, that is, that

the Shah was passionately loathed by the over Many American citizens who experienced the

whelming majority of his own people. The list of tragedy of Vietnam are saying that they do not

miscalculations is too long to recapitulate.

want another Vietnam. Anyone who looks at the

history of El Salvador from a situation in

Economic and social inequality enabled a few Australia could not fairly or honestly say that he

to live in luxury while the great mass of the Sal wants the Australian Government, even the

vadoran people were condemned to live in the Government of Malcolm Fraser, to be associated

poverty that created the socio-economic base for with the murderous junta which has made the de

revolution. It was the determination of those who struction of its own people an instrument of pol

controlled economic power to maintain it with icy. So long as the Prime Minister of ths govern

paramilitary murder squads and political re ment is prepared to do that, he need not talk in

pression that did not shrink from large scale state this House about terrorism. Individual acts of ter

sponsored terrorism, combining murder and tor rorism are no worse, and probably not as bad, as

ture as a weapon for cowering their own popu state sponsored terrorism, and that is what this

lation that led to the counter demand for arms. Government is supporting in El Salvador.

The same right wing junta is now to receive

United States military hardware and advisers as I wonder whether the blinkered vision of the

well as financial backing that is designed to secure honourable gentlemen opposite who involved

them in power. We are told that this is necessary Australian youth in the divisive war in Vietnam

because of United States intelligence reports that will ever learn. Is the same blinkered vision of the

a flow of arms came from the Soviet Union or Prime Minister going to cast Australia perma

Havana. Given the absence of American nently into the role of a Sancho Panza, as Presi

weaponry, the Revolutionary Front, if it is to suc dent Reagan becomes the West's new Don Qui

ceed, must get its arms where it can.

xote, tilting forever at the windmill of communist

dragons emerging from the tortured areas of

Governor Reagan made it plain during his human tragedy on the South American conti

presidential campaign, that he regarded the prob nent? The judgment that gave us Vietnam is no

lems in central America as an exercise initiated by better and considerably worse than the judgment

Cuba and the Soviet Union aimed at destabilising being exercised in the White House and in the

the region. The rhetoric suggested that only a mili Prime Minister's office when we determine our

tary solution could solve the crisis in E l Salvador. attitude towards the Salvadoran people. How

The Carter strategy of backing the forces of re does any government in Australia support a

form and being outspoken on human rights regime which has not hesitated to murder its own

Governor-General's Speech

31 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 35

Archbishop, its own academic scholars and intel lectuals, its own writers, its own trade union leaders, the leaders of the peasant party and op position leadership? Yet that is what we are asked blindly to support. I believe that the judgment of Presiqent Reagan is wrong and that once again the West will pay for that error in judgment. I believe that the judgment of the Prime Minister of Australia is far worse. At least the United States President can say of EI Salvador that it comes his torically within a region which America has regarded as its area of influence. At least Presi dent Reagan can fall back on the Monroe Doc trine. But what can we in Australia fall back on? What judgment enables us to hold our heads high in any international community or within the Third World? How do we explain our attitude of blind support on this issue? I suggest that the Prime Minister is making a worse mistake on the question of El Salvador than a previous Liberal Government made on Vietnam. Ultimately that conservative Government came to realise that one cannot hold back forces of social change by supporting in power oppressive juntas which believe that murder is a legitimate exercise, that genocide is a legitimate exercise. That lesson had to be learned the hard way by honourable gentlemen opposite in relation to Vietnam. They will surely learn this lesson again when history writes its judgment of the attitude of the Prime Minister and this Government on the tragic geno cide which is now taking place in EI Salvador. I condemn the Prime Minister's statement and I condemn this Government's attitude. I believe that the people of Australia, when confronted with the facts, will equally condemn it. I incorpor ate in Hansard the document in respect of which leave was granted earlier.
The document read asjollows:
COMMISSION OF THE CHURCHES ON INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
of The World Council of Churches Moderator: Olle Dahlen
Director: Leopoloo J. Nilus
Question of the violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in any part of the world, with particular reference to colonial and other dependant countries and territories.
Text of the oral intervention by the Commission of the Churches on International Affairs, a Non-Governmental Organization in Category II Consultative Status, to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, at its Thirty Seventh Session, concerning EI Salvador, under Agenda Item 1 3.
Mr Chairman,
Thank you for this opportunity to address the Commission on behalf of the Commission of the Churches on International Affairs of the World Council o fChurches a non-governmental organization in consultative status in which are joined over 300 Protestant, Anglican and Orthodox churches in some 100

countries. It also maintains close relations with the Roman Catholic Church. Mr Chairman,
Our Commission has circulated Document E/CNAtNGO 3 14 which contains recent statements by the World Council of Churches on the situation in EI Salvador, a country charac terized by systematic and gross violations of human rights. This affirmation is based on the daily experience, and copious documentation which has been gathered by the Legal Aid De partment (Socorro Juridico) of the Archdiocese of San Sal vador, of which I am the Director, and in whose name I speak. We have been uniquely placed to hear' from every corner of our country the cruelty and humiliation the common people suffer.
It is a privilege for me to bring their voice here and to be able to share with you the deep concerns of the Salvadorean people. What I shall say is not an invented construction of our situation, it is the living reality of a people. Mr Chairman,
In its resolution 35/192 ( 1 5 December 1980), the General Assembly made reference to the brutal assassination of Arch bishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero, a man of faith who had come to symbolize the struggle of our people for justice. As the world knows, he was gunned down in cold blood by an as sassin as he was celebrating the mass in a hospital in San Salvador.
During his brief three years in the episcopate, Archbishop Romero became a staunch advocate of human rights and of the cause of the people of our country: he consistently de nounced the sinful practices he saw about him and with a force comparable only to the prophets of old, and of Bishop Bartholome de las Casas, the defender of the Indians of Cen tral America. He never let up in his outspokenness and, con trary to some others, did not place the security of the Church above the need to denounce injustice. He was the "voice of the voiceless". No regime has succeeded in destroying the authen ticity ofMonsignorRomero's witness. As Christ had done, the Archbishop said, just before his death, that during the three years of his preaching none could accuse him of falsehood. It was necessary to assassinate him in order to silence him.
The cases of the violation of human rights which the Arch bishop ennumerated each Sunday, had been subject to a rigor ous process ofcorroboration and legal review by the Legal Aid Department of the Archdiocese. Since his martyrdom we have endeavored to fulfill his mandate to us: 'If they assassinate me', he said to the staff, 'you must continue defending the rights of my oppressed and poor people'. It is precisely because we carry out the martyr's will that those who illegally govern EI Salvador raided the offices of the Legal Aid Department on 5 July 1980 with the intention of eliminating the evidence we held which proved that the clandestine death squads and other right-wing extremist groups were linked to the Armed Forces and their military securityapparatus.
The authorities have also attempted to eliminate available evidence concerning the assassination of Monsignor Romero, and of the persecution of the Church, which during 1980, claimed the lives of six priests and involved some 1 50 terrorist acts directly attributable to the Salvadorean military and, in some cases, to foreignmilitarygroups. Mr Chairman,
We are able to affirm and document the present situation of human rights in El Salvador as follows:
1 . The violation of human rights in El Salvador has a long history. Between 1977 and 1979 four investigations were carried out by impartial observers-the Department of State of the United States of America; the Parliamentary Commission of Great Britain; the Interamerican Commission on Human

1 1 36 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

Rights of the Organization of American States, and the Inter national Commission of Jurists. Their findings and recommendations are well known. Following the military coup d'etat on 1 5 October 1 979, the procedures by which sanctions would have been applied against the Government of General Romero for the violation of human rights in El Salvador were suspended. From this date on, contrary to the statements made by the new governing military group, and to expec tations of the international community, the constant violation of human rights has not diminished, but rather has increased significantly.
2. The substantiated available data indicate that, since 1 5 October 1979, large sectors of the Salvadorean population have been targeted for systematic extermination, and that to this end instruments have been developed and refined by the regime in power. How does the record of the present regime compare to its predecessor? During the 21-month period from January of 1978 through September 1979 Monsignor Romero and the Legal Aid Department of his Archdiocese denounced 727 political assassinations attributable to government forces. Those responsible for the IS October 1979 coup de'etat gave as a justification for this act the need to put an end to these atrocities. In the three months following the coup ( 1 5 October-31 December 1979), 450 assassinations were com mitted by the new military regime. It was for this very reason that a majority of the members of the new military junta re signed at the end of the year, charging that the regime was engaged in generalized repression with massive foreign aid as sistance, under the guise of a so-called agrarian reform program.
After January 1980 the number of assassinations and disap pearances increased. During the first four months of the year more people were killed by groups related to the military than during all of 1979. During these months we heard the indominitable voice of Monsignor Romero demand, in the name of God, that 'the repression cease now', asking that there be no outside collaboration with the illegal military regime, either through provision of military advisors or through further arms shipments, since such collaboration would only contribute to greater injustice and to further bloodshed.
The tragic history of the subsequent eight months of 1980 is an eloquent indication that neither the military regime, nor its supporters abroad had heeded the voice of Monsignor Romero. His warnings continued until those he denounced chose to silence him by the assassin's bullet.
The total number of defenceless victims among the Sal vadorean population-not counting those whose lives were lost in direct confrontations with the armed forces-victims who have been assassinated by the government armed and se curity forces, comes to 8,660 documented cases. To this figure must be added the 4,400 victims of the civilian population mostly women and children-who died in operations of 'total extermination' carried out during the past three months by the Salvadorean armed forces.
In absolute terms, these figures greatly exceed those for which the previous government of General Carlos Romero was so sharply criticised by the Inter-American community in October 1979.
3. Qualitatively, the violations of human rights have be come more serious as the deliberate policy of extermination has been carried out in the countryside by the armed forces, with the help of foreign military advisors, which has resulted in the physical elimination of leaders of significant international renown and who defended the cause of the poor and the oppressed among the Salvadorean people.
Salvadorean military personnel were implicated not only in the assassination of Monsignor Oscar Romero, but also in those of the democratic opposition leadership, numerous'

priests, and the North American nuns. And this is a government which cal1s itself Christian!
Members of the present government who opposed the prac tice of extermination have themselves been assassinated or have been forced to flee the country. In the most recent documented report of the Archdiocese of San Salvador, made available to the Division of Human Rights, on 25 February 198 1 , it is stated that the Army, and security forces assas sinated 257 defenceless persons between 14-20 February. In one month of martial law, 300 defenceless persons were mur dered. The majority were abducted from their homes. From June 1980 to January 198 1 , the Army and the security forces assassinated 202 children, of which 58 were 1 to 1 0 years of age (the rest from 1 1 through 15). It can therefore be safely concluded that the illegal and dictatorial government has not heeded the recommendations contained in General Assembly Resolution 35/192.
Mr Chairman,
As Christians seeking to achieve justice, the necessary basis of peace, we regret the nature of international attention which has been paid of late to El Salvador. It is harmful to the whole American continent, to those governments al1 over the world which respect human rights and in an increasingly serious way to world peace itself.
Central America, and especial1y now El Salvador, has become an international political laboratory for a set of de monic, violent experiments, the object of which is a people which longs only for justice, for peace, and for its right to determine its own affairs. The people suffers. As has so often happened in the course of the history of our continent, the people has been left to one side, its basic rights trampled or ignored.
Mr Chairman,
It is not through pouring more arms into our country that human rights will become respected. It is not through sending foreign military advisors to improve the capacity of a regime to impose its will by force, that the rule of law will bc established. It is not by distorting and hiding the tr'lth that justice will be achieved. It is not through a war against a people that peace will be constructed.
It is with deep regret that we must conclude that the primary responsibility for the violations of human rights in EI Salvador lies with the Salvadorean military regime. The tes timonies of violations of human rights which we have com piled over the years constitute incontrovertible proof. This documentation is public and available. We hope that this Commission will examine and analyze it. We are convinced that a study of the facts as provided by the people themselves will eliminate the confusion which has been quite deliberately created by those at home and abroad who have their own nar row interests at heart. We sincerely hope that all the governments and peoples of the world will demonstrate their com mitment to the lofty principles of human rights which it is the task of this Commission to safeguard, and refuse to become accomplices to the crucifixion of the Salvadorean people.
We call upon those now aligned with the forces of re pression in EI Salvador to cease their nefarious support for this war against our people, the vast majority of whom are Christian, a people which has been denied its rightful voice in such important international forums as this one. We sincerely hope that this voice will be heard. We pray that it will awaken in this Commission, and in the whole of the international community a commitment to aid us in our efforts to gain respect for the rights of al1 our people, including our right to democ racy and self-determination.
Thank you, Mr Chairman
Mr McLEAN (Perth) (9. 1 7) -1 want to con centrate on the economic aspects of the

Governor-General's Speech

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 37

Governor-General's speech. Because that Speech not private enterprise economies. Given the state

contained substantial reference to the philosophi ments made by a number of honourable members

cal basis of the Government's platform and poli opposite I wish to give to the House the results of

cies, this debate has provided an opportunity for a number of studies on economic justice. Studies

honourable members from both sides of the by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation

House to argue the ideological merits of their re and Development on income distribution show

spective parties. The socialists opposite, par that Australia is one of three countries which

ticularly the newer members who in their exhibits the lowest degree of income inequality on

speeches to date have sanctimoniously claimed a both a pre-tax and post-tax basis. In a publication

monopoly over just about every virtue that exists, called, Surveys of Australian Economics an

have argued that their philosophy is the only one article entitled, 'Income Distribution, Poverty

which can bring equity and justice to society. I and Redistributive Policies', shows that on a fam

suggest that they should look at an atlas and dis ily income basis Australia consistently displays a

cover which nations and which political more equitable income distribution than other de

philosophies around the world provide the better veloped countries no matter which assessment

living standards for their people, and where is the process is used. That article refers also to a study

great equity and justice in those nations, which, involving 56 countries which calculates the pro

taking the socialist case to its logical extreme, ex portion of total pre-tax income received by the

ercise total governmental control over their citi top 5 per cent of households. In that study

zens. I think that honourable members opposite Australia was placed among the top 5 per cent of

should compare the living standards of countries the group which received the smaller share of that

such as East Germany and West Germany, North income. In all studies Australia is in that group of

Korea and South Korea China and Taiwan, the countries with the lowest degree of inequality in

Soviet bloc and the United States, and the nations income distribution.

of the Association of South East Asian Nations

and the socialist countries of South East Asia. I I refer also to a World Bank study. The Inter

think that the great claims made on behalf of national Bank for Reconstruction and Develop

socialism could be seen then in an operational and ment made a study on this subject a few years ago.

realistic context.

On a comparison of countries it showed that

Why is it that in these great discourses, particularly from those newer members thrown up to this Parliament by the socialist Left in Victoria, they never seem to champion the cause of freedom? That is a word about which I have not heard much moralising to date in their speeches. They seem to assume that there is no equity or justice in freedom. They seem also to suggest that a degree of economic freedom is almost immoral and auto matically precludes the attainment of all other virtues. Are honourable members suggesting that the state should determine consumer preferences, that we should surrender consumer sovereignty, and that the state is the best device to make the millions of intricate decisions required every day between investors, producers and consumers? If that is their argument they should ask themselves a few questions.

Australia had one of the least unequalincome dis tributions of any nation, and that included the communist countries of Eastern Europe. Let us not have any more of this nonsense from the Op position that economic freedom automatically precludes the attaining of economic justice. Australia not only has a higher growth rate, higher living standards, and a better welfare system, but also we have much fairer sharing of the cake than most countries. This has been achieved within the context of a political philosophy which champions the cause of private enterprise and economic freedom. Given these facts it constantly surprises me that honourable members opposite criticise those of us on this side of the House, who champion private enterprise, as being hard liners because we believe in a reduced public sector with a greater concentration of welfare resources upon the needy. I cannot see what is hard line about

Dr Theophanous-Nobody ever said that.

advocating, firstly the need to concentrate more welfare resources on the needy; secondly the need

Mr McLEAN-The honourable member made to reduce taxes; and thirdly, the need to increase

this kind of assertion in his speech. Honourable private sector employment by responsible budget

members should ask themselves: Which are the ary restraint. This seems to sum up the whole ap

countries with the lowest standards of living, the proach of the Opposition, that if we support pri

_ lowest growth rates, the largest blackmarkets and vate enterprise and a more productive economic

the longest queues for essential goods? I think the system we cannot also have any concern for

answer to that question is simple. It is those coun people, particularly the needy. I would have

tries with government-controlled economies and though that these concerns were complimentary

1 1 38 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

rather than mutually exclusive. 1 believe the record of this Government has shown this to be the case.
Rather than concentrating on the ideological sermanising of the Opposition I will concentrate

The level and rate of unemployment in February was lower than in February 1980, particularly for juniors looking for full-time work.
Unfilled vacancies increased further in January. Average weekly earnings rose by 13.7 per cent over the course of 1980 which compares with a CPI rise of 9.2 per cent

on the facts and figures which highlight the econ for the same period.

omic record of this Government, based on its poli The food group index of the Consumer Price Index

cies and philosophy. The second paragraph of the increased by 1 . 1 per cent in January.

Governor-General's Speech states that the 1 980 Growth in the volume of money, M3, slowed to 1 1 .3 per

general election provided:
. . . a mandate to maintain the basic thrust of the policies which have been followed over the past five years.
Given that economic issues have dominated par

cent measured over the twelve months to January, although some of this decline reflected special factors which will be unwound in comingmonths.
The turnaround in the trade account to deficit in February was a major factor contributing to the overall balance of pay

liamentary debates over this time and given this ments deficit of$45m.

statement by the Governor-General, it is necess Mr McLEAN-I thank the House. The econ

ary to examine the present state of the economy in omic indicators revealed in these publications give

order to assess the effectiveness of the economic every reason for optimism. They show that con

policies which have been pursued over the past sumer spending in the December quarter and in

five years. The best and most recent summary of the three months to January J 981 has been strong.

the economy is contained in the February and Investment expenditure, which is important for March publications of the Department of the future job creation, has been exceptionally strong Treasury 'Round-up of Economic Statistics'. [ with new, fixed capital expenditure by private

seek leave to have those summaries incorporated enterprises rising by 24 per cent in the half year to

in Hansard:

December 1 980. The indications are that this

Leave granted.
The summaries read as follows-
Round-up ofEconomic Statistics The Treasury, February 1981
The Consumer Price Index increased by 2 . 1 per cent in the December quarter 1980 and by 9.3 per cent over the course of 1 980.
Both retail sales and new passenger vehicle registrations showed strong growth in the December quarter.
Private dwellings approvals rose further in the December quarter.
Unemployment continues at about the level of a year earlier although it has declined as a percentage of the labour

trend will continue through 1981 . The summaries also show that unemployment in February 1981 was lower than for the year earlier, particularly for juniors looking for full-time work. Employment growth and unfilled vacancies grew strongly over the year to January 1981 . Average weekly earnings rose by 1 3. 7 per cent during 1 980, while the inflation rate was only 9.2 per cent over the same period. These and other statistics contained in these official economic bulletins provide a com prehensive range of major indicators which suggest that a substantial economic recovery is well under way in this country.

force. Employment growth remains strong.

There is no need to dwell on the state of the economy when this Government took office. The

Unfilled vacancies have increased substantially over the past year.
The volume of money, M3, increased by 1 3 per cent over the twelve months to December. Over the first half of 1980-8 1 , M3 grew at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 1 1 per cent.

policies of this Government, referred to by the Governor-General, have led to the kind of economic recovery for which the whole nation was voting in the 1 975 election. A closer look at the performance of the economy strengthens the pic

The combination of a steady current account deficit and ture which has been painted by these indicators. stronger private capital inflow resulted in an overall balance For the third year in a row the rate of growth of

ofpayments surplus of $288m in January.

the Australian economy will increase in 1 980-8 1 ,

Round-up of Economic Statistics despite a drought and depressed international

The Treasury, March 1981 economic conditions which will restrict the

Despite some easing in January, retail sales and few passenger vehicle registrations have recorded strong growth in the three months to January.
New fixed capital expenditure by private enterprises rose by an exceptionally strong 24 per cent in the half year to December 1980 and businesses expect further strong growth for the second half of 1 980-81 .

growth of our exports in the current year. Therefore, as we head for a 3t per cent increase in non. farm production for 1 980-8 1 this growth will be based more on domestic factors than on export growth, as has been the case in recent years. In other words, the policies of this Government

A:lthough total employment eased seasonally in January, have meant that domestic demand or the ability,

growth over the year to January remained strong.

the Willingness and the confidence of people to

Governor-General's Speech

3i--March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 39

spend and to invest their money has increased substantially.
After allowing for inflation, private consump tion expenditure will increase by some 3 per cent this year. Retail sales have increased strongly, as have motor vehicle sales. In the area of investment expenditure, it is not exaggerating to say that we have an investment boom on our hands. I have quoted already some figures to support that. The present situation is a far cry from the early and mid-l 970s when investment fel l each year. So to those in the Labor Party who say that our present economic strength-this has been said during this debate-is due to the lucky historical fact that we are rich in natural resources, I would say three things: Firstly, we are facing a strong, broadly-based economic growth, not just in the natural resources sector, which has resulted from strong domestically sourced demand. Secondly, ] would say that this is despite the unlucky occur rence of drought and the depressed international market. In that context I would like to quote from a speech given by the Secretary to the Treasury in a recent address to the N ational Agricultural Out look Conference. When he was referring to the drought and to the international scene he said:
T might say of these otherwise unwelcome changes that had they not occurred we would currently be facing in Australia what might almost be described as an economic 'boom' of a kind we have nearly forgotten.
In that context it is interesting to note that when in office the Labor Government blamed its poor economic performance on a depressed international economy, whilst this Government, also confronted by a poor international economy, has still succeeded on the domestic economic front. The third point I make to honourable members opposite is that it is not sufficient for a country like Australia to assume that natural endowments automatically make it lucky. We have to have the right policies. After all, these resources were in Australia in the period 1 972-75. This Government has achieved the present state of economic recov ery because it has applied the kinds of policies which create the incentives and the overall economic environment in which people are prepared to invest their money in all sectors of the Australian economy. It is as simple as that. There has not been any Keynesian growth from the private sector.
Let us consider other economic indicators which have contributed to and resulted from this economic growth. It is important to note that the Government succeeded in attaining a single digit inflation rate for 1 980. The rate of 9.3 per cent, although still too high, makes our record better than that of most other countries; the average

inflation rate of countries in the industrialised world is about 12.4 per cent. J think we all agree that the level of unemployment in this country is higher than any of us would wish. Nevertheless, the employment situation has continued to im prove, according to the latest Australian Bureau of Statistics labour force figures.
Although the Opposition likes to cite figures of the Commonwealth Employment Service because they show a higher level of unemployment, the fact remains that the Australian Bureau of Stat istics figures are more accurate indicators of employment trends. Successive surveys conducted over a long period have shown that CES figures greatly overstate the unemployment situation because they include those persons who have already found work during the month and some who are no longer in the labour force at the end of the month for which the figures are extracted. The ABS and CES assessments of the employ ment situation are based on different definitions and different methods of collection and they re late to different periods within the month. The definition used by the ABS coincides with ac cepted international conventions, whereas that used by the CES does not.
The past two years have seen a significant strengthening of the labour market. In the 1 2 months to December 1980 the number of people in employment rose by 1 69,000. The January 1 98 J labour force figures show that 1 40,000 more people were employed in this country in January 1981 than were employed a year ago. In the two years to January this year the number of people employed increased by 279,200. The preliminary labour force figures for February of this year show that the number of full time unemployed people fell by 1 7,900 over the year from February 1 980. That figure shows a much improved result when compared with the figures for 1 980 and 1 979. The position of teenagers seeking their first jobs continued to follow the encouraging trend shown in January of this year.
As I said, the level of unemployment certainly remains too high, despite the substantial increase in the number of people employed. This can be partly explained by the increasing work force par ticipation rate which last year stood at 6 1 .3 per cent, compared with 60.4 per cent in August 1 979. That means basically that this increase has resulted in something like 1 00,000 people becom ing employed without in any way reducing unemployment levels. This occurs simply because additional people have entered the labour market as employment and economic prospects have improved. I think this trend will continue because although Australia has one of the highest work

1 1 40 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

force participation rates of all member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development at the present time, there is still scope for this rate to increase further, based on our recent experience. We have every reason to expect this growth in employment opportunities to continue in the foreseeable future as major re source development projects come on stream.
The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) , in his speech to Parliament in December last year, said that a direct employ ment growth of something like 60,000 jobs would result from such projects over the next five years. Of course, indirect growth in employment opportunities resulting from these projects will be much greater. Those honourable members opposite who always oppose foreign investment and multinational companies would do well to ponder the positive employment effects of the record foreign investment of something like $2.9 billion in Australia last year. That ultimately will filter through the whole economy into all sectors of industry and will help to provide the surpluses necessary for the future expansion of the economy to the benefit of all Australians. To the critics of natural resource development 1 suggest also that they look at a State by State breakup of the employment figures. They will find that the States of New South Wales, Western Australia and Queensland-those most affected by resource based developments-have experienced the strongest growth in employment figures.
In summary, Australia has now recovered to a point where its economy is once again at the fore front of economies of the industrialised world. I suggest to the Government that it should keep on course. Present economic problems are not due to the overall thrust of the Government's present economic policies but rather to the fact that those policies have not been applied more consistently. l suggest that too heavy a reliance on any particular economic weapon will lead to economic distor tions of a kind which will only impede future economic recovery. I believe we should seek a more appropriate mix of monetary, fiscal, tariff and wage policies. In the past the Government, by failing to take sufficient budgetary and tariff action, has allowed the burden of fighting inflation to fall too heavily on monetary policy, which has led to the present interest rate increases.
If anyone has any doubts about the connection between all arms of economic policy, he need look no further than the present situation to dispel those doubts. Successive Budget deficits have increased the public sector borrowing require ment to such an extent that home buyers are now

feeling the pinch. Yet honourable members opposite in this debate have said that we adopt a cal lous approach to government because we want to control government expenditure and reduce Budget deficits. I think all home buyers in Australia who are currently facing increased mortgage repayments as a result of the rise in interest rates will be interested to know that the Opposition in this debate has constantly advocated higher government expenditure and larger Budget deficits-the very things which in the long run lead to higher interest rates simply because the Government has to compete for bor rowings to finance the deficits. As the demand for funds increases, so does the price of the borrowings-the interest rates.
The Government has been slowly getting the budgetary situation under control but the cumu lative deficits of previous years are imposing an incredible burden on many people through these increased interest rates. That makes it even more imperative for the Government to exercise greater control over the Budget in the future. All in all, although the economy still has troubles, almost all available indicators show that economic recovery in this country is well under way and that the policies of the Government over the past five years are working. For that reason, I am pleased to support the Address-in-Reply to the Speech of the Governor-General, moved by the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender) , and ] reject the amendment moved by the honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent) .
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (9.37) -At a time when crucial decisions about the development of Australian mineral and energy resources need to be made, the policy of this Government as outlined in the Governor-General's Speech makes disappointing and depressing reading. This Government simply lacks any concept of what constitutes the long term national interests of Australia. It believes that foreign investment is inherently good, regardless of how, why and where the investment is made. It believes that the majority of Australians have no right to share in their country's mineral wealth. We live in what is potentially the wealthiest country on earth. We have vast mineral and energy resources, a highly skilled population and a surplus of agricultural production. Yet we are well down the world list in terms of living standards.
The sell-out to foreign investment by post-war Tory governments has already cost us dearly. The distribution of wealth and income in our community is becoming more lopsided every day. Now that we are poised on the brink of a further expansion of mineral and energy industries due to

Governor-General's Speech

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 141

our fortuitous endowment of cheap energy re serves, we have a critical choice to make. We could take the Tory path and leave our resources to foreign corporations. That way we would cre ate a few overnight millionaires, a handful ofjobs, a trickle ofroyalties for 20 or 30 years and a lot of environmental problems. On the other hand, we could be more discerning in our attitude to foreign investment.
We could follow the path of many European nations, Japan, and lately other Asian countries such as Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, Malaysia and India, and develop our own corporations with minimal dependence of foreign equity. We could use our strength as a major supplier of raw materials to strike a better bargain from foreign investment proposals. We could insist on tech nology transfer to Australian control as the price for exploitation of our resources. We could insist on further downstream processing, research and development within this country. We could disen tangle the corporate web used by transnational corporations to deprive the Government of ad equate information and to cheat it of fair tax and royalty payments. All we need is a government with foresight and understanding and we will make decisions.
The deficiencies in Australia's past foreign investment policies are well described in a paper which was delivered last year to the Australian Mining and Petroleum Law Association by Mr Paul Grant of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation. Grant found that State and Federal governments accepted vir tually without question the package deal foreign investment proposals offered by foreign corporations. This package deal involves equity funding, technology transfer, local production and export of selected products to selected markets. No thought is given by the Government to dissecting the foreign proposals to achieve a more equitable deal for this country. Mr Grant also concluded that the three Australian parties involved in nego tiation of foreign investment proposals, namely, the Federal and State governments and local companies, do not work together and are, there fore, readily played off one against the other by the foreign corporations concerned. In other words, Australia gains the lowest common multi ple in foreign investment.
What makes the situation worse is that the Fed eral and State governments not only readily acquiesce in foreign investment package deals but also are unconcerned about their long term implications. It is not difficult to find reasons for foreign corporations being anxious to impose package deal proposals on Australia. Under the

proposals offered by these corporations, tech nology is held securely under their control and not disseminated further within this country. The threat of future competition is thus overcome. Local processing and exports are limited to suit the disposition of the foreign corporation's plants in other countries. Further, favourable transfer pricing between plants and nations to minimise local tax and royalty payments is available to the vertically integrated corporation. It has taken us a long time to overhaul section 1 36 of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
Technology transfer is a vital but ignored consideration in the evaluation of foreign investment. Norwegian involvement in deep sea oil explo ration provides a good example of how foreign investment can be used to nurture a new domestic industry. The Norwegians welcomed multina tional oil exploration, but insisted upon the involvement of local companies in the exploitation of any reserves. Once there was an indication of substantial off-shore oil and gas reserves, the Nor wegian Government made it a condition of further exploration that a Norwegian partner be taken on in a situation where it could pick up the technology of off-shore oil rig design, construction and operation.
A four-party joint venture was established in volving the foreign corporation, an established oil marketing company, a consortium of Norwegian ship builders and the original Norwegian explo ration partner. The massive investment required on behalf of the Norwegian companies, particularly in the construction of the off-shore oil rigs, was organised through the national banking system on a totally unprecendented scale. The result was that within a few years the Norwegian part ners led the world in off-shore rig design and had developed a major industry building rigs for other nations, particularly those bordering on the North Sea. It is ironic to note that the first Russian dis covery of off-shore oil was made by a Norwegian rig manned by a Norwegian crew. If Norway pro vides a classic study of how foreign investment can be used to advance a host nation, foreign involvement in the Australian aluminium industry provides a perfect case of the cost of mishandled foreign investment in this country.
When proposals to produce aluminium in Australia were first made after World War I, they had to be shelved because of the ease with which the international aluminium cartel could destroy the new local industry. Even when World War II and a world-wide shortage of aluminium forced Commonwealth involvement in aluminium pro duction, the design and construction of a plant was delayed by the refusal of Alcoa to provide the

1 1 42 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

expertise. It was left to the CSIRO, with British help, to develop an Australian designed Bayer Hall process. An Australian aluminium com mission was formed in 1 944, and an extensive sur vey of bauxite reserves was undertaken. A plant was finally commissioned, after five years of con struction, at Bell Bay, Tasmania, in 1 955. The plant was operated jointly by the Commonwealth and Tasmanian governments for several years before being sold to two transnational corporations.
Following this sale a number of aluminium smelters and alumina refineries were constructed in Australia by foreign corporations. The refinery constructed at Kwinana by Alcoa was a typical case. Originally the Australian-owned Western Mining Corporation Ltd began negotiations with Alcoa for the construction of this Bayer-Hall pro cess refinery. Western Mining fought hard to re tain control in Australian hands by bringing in two other Australian partners to make up the local equity, but had to concede control because of Alcoa's dominant position in the technology. Much the same situation had occurred earlier with the Gladstone refinery. It was repeated in the Bayer process alumina refinery at Gove where the major shareholding went to Swiss Aluminium Aust. Ltd. because of its position in controlling the technology of production. The efforts of Australian scientists and technologists and the fore sight of the wartime Labor Government went down the drain. This shameful episode was sum marised by Grant in the following manner:
We have the same technology-the Bayer processbeing the subject of three separate international transfers in three different direct foreign investment packages (that is, being paid for three times), when the same technology had been worked-up and operated at full scale by the government before any of the transfers were made. Not only that, but it is clear that the technological base in each case now lies outside Australia so that significant process development no longer occurs in Australia and none of the three companies operating alumina refineries in Australia is either capable of or empowered to transfer that technology to another country. It is possible, therefore, to argue that the massive international transfer of technology which has occurred has effectively de prived Australia of that verytechnology.
This is a shocking indictment of Australian foreign investment policies and a repudiation of the political philosophy of this Government and past Liberal governments. The same sorry story could be told about the mineral sands industry where wartime development could have provided the basis of an industry producing titanium diox ide pigrrient. The nature of other recent foreign investment proposals should also set the alarm bells ringing for any concerned government. Almost every day the large international oil companies are swallowing up our mineral and energy resources, particularly coal and oil shale. Oil shale

technology and oil-from-coal technology are obviously areas where Australia could develop a key industry if the Government were to lead the way. The sell-out of the Rundle shale oil reserves to Exxon already has probably put paid to any such viable industry led by Australia. We ought to re member by studying the history of the matter that the same oil companies which rejected research and development into these technologies after the War are now quietly but insidiously closing off the option of an Australian-based industry by tying up key reserves of oil shale and suitable coal.
We no longer keep statistics on the level of foreign investment and control in Australia. We cannot even establish the extent of the problem. We also have the situation in which foreign investors are obtaining an increasing share of the few major Australian mining companies such as Broken Hill Pty Co. Ltd, Western Mining Corporation Ltd, Peko-Wallsend Ltd and CSR Ltd, via bank nominee companies. Honourable members opposite should take into account that there is no provision in the current companies and securities legislation to cover that predicament. The pro vision has been taken out. Up to a quarter of each of these Australian companies is now owned by bank nominee companies which are in turn dominated by off-shore interests. The proportion of shares in major Australian mining companies which are held by nominee companies has increased steadily over the past two or three years yet we do not know which foreign interests are behind these moves, and thcre is no legislation to block them.
For example, in the case of Pancontinental Mining Ltd we do not even know the true owner ship of the company because eight of the 1 0 largest shareholders are nominee companies hold ing 41 per cent of the shares. How can any mini mum ownership requirement have any value when true ownership cannot be assessed or disclosed? Although the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has powers under the Companies (Foreign Take overs) Act-if my memory serves me correctly the powers are contained in section 26-to re quire disclosure of the persons or corporations on whose behalf an interest is held by nominee companies, he has not found it necessary to exercise this power. I predict that he will never use it. In effect, the Government is turning a blind eye to major overseas investors acquiring substantial interests in major Australian companies through nominee companies. Whilst no government would dare to allow these Australian companies to fall to foreign investors in an open market takeover, this Government is allowing the same process to occur through the back door method.

Governor-General's Speech

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 143

In conclusion let me say that there is no short age of solutions or overseas examples to follow to ensure that development of Australian resources provides the optimum advantage to this country. Frankly, what is needed is a government that will rekindle the faith in Australia's know-how which led to early pre-eminence in technology such as we had in a number of areas before, during and after the last war. We need a government which will take the initiative to promote Australian pro jects with the same zeal that led to the Snowy Mountains scheme and other great projects of the past. I remind honourable gentlemen opposite that, when we talk about statutory bodies and government agencies, the Snowy Mountains scheme was allocated the sum of $800m. At com pletion of the project, that is precisely how much was spent.
We need a government which will set up government supported marketing agencies in the mineral products area to assist Australian companies to secure long term contracts without having to rely on foreign' corporations, particularly those that are vertically integrated. We need a government which will back schemes to finance major industrial development projects to mini mise dependence on foreign equity. We ought to do this. Other advanced countries of the world can do it; why cannot we do this? We need a government which will gear the substantial government supported scientific and technical resources in Australia to assist the generation of suitable locally owned investment vehicles, that is, enterprises equipped with the financial, techni cal, marketing and entrepreneurial skills to under take direct investments. We need a government which will extract a much better deal from foreign investors using our considerable resources as a lever. This ought to be our source of strength, not our source of weakness.
Finally, and most importantly, we need a government which will redistribute the great wealth that can be generated from our natural resources much more equitably. The Government has an obligation to do so; it ought not hesitate to do so. Regrettably, the Speech of the Governor General reveals that this Government will continue its short-sighted and dogmatic faith in foreign investment at any cost. Such a thrust ultimately will lead to disaster. The speech reveals that this Government stands as the main impedi ment to a more prosperous Australia. The Government cannot be trusted to protect the interests of all Australians. I thank the honour able member for Capricornia (Dr Everingham) for allowing me the opportunity to speak in this debate earlier than I was originally to participate.

Mr ADERMANN (Fisher) (9.53)-I rise to support the motion moved by the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender) , ad dressed to His Excellency the Governor-General, which incorporates an expression of loyalty to our Most Gracious Sovereign, and to oppose the amendment. I add my congratulations to the new members who have entered this Parliament for the very high standards of some of the maiden speeches that we have heard. I extend my con gratulations to Mr Speaker and to the Deputy Speaker and Chairman of Committees on their re appointment. That surely is an indicator of the confidence that they have inspired in this House as a result of the very high standards of impar tiality, dignity and ability that they have brought to this Parliament. I congratulate the new Ministers-and 1 include my colleague and friend, the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) , who is at the table. I tender my best wishes for a successful and satisfying period in office. I hope that they will experience the cooperation, the goodwill and the satisfaction of worthwhile achievement which it was my privi lege to enjoy.
It was my privilege to occupy the portfolio of Minister for the Northern Territory in a very his toric era. Firstly, following the devastation of Darwin by Cyclone Tracy, my role was to work for the reconstruction and rebuilding of that great city, working closely with the Darwin Recon struction Commission . I pay particular tribute to those who have probably received too scant a rec ognition in that tragedy and in the tremendous task of reconstruction. Firstly, I pay tribute to the members of the Cyclone Tracy Relief Trust Fund, a body of citizens of Darwin of all political com plexions. J believe that this nation owes a very hearty vote of thanks to them. Theirs was an unenviable task. They had suffered tragedy and loss. They often were the victims of unfair and unwarranted criticism. Yet the manner in which they handled the funds of the Trust to relieve dis tress, worry and hardship was magnificent. If ever any part of Australia again suffers such a national disaster, that Trust has provided a blueprint of administration and action which could well provide splendid guidance for any such committee of the future.
In the massive task of reconstruction, many people played a magnificant role. I pay particular tribute to two men and record my deepest ap preciation in the records of this Parliament and in the history of this nation. It may surprise honour able members to know that the first person is the Chairman of the Darwin Reconstruction Commission, Mr Clem Jones. He was appointed by my

1 144 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

predecessor, the Honourable Rex Patterson, and women who have played these important roles in

although our political ideologies do not coincide, the building of the Territory and have made that

in retrospect I feel that it was an excellent future success a certainty.

appointment. Indeed, the way he harnessed and co-operated with private enterprise to do the job was an eye-opener. The speed and the standards of the greatest task of rebuilding Australia has ever faced owes much to the leadership of Clem Jones. I place on record my appreciation of the absolute loyalty and support which he gave me while I was Minister. With him was the Deputy Secretary of the Department of the Northern Territory, Frank Dwyer-a legend in the Territory. He too was involved in that great task. It was very sad indeed to learn of his death a few days ago. The Northern Territory owes very much to Frank Dwyer. I interpose here also that in both of my ministries I count myself most fortunate in the secretaries of the respective departments, namely, Mr Ray Livingston and Sir Richard Kingsland.

I turn to an aspect of government legislation and planning which is of considerable importance. That is the adoption of the new two-airline agreement. I do not propose to canvass much of the de bate which has already occurred in this House and elsewhere. I simply recognise that by the very geography of our nation, the vast distances and the decentralisation we face somewhat unique particular conditions. Recognising too that we rightly demand the most rigid safety standards, efficient and convenient services, and high quality aircraft to provide both speed and comfort, I believe that the two-airline policy has been necess ary and has achieved these desires. I further recognise that, with the very great expenditure on new aircraft and the proper insistence of the Government that remote areas and distant States must be

Also, in that role as Minister for the Northern properly served, we can only sustain our insist

Territory, it was my good fortune to activate and ence on service beyond the most commercially

complete the commitment of the Government to profitable short haul journeys by some fair agree

take the Northern Territory to self-government. ment. Thus, I do not seek to contend that a two

The Government foresaw a timespan of five years airline agreement should be abandoned.

to achieve this; in fact, it was accomplished in less The point which must be carefully pondered is

than three years. In this House we have heard of some of the architects and champions of Terri torian self-government. I will not go through that noble list again. However, the tremendous contribution and co-operation of Goff Letts and his deputy, Grant Tambling, who now very ably rep

the role of regional airlines and their fair treat ment. The trunk routes are preserved for two air lines and other operators, such as East-West Air lines Ltd, Bush Pilots Airways Ltd and others cannot intrude. However, much of our nation away from those trunk routes is serviced by such

resents the Northern Territory in this House, operators. They have pioneered services and

must be recorded. Add to this the grand contri routes and have developed them. If they desire to

bution of Sam Calder, a friend of all of us, and we see the quality of the Territorians who have been in the vanguard. The present Chief Minister, Paul Everingham, assumed the reins of office and saw

go into jet aircraft, they do not receive the guaran tees of government that others receive. Of course, they are subject to government export controls. If they are precluded from the trunk routes, Ansett

the goal finally achieved. He has very capably led Airlines of Australia and Trans-Australia Airlines

the Territory into an exciting new era, already must play the game on other routes.

bearing the hallmarks of success and achievement.

For instance, I would deplore a repetition of the Sydney-Maroochydore saga, which is not the

The role of Administrator of the Northern Ter only occasion when such a situation has occurred.

ritory was both central and crucial to the attain I believe that many years ago Ansett operated a

ment and consolidation of self-government. Terri Sydney-Maroochydore service but abandoned it

torians, irrespective of their politics, join with me for economic reasons. So East-West instituted a

in paying a tribute to John England, who has just regular Fokker service between those centres, and

retired from that position, for his magnificent and popularised and developed it. With the growth of

completely dedicated service as Administrator. the Sunshine Coast, a daily service was provided,

Side by side with his wonderful wife, Polly, he and additional services were provided in holiday

attracted the respect, admiration and love of all periods. Serious consideration was even given by

Territorians-and I say that advisedly. I wonder East-West, in view of the use of the run, to pro

whether history will ever adequately record the ceeding to use jet aircraft to service the route.

sterling and splendid service that that couple ren With Norfolk Island and other routes, that degree

dered to the Territory. I am confident that the of viability seemed promising. However, Ansett

Territory has a great future. That is why I felt it then came in with Fokkers and provided a daily

appropriate to pay these brief tributes to men and service and extra aircraft. This capitalised on

Governor-General's Speech

31 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 45

East-West's development and reduced its revenue. Certainly, it is great to have so many air craft flying from Sydney to Maroochydore and the beautiful Sunshine Coast but, of course, the jets did not materialise and, whether justified or not, the suspicion has been voiced that the action was at least influenced by the possibility of East West acquiringjet aircraft. So, without wanting to be a protagonist in that controversy, as a Queenslander I emphasise that our regional air lines which serve, and have served, much of our State off the trunk routes faithfully and well often not with great profitability-must not be sacrificed or betrayed on the altar of expediency in the attainment of a new two-airline agreement.
Might I now turn to our commitment to recognise 1981 as the International Year of Disabled Persons. This must not take the form of a barrage of slogans, pious platitudes and propaganda. We will be judged by our actions rather than our words. There is always much publicity when we send athletes to the Olympic Games or international games, or to participate in Commonwealth Games. Quite rightly, Federal and State governments and other sponsors contribute hand somely to assist the athletes to participate. I ap plaud that. However, many such athletes then be come professionals and do not always devote their time and endeavours to promoting amateur sport and assisting others to develop their athletic potential. This is not a blanket condemnation, but on occasions the rich rewards of professionalism dim the memory of the contributions by taxpayers and citizens which helped them along the path to that goal. My plea is for the disabled. These people also love sport and international and inter state competition. They will not become pro fessionals but participation enriches their enjoy ment of life. Because of their disabilities, most of them are not in very favourable economic circumstances. Often they are on low salaries or social se curity benefits, yet if there are paraplegic games, blind games, deaf games and so on, how ready are we, as governments, sponsors or citizens, to be generous enough to provide sufficient funds to help them to participate?
Sadly, as I have spoken to blind, deaf or dis abled friends about particular international sports meetings in which they would dearly love to par ticipate, I have repeatedly heard them say that they could not possibly afford to go. If an athlete cannot afford to go to the Olympic Games, the media and the community make quite a stir and start a fund to get him there. That is fair enough, but contrast that athlete's position with that of the disabled person who, more often than not, just has to stay to home. Perhaps I have said enough to

pose to parliaments, governments and the community, in this year of the disabled, the question: Have we got our priorities right? That, too, is why I have on the Notice Paper a question, as yet unanswered, asking whether, in our provision of national and State sporting and other centres, we are providing facilities to accommodate the dis abled. They too like sport and participation in athletics.

I turn now to a particular and large group of disabled people, the deaf. As they live in a lonely world of silence, they are largely ignored. Because communication is difficult, most people become impatient and unsympathetic with them and finally push them out. The tragedy of deafness is often sadly increased by our own unthinking, cruel sense of humour. If we relate Irish jokes, lewish jokes or jokes that are offensive to any eth nic group, we are rightly and properly con demned. Such jokes are hurtful, insulting and wrong. Yet how often is deafness, with the ridicu lous ear trumpet illustrated, the butt ofjokes. Just think about how spiteful and hurtful that sort of humour appears to those who suffer from this ter rible disability.

I want to put forcibly and earnestly to the

Government two propositions. I could put many

more, and probably will, but two in particular

stand out. Let me give an illustration. Recently

there was on the Sunshine Coast the threat of a

cyclone. Warnings were issued of flooding and

possible disastrous wind gusts, precautions were

frequently advised and so on. But how were they

issued? They were issued by radio, which the deaf

cannot hear, and by television. I was in close con

tact with a profoundly deaf young couple. Every

little while the well-known cyclone warning sym

bol came onto their television screen. They saw

the well-dressed announcer and assumed that he

was giving up-to-date warnings and information.

All they could do was admire the cut of his suit

and his tie. They could not understand a word

that he said. Our television companies do not flash

captions or sign language on the screen to help

such persons. That is a travesty. Picture the con

cern and fear of that young couple. I made count

less trips to their home to tell them of the pre cautions being advised. But if it had rained much

"

more the road would have been cut and I would

not have been able to get through. Yet there is an

attachment which can be added to, or built into, a

television set. In Queensland, it is called Seventel.

B y the flick of a switch, the viewer can get on his

screen a print-out of such things as police warn

ings, cyclone warnings, news, sports results and

many other messages which we with full hearing

take for granted. Most deaf people cannot afford

1 1 46 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

Seventel, which is very dear, but w e add to its cost salve our consciences with the least possible in

by levying on such attachments and sets a hefty convenience. Our responsibilities are not dis

sales tax. There is no morality or justification for charged by buying a raffle ticket or two, or by giv

doing that. The Government should remove sales ing a dollar or two for tax deduction purposes to a

tax on those attachments immediately for cases in collector because there, but for the grace of God,

which the purchaser produces a medical cer go we.

tificate of profound deafness. If the Government does not do so let us not trumpet platitudes about our concern for the disabled.

Dr EVERINGHAM (Capricornia) ( 1 0. 1 1 )-1 wish to touch on a number of matters that have been raised in the Governor-General's Speech

The other matter concerns the teleprinter tele and which have a bearing on the general

phone, about which I have also placed a question philosophies of the Government. Indeed, that

on notice. This phone has a print-out, so that a speech was a fairly good summary of the

deaf person can use the receiver to converse with philosophies of the Australian Government.

others who have a similar receiver in their home. Some of the speakers in this debate from the

They can receive a printed conversation record Government side have warned against increasing

back from them. Such a receiver should be pro the deficit because, they say, that is irresponsible.

vided in every police station, ambulance centre, The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is on

medical centre and office of a State and Federal record as having said several times that to increase

government department set up to serve the com the deficit would be irresponsible; it is like a

munity. Indeed, I hope that it will be provided in housewife spending more than her housekeeping

many commercial establishments, stores and pub money. Of course, he is concealing from the Aus

lic telephone booths also. The telephone is a life tralian people and from the Parliament-possibly

line, a means of calling for help, a method of com from himself-the fact that Federal Budgets in

munication which we take for granted and clude an item which does not occur in the well

sometimes curse because it never stops ringing, balanced State Budgets; namely, capital expendi

but why can we not open up these lines of com ture. It is completely misleading to represent a

munication to the deaf. Such receivers are very deficit, on account of expanded capital invest

dear. The answer of the Minister for Communi ment in the interests of the Australian people, as

cations (Mr Sinclair) quotes their cost as $800 to being irresponsible budgeting if it is funded by re

$ 1 000. They are not of much use to the deaf un sponsible borrowing and responsibly repaid by the

less similar receivers are provided in the places to posterity that will get the benefits of that capital

which I have referred by way of illustration. investment. In just the same way it is not irrespon

Surely we must get off our seats and do something sible for a family, or household, to go into debt to

to help many disabled Australians who have been pay off a home which is something that will be an

pushed into a corner and forgotten. If that $800 to increasing asset to them and to future generations.

$ 1,000 includes sales tax payable by the deaf the tax should be immediately waived on production of a medical certificate ofprofound deafness.

One of the economic theories that seem to be espoused particularly by the National Country Party, which has seized on this marvellous con

All around us are disabled people with all sorts cept of a 20 per cent fiat rate tax as an ultimate

of disabilities. We are making a great noise about objective, is that of the Laffer curve. This gentle

this year showing our concern for them. It is great man, Laffer, has come up with the remarkable

to sing 'Break down the barriers' but let us do it, discovery that if we do not tax incomes at all, rev

not just sing it. Governments have their part to enue from income tax is nil and if we put a 1 00 per

play, their credibility to prove, and I urge them to cent tax on incomes revenue is nil because nobody

face that responsibility, as should every Aus will work to gain income which is 1 00 per cent

tralian citizen. Very much has been achieved over taxed. Therefore, the rate of tax has to be some

the years for those with disabilities but very much where between nought and 1 00 per cent. He has

more has yet to be done. The Bible, a book that I capitalised on that remarkable discovery. Of

love, says that it is by our deeds and not by our course he and the National Country Party fol

words that we will be judged. I wonder how we lowers are using this to prove, in their view, that

will be judged by the disabled on 3 1 December our rates of tax are too high. Nowhere does the

198 1 in relation to our sincerity about bringing shape of the Laffer curve indicate that. It does not

into the community the disabled who for so long even indicate that we will get maximum revenue

have been shut out. However, our concern, com if the level of income tax is set at 50 per cent. The

passion and action must not cease at this year's curve does not have to be of Sabrina-like sym

end or we will be rightly identifiable by band metry; it may be that the highest revenue comes

wagon hypocrites going through an exercise to from an income tax level of below 50 per cent, as

Governor-General's Speech

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 47

the National Country Party suggests, but it may well be that revenue will be higher if it is pitched at 80 per cent. Other countries have demonstrated efficiency and achievement in economic manage ment far in advance of anything this country has achieved under conservative governments.
Mr Braithwaite-Which ones? Dr EVERINGHAM-Sweden is an excellent example. That high rate of tax was introduced over a period of about a quarter of a century, about the same period that we had conservative governments in this country achieving none of those economic goals. In fact, they presided over records of just about every economic indicator records of bad achievement. There was a level of inflation of 22 per cent under the Menzies Government and under the Fraser Government we have the worst post-Depression unemployment rate. The Government has also espoused another Messiah in the economic catalogue of saints, Milton Friedman, who assures us that the way to prosperity and salvation in times of stagfla tion and the like is to cut government expenditure. I suppose the arch disciple of the Friedman philosophy would be Mrs Margaret Thatcher. This week a statement, released by over 70 per cent of the leading economists in Britain, told her that she was going the wrong way and that she should go back. They told her that she has to start increasing government expenditure in certain di rections, with certain discrimination, if she is to stop the stagnation that is the major affliction of the British economy, despite its high achievement in resources development with North Sea oil. Not only is that the case with North Sea oil, but also Britain has a record output in agricultural produce. It exports agricultural products that a few years ago had to be imported. It hardly relies at all on the food imports on which it relied when Australia was one of its main suppliers. Another dogma of conservative governments is that they are low tax governments and that Labor Party governments are high tax governments. The Government frequently propounds this by refer ring to the rate of increase of revenues under the Labor Government, completely ignoring the increase in the gross domestic product particularly in the social dividend that Australian's received from the Labor Government compared with conservative governments-and ignoring entirely the fact that the increased rev enues that a future Labor government would pro pose to take would not be mit of the pockets of the ordinary citizens of Australia, as we are continu ally being told in this place. Our proposals are not to increase the load on the low and middle income

earners but to take it from those who have the capacity to pay and who ought to be paying.
The theme of the speech of the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) could be summed up by saying that Australian Labor Party policy is not against the marriage of foreign capital with local capital, and we are not against the marriage of public and private enterprise. We pioneered it. We brought in the General Motors company in partnership with the Australian Hol den team. Under the Fraser and Menzies governments the attitude has been to let the foreign people take over. The Labor Party introduced a marriage between State and Federal enterprise in Australia's first aluminium refinery. Our suc cessors sold it out to their great and powerful friends in the private sector. We are not even against polygamy of capital. Whether one hap pens to be a Moslem, a Mormon or an Aboriginal who believes in polygamy, we do not mind if one wants to marry foreign and local private capital with public capital. Australian Labor Party governments are not against private enterprise ab solutely, as has been alleged in debate tonight, particularly by the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) . What we are against is indiscriminate prostitution of capital. That is what the Government is hellbent on achieving. We do not mind being pastors to preside over any kinds of company marriages. We do object to this Government assuming the role of a pimp to pros titute Australia's resources to the plunderers, the multinational companies.
An example of the Government's obsession with blindly opposing at all costs anything that comes from the working class or the people who at the moment are receiving, and since 1 975 have been receiving, a decreasing share of the increasing wealth of this country, is the millions of dol lars that it is going to spend on a promotion to convince the Australian people that if everybody worked 35 hours a week, we would be worse off. The Australian people do not have to be convin ced of that. The Australian Council of Trade Unions does not have to be convinced of that because it has been saying that for years and it has never said anything different. The Australian Labor Party does not have to be convinced of that. We have said that an immediate move to a 35-hour working week across the board in all industries would be silly, suicidal and harmful. We have agreed. Apparently in promoting this propa ganda the Government is not trying to persuade people of that self-evident fact, but is trying to persuade them that what it is opposing is some thing that has been promoted by the alternative government and by the trade unions-in other

1 1 48 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

words, to create hatred and division in the Aus

tralian community, to paint unions as devils and

to paint the Australian Labor Party as the dupe of

those devils. In fact, the honourable member for

Mackellar (Mr Carlton) said in his speech this

evening: 'If only we could get the devil out of the

labour market, we would solve unemployment'.

Here was his great formula: The honourable

member said that we should stop overtime pay

giveentpseofoprlewpereekmel!Uldmwpoarykmienntths efolrenisiugrhet

industry, work but

not on weekends. We should import skilled

tradesmen and persuade the unions to let more

mature age people become skilled so that we

would not have to pay bigger margins to skilled

people, because if we did, there would be a

flow-on to the unskilled. That is a cirular argu

ment. On the one hand, we must keep down the

margins for the skilled people so that other people

will not want to reduce those margins, but on the

other hand we must not train young Australians

to help the unemployment situation. We must

train mature age people and bring in migrants. I

do not think that he has thought out his figuring

too well there.

Of course, the 35-hour working week stance of the Government, its blindness and its one-eyed approach to this argument, tie up with its usual approach to the umpire. We have explained this on many occasions in other situations. The Government uses the term ' industrial blackmail' when the unions strive to use the open labour market, the very labour market that the honour
s able member for MacKellar wants to get the devil
out of. The Government sa s; 'But you should go to the umpire. You should go t conciliation or to
:f arbitration'. Of course, in manY ases the unions  are not allowed to do that as the ustralian Con
ciliation and Arbitration Commission will not
 hear their cases unless there is alre y Ii dispute;  so they do not have much choice. So etimes they
cannot even consult the umpire. But when they do, such as in the case involving Altona Petro chemical Co. Ltd, and have argued a reasonable deal and package-the same sort of thing that would occur in collective bargaining in the open market, or in the free labour market-the arbi trators agreed that the deal was a fair one and that the industry would benefit not only by shorter hours of work but also by the increased pro ductivity arrangements that the employees entered into in return for those shorter hours. But the Government does not want to abide by the decision of the umpire. It wants to brainwash people into believing that the umpire was biased, that the unions were using industrial blackmail and that the Australian Labor Party is irresponsible. In

other words, there is no virtue in any decision

which disproves the Government's ideological preconceptions.

own

bigoted '

The Government has broken not only its prom ises of abiding by what the umpire says but also has used industrial blackmail in the case of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act. In effect, by its amendments to the Act it has shot the umpire. The Government has taken away from Commonwealth employees only their right of appeal on redeployment and re trenchment. It has deprived them of any right of appeal. Not only has the Government broken promises in that regard but also, as I think Senator Chipp totted up, it has broken over 70 other promises. r will not go through the broken prom ises again in detail, but the common ones that have been raised in this debate include employ ment, interests rates, inflation, Medibank, tax, small government, Aboriginal welfare, general social welfare and ministerial jobs. Even today another broken promise has been raised. There is an article in the Canberra Times entitled 'Doubts over future of institute. "Broken Promises" anger director'. Mr Don Talbot, the executive director of the Australian Institute of Sports says:

If I was a gambler . . . I wouldn't bet on the institute surviving.

1 am not saying that the Australian Institute of

Swli?tohrt

is vital for those the honourable

in need in member

Australia. I for Fisher

agree (Mr

Adermann) who made a very able speech this

evening on the need to help the disabled to take

part in sport. I do not think that leading the world

fines,s,-l,Oinnnailngspgoorltd

medals, competitiveness and pro is a major priority. But partici

pation of the disabled in sport and other fields

surely should have some assistance. This was a

; promise. The then Minister for Home Affairs Mr
Ellicott, a Christian gentleman who is acti e in

the parliamentary Christian assemblage, a man of

honour who has been appointed to a court by this

Government, promised that this Institute would

go ahead. Have the promises been fulfilled? The

director of the Institute has no confidence in its

survival. Yet the Government helps Broken Hill

Pty Co. Ltd. Conzinc Riotinto of Australia Ltd,

Ansett Airlines of Australia, the Utah company,

Coma1co Ltd, A1can Australia Ltd and the

Pechiney company. To any of these big

companies, the Government says: 'We need you'.

The old pimp is at it again.

It is just like when Prime Minister Gorton said in less extreme terms: 'We are like a puppy with its four legs in the air saying "please, please, tickle my tummy". Give us foreign capital under any conditions'. That is exactly what the honourable

Adjournment

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 49

member for Hawker told us. It is not only Liberal Party of Australia leaders who have told us that. A former Country Party Prime Minister, Sir John McEwen said: 'We are like a farmer who sells a little of the farm each year to try to stay out of debt'. What a way to pay off a mortgage. This is the Government that talks about balancing the Budget. There are many other issues that I could raise and would like to raise, particularly relating to foreign affairs. But I think I will content myself, in the one minute left to me, with drawing attention to a very significant article by Ivan Illich in the Co-Evaluation Quarterly. It starts with a let ter dated 1 2 April 1 980, in which he talks about vernacular values.
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT Geelong Aboriginal Co-operative Society-Diabetics: Insulin-Welfare Expenditure-Poland-Community Health Facilities-Meat Inspection Services
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! It being 1 0. 30 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) ( 1 0.30)-1 want to raise two matters on the adjournment debate to night, both of which I find of extreme concern. 1 hope that the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) will investigate the second matter at a later stage. The first matter concerns the Geelong Aboriginal Co-operative Society. Twelve months ago it obtained funding to conduct a drop-in centre for the Aboriginal community in the Geelong area. The Co-operative obtained and established rooms and a centre from which it has been able to operate. Unless there has been a very sudden change of heart today that funding ceases. No further funds will be made available to the Co-operative.
I think the group has been treated very badly. It has been given little or no opportunity to prove the success of the venture which a small number of Aboriginal people, banding together in a self help honorary manner, have tried very hard to make work. After only one year of funding the organistaion is now to be chopped off as a cost saving measure by the Commonwealth and State Aboriginal affairs administrations. The reasons for non-funding are vague, to say the least. There seems to be some suggestion of prejudice against individuals at the levels at which recommendations are made. I believe that this matter should be investigated by the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Senator Peter Baume) in another place. When decisions are made to support projects

which will obviously require continuing funding, that support should be forthcoming for a reason able period so that the organisation can establish whether it is able to operate a viable and worthwhile community service. To drop the funding at the end of the first year is unreasonable. It would have been better not to have commenced the scheme in the first place. Governments have asked for and accepted from people work in good faih. Expectations which have been created have not been met.
The other matter I raise arises out of certain changes in the types of insulin available to dia betics in Australia. This House has seen a number of petitions over recent weeks relating to chan geovers in syringes and other equipment that are necessary because of the change from insulins of varying strengths of 40, 80 or 1 20 to a standard 1 00 strength insulin. Costs are involved. The old types of syringes are less than satisfactory. I think as a general principle that people whose incomes are not adequate should be assisted. All people on low incomes are the most disadvantaged in this situation. They may require certain life support systems. Insulin is a life support system for those who require it. Similar difficulties exist in relation to other surgical aids such as colostomy bags. The free medical service scheme will pay to take out part of a person's bowel but it will not provide the wherewithal to allow a person to continue to function. That is a cost of living which people have to bear.
There are now medical reports that the 100 strength insulin has effects which are less than sat isfactory, so the change to a standard strength which has taken place may not be useful. I ask that the matter be drawn to the attention of the Minister for Health because it is reported that the stronger insulin will not pass through the small vessels through which it must pass in order to react.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CHILD (Henty) ( 1 0.35)-1 read with interest in the latest bulletin of the Australian In dustries Development Association the article en titled 'The Burgeoning Cost of Welfare'. This Association with a powerful voice is calling on the Federal Government to reduce welfare expenditure. The article accepts that such a reduction would be politically sensitive and advises its being done in a cushioning and gradual way. But the whole emphasis of the article is on cutting the amount of money spent on welfare so that the tax

1 1 50 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

A djo urnment

burden is alleviated. The paper calls on Government Ministers to be bold and to support Sir Phillip Lynch's razor gang in reducing expenditure. It advises the reintroduction of the means test for pensioners aged 70 or over. It advises an income test for family allowances based on the joint income of husband and wife. It further advises that the age at which women become eli gible for a pension should be raised to 65 to bring it into line with that of men. Its argument is that women are seeking equality and tend to live longer than men so there should be no basis in principle for granting the pension to women five years earlier than it is available to men.
The paper supposes that the savings over a four year period would be in the vicinity of $400m. This sounds perfectly absurd to me. In a climate of such high unemployment as we have today, just how many women aged 60 to 65 would find employment? The authors of the paper do not seem to have taken reality into consideration. If in fact a woman of 60 cannot get an age pension and she is designated to be of employable age, then she would be entitled to unemployment benefit if the Commonwealth Employment Service could not find her a joband it cannot find jobs for some of the 450,000 unemployed now. Just what sort of saving is this to the community? She is whipped off the old age pension and she is put straight on to unemployment benefit. How many widows of 60 who draw a pension now have never officially worked in the employment market at all? How do they suddenly develop the skills at 60 to enter a highly competitive work force such as we have today? They have made a home, they have reared their families, they have been a partner in family life, and they have lived on the widow's pension if their husband has pre-deceased them. Are we then to say, in the cause of reducing the tax burden: 'You can't have a pension until you're 65. We'll save that money and we'llput you on unemployment benefit instead'? The idea is ill conceived and ill thought out and should be dis missed by the Government for the absurdity it is.
Instead of thinking of raising the age at which women will be eligible to receive a pension, we should be looking at lowering to 60 the age at which men can get a pension. I agree with the equality of that. Early retirement would be most beneficial to the community at large and very beneficial for many men who work those last few years to 65 to qualify for superannuation when they are just too tired to carry on. It would also open the doors for promotions of men in the middle age group and for a larger intake of younger people at the other end of the scale and

would take some of the enormous army of unem ployed off the dole and on to a weekly wage.
The article implies congratulations to the Government for failing to index payments to all but 20 per cent of those on unemployment benefit, the ones indexed being those for adults with dependants. Those who are struggling to exist on the unemployment benefit will not thank the Association for being more interested in saving on the welfare bill than in provision for them to live with some semblance of dignity. The article accepts that the genuine and needy recipi ents of welfare benefits should have a rate of pay that keeps pace with the consumer price index. But who is going to judge who are the genuine and the needy? If one is homeless, hungry and strug gling to keep one's kids, who is going to be one's judge as to whether one is genuine or not? How would such a judgment be made and who would be qualified to make it? [ guess it could be said that welfare payments could be kept to the absol ute minimum if it could be proved that the recipi ents could be described as lazy, spendthrift, dis honest and, in fact, not genuine. What absolute hypocrisy! If the Australian Industries Development Association wants to save government money and reduce the tax burden, it would be better employed getting out after the big tax avoiders who milk the general revenue of hundreds of millions of dollars annually while the pay-as-you earn taxpayer pays his full tax.
Mr SchoIes-Pays more than his full tax.
Mrs CHILDThe honourable member is
quite right. Family allowances must be increased and this should be done as a matter of urgency. J hope that the Government will totally reject the recommendations contained in this article.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) ( l 0.40)I take issue with what I think are some quite unnecesarily churlish remarks attributed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) in the Australian of last Friday. Those remarks were in response to a letter sent by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) on behalf of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party to the Soviet Ambassador on the con temporary situation in Poland. As reported in the Australian the Foreign Minister suggested that the Opposition had 'finally agreed to join the Government' in protesting Soviet interference. The letter sent by the Leader expresses in very strong terms our opposition to the possibility of Soviet interference. I seek leave to have the text of the letter incorporated in Hansard.

Adjournment

3 1 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 5 1

Leave granted. The document read as follows
Leader of the Opposition 25 March 1981
His Excellency Dr N. G. Soudarikov, Ambassador for the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 78 Canberra Avenue, Griffith, ACT 2603
Your Excellency, The Federal Parliamentary Labor Party would like you to
convey to your government its strongest opposition to any intervention by Soviet armed forces or other Warsaw Pact countries in the internal affairs ofPoland.
We believe that such a course of action will do irreparable damage to the process of detente seriously endangering world peace. Such action would -be in breach of the principles of non-intervention in the internal affairs ofsovereign states.
We note with concern the extension of Warsaw Pact manoeuvres in Poland and strongly urge that such pressure on the Polish Government and people should cease. The Polish people are entitled to solve their own problems without exter nal interference.
Relations between the Soviet Union and Australia, which have already been damaged by the invasion of Afghanistan, would further deteriorate should armed intervention take place.
The Federal Parliamentary Labor Party would like you to make clear to your Government that it would share in the sense ofoutrage that would accompanyany such intervention, and would regard it as placing in seriousjeopardy the prospect of any useful relations between a future Labor Government and the Soviet Union.
It is in this regard that I have sought an appointment with you so that the concern ofmy Party can be conveyed to you. l thank you for agreeing to see me at 4 p.m. on Tuesday 31 March 1981 along with my Deputy, Lionel Bowen, and the President and Secretary of the FPLP Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, Mr R. Jacobi, and Mr K. Beazley. Given the uncertainties of a Parliamentary sitting day, I would much appreciate it if our meeting could take place in my office at Parliament House.
I look forward to discussing this and other issues whose resolution is essential if there is to be any possibility of a more healthy and positive future for Australian/Soviet relations.
Yours sincerely, BILL HAYDEN M.P. Leader of the Federal Parliamentary
Labor Party
Mr BEAZLEY-I thank the House. The letter is by no means the first comment of the Labor Party on this matter. On 27 November last year, the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) sent to the Polish Embassy a petition signed by a sub stantial majority of members of the Federal Par liamentary Labor Party which strongly supported the creation of independent trade unions in Poland, argued that they strengthen democracy and indicated the following to the Polish Government:
We attach greatimportance to the continuing ability of the Polish Government to negotiate a peaceful settlement of the complexissues without intervention by external forces.

Further back to last September after the spon taneous and dispersed strike committees co alesced to form Solidarity in Poland, a variety of Labor Party and trade union bodies passed resol utions supporting the creation of Solidarity, the claims of Solidarity and its right to pursue those claims without external interference. Clearly, this included external interference from the Soviet Union. I moved and had adopted by the West Australian State conference of the Australian Labor Party in that month a resolution to that effect.
At every key point of this crisis, the Labor Party has strongly and publicly supported Soli darity and opposed Soviet intervention-first, last August when Solidarity first challenged the auth ority of the Polish state over all facets of economic planning in a move unprecedented in the eastern bloc, then in November-December when many in the United States State Department feared Soviet intervention, and finally this last week when the extension of Warsaw Pact manoeuvres raised ten sions and the possiblity of Soviet intervention. We have opposed forcefully, solidly and unequivoc ally intervention by the Soviet Union. We have done so because as a democratic socialist party with a trade union base the economic and political reforms sought by Solidarity are four square with what we see to be the requirements of the creation of any democratic state and that includes a demo cratic state in Poland. Of course, we see these policies as fundamental to the existence of democ racy in this country as well. We have no wish to argue with the Government on this matter. We are on the public record and we would expect a Minister with half a regard for a bipartisan approach on this matter to acknowledge that fact gracefully.
Mr BAUME ( Macarthur) ( 10.44)-1 take this opportunity to add to the one minute contribution I made to the adjournment debate on Wednesday of last week when 1 discussed a table--
Mr West-What, more shonky figures? Mr BAUME-I notice that the honourable member for Cunningham is once again incapable of containing himself when presented with the facts. He is so unaccustomed to dealing with facts in his own party and on his side of the House that the presentation of statistics which are unassail able is too much for his psyche which apparently is clearly dented if one is to judge by his last obser vation. I was referring to official statistics relating to the grants for community health facilities from 1 975-76, which those of us with any kind of mem ory can recall was during the term of the Labor Government, and 1 980-8 1 . Those statistics

1 1 52 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Adjournment

revealed that in the recurrent spending o n community health facilities there had been a dramatic difference in the trends between the various States. I particularly refer to this matter because the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) had quite falsely claimed in this House that the Federal Government had cut funding to New South Wales. The statistics show of course that that is not true, particularly in the context of the funds being on a matching grant basis. If the State wishes to put up a request the Federal Government is obliged to match that request.
It is interesting to look at the differences between the performances of the various States in the area of recurrent spending-that is, running costs of the community health service. We are all aware that there is a difference between the run ning costs and the capital costs. For example, in the Wollongong area which services part of my electorate and which has the ill fortune to have the honourable member for Cunningham as its representative in this House there has been a clear distinction between capital and recurrent spend ing because the State Government, in fact, has reduced recurrent spending in that area and in stead stated that it plans to spend something like $50,000 purchasing a house while at the same time threatening to put off community health ser vice workers who are involved in the recurrent spending side of the program; in other words, who are actually providing a service to the people.
Let us look at the differences between the per formances in New South Wales and Victoria. From 1 975-76 to 1 980-8 1 in Victoria there was a rise from $7.7m to $ 1 5.9m; after accounting for inflation that was a sizable rise. There was a simi lar sort of rise in Queensland from $3 .6m to about $6. 1 m. In South Australia there was a rise from $ 1 .97m to $3.5m. These are all pretty substantial rises. I concede that these levels of funding still do not reach the levels of funding that exist in the New South Wales service; that is quite true. In New South Wales the total is still higher than it is in the other States as, of course, it should be; New South Wales is a bigger State. There is no doubt that in Victoria there seems to be a greater con centration on home help service. Certainly, on a per capita basis it is far higher in Victoria than in New South Wales. That is an offset which I recognise.
It is interesting to see that in New South Wales the increase in recurrent spending has been only from $ 1 9. 3m to $24.2m. That is a much lower rate of rise than the rate in any other State of Australia. We must remember that they are matching giants by the Federal Government in response to requests from the States. That is

almost an open-ended situation because if the States put up the money the Federal Government is obliged to meet it. The State of New South Wales has taken a different view to that of the other States in the matter of recurrent spending. I think it is worth mentioning that the honourable member for Cunningham misled the House when making totally incorrect assertions about the run ning costs of community health facilities in New South Wales.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) ( l 0.49 ) - Mr Deputy Speaker, once again we have had to listen to a diatribe of shonky figures from the little grafter from Macarthur.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar) Order! The honourable member for Cunningham has a habit of using a word which the dictionary has not taken notice of. I think we should regard it as unparliamentary. I ask the honourable member to desist from its use.
Mr WEST-Mr Deputy Speaker, Let us say that the figures given by the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) are aimed at mislead ing this House. In the first place what I took exception to on this matter last week was that the honourable member for Macarthur had in public statements in the Wollongong district alleged that, in fact, funding for community health centres in Australia and New South Wales had been increased by a substantial amount between 1 979-80 and 1 980-8 1 . I drew attention to the obvious fact that a comparison of what had occurred over the past five or six years was of far more rel evance than a comparison of figures over the last year. If one looks at the figures from the Budget Papers of 1 975 and 1 980 one will find that New South Wales received, all up, $25.8m in 1 975 for ' the running of community health centres, and $24.9m in 1 980. That amounts to a cut of between 3 5 per cent and 40 per cent, depending upon what deflator factor one uses. That simply means that this Government does not want to repair or build any more community health centres.
Mr' Baume-It is for the running of them. Admit that.
Mr WEST-Mr Deputy Speaker, if you can not control the l ittle grafter, perhaps I should sit down until you can.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Macarthur will remain silent. The honourable member for Cunningham will proceed.
Mr Baume-Admit that it is for the running of them.

Adjournment

\3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 53

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER - I warn the honourable member for Macarthur.

Mr WEST-If one looks at the national figures one will see that $59.5m was allocated in 1 975 and that last financial year exactly the same figure was
t allocated which means that if one takes into
account he inflation rate over that period one will get the percentage rate by which the figure has been cut. The honourable member for Macarthur comes into this place and tries to tell us that there is nothing wrong with the community health centres. He should go back to Wollongong or Dapto and talk to the employees and the directors of the health centres there. They will tell him how many people have had to be put off. Eighteen months ago over 200 peopl were employed in community health centres m the Illawarra area. Now only 1 60 people are employed there. Because of a policy which has been forced upon the New South Wales Department of Health by these cuts of the Federal Government there is now no replacing of people who leave for whatever reason, whether they leave for good or go on accouchment leave and so on.

The terrible thing about all this is that most of

these cases are affecting services in the field; that

is, the services of community nurses who go out

and look after people such as the poor old lady

featured in the Illawarra Daily Mercury who has

terminal cancer and who is frightened that, be

cause of the cuts that the hl)nourable member for

Macarthur and his Government have foisted

 upon the service in New South Wales, she will not

get nursing services cuts in community

ahneyaltmhorseer. VII.ckenofuwndtmagt

the are

simply symptomatic of a greater malaise. In the

next few days we can expect further attempts to

be made to dismantle the health insurance scheme

in this country. We can also expect an attempt to

cut back recurrent expenditure under the cost

sharing agreement for the State hospitals systems.

I wonder what the honourable member for

Macarthur, the Prime Minister and the Govern

ment have in store for us there. What will they do

with regard to hospitals, not just the community

health centres, in the future?

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) ( 1 0.54)-1 should like to address this House tonight on a subject that is very dear to the hearts of many country pro ducers. I refer to the problem of meat inspection services and the manner in which they apply to export abattoirs. Recently an abattoir within my electorate-the Tip Top abattoir which is located

in the Northam Shire-sought an export licence.

The abattoir previously serviced a major retail

chain in Western Australia and, under the laws of

that State, operated in a situation in which the

local authority, namely, 'the Northam shire, was

able to supply the meat inspection services. It did

this according to the health requirements of West

ern Australia for the cost in the case of a bullock

of $ 1 .25. Nevertheless, when the company de

cided that it needed additional throughput and

sought an export licence, it found that the Com

monwealth had to enter the scene. In doing ,this,

the work force situation was reconsidered. It is a

fact that importing countries require a higher de

gree of meat inspection and consequently ad

ditional meat inspectors and the services of a vet

erinary officer. However, the Northam shire

originally operated with 1 0 meat inspectors, eight

of whom worked at any one time. When our em

ployees turned up on that approximately

the 16

socpenereaittI.vweass

discovered would be

needed. The original suggestion was that all of

these people should be supplied by the Depart

ment of Primary Industry.

It is interesting to note that because of the con

cern that has been felt by governments certain in

vestigations and inquiries have been held, the lat of which was carried out by Mr Bert Kelly, who IS

well known to many people in this Parliament. In

cluded in his discoveries was that after the Com

monwealth supplied its meat inspection service

the Australian taxpayer is up for about $26m a

year. That is over and above the $ 1 .80 which is

 charged
spection

by the service.

Commonwealth f?r So the producer IS

loitasdmedeaWt I.tin

 ,

firstly, a local inspection fee, which in this case IS

$ 1 .25, the Commonwealth fee, and if he happens

to be a taxpayer he has to contribute to the $26m

loss.

Interestingly, the Northam shire has managed to make ends meet on the revenue of some
 $200 000 a year that is attracted. It did this in
vario s ways, one of which was to pool its vehicle resources when it was necessary to get men to work. In fact it managed to get the work force to work for a fee of about $7,000 a year. It drew to my attention that if the same eight inspectors were taken to work by the Commonwealth the cost would jump to $43,000 a year; and we wonder where the money is going.

In this case the shire did not want to dismiss any

of its workers. It was quite willing to supply men

whose qualifications exceeded the minimum re

quirement of the Department of Primary Indus

try, on

at no charge the services.

to In

the Commonwealth, the interest of the

taobactatrOrI?r

when our people came on the scene-apparently

1 1 54 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 198 1

Adjournment

they are a very elitist lot-they demanded separ ate ablution facilities. The union has convinced our Bureau of Animal Health that such facilities are necessary. A letter dated I September 1 980 stated that it was the Department's firm policy not to share amenities with other inspector personnel. When that was queried we discovered that in fact it was the policy of the Meat Inspectors Association. On-30 December the Association wrote stating:
It is the policy of the Association not to share amenities with any other than DPI inspectors on any registered export works.
That is about as un-Australian as bowling under arm. To be quite honest, it astounds me that workers in the Australian community cannot even share, with similar qualified people, their ablution facilities. That is the circumstance that we have.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) ( 1 0. 5 9 ) -The honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) said that in the last 1 8 months cuts have been forced on the New South Wales Government by Federal cuts in expenditure. I repeat that that demonstrates the falsityof the whole position that he is maintaining. There have been no Federal cuts in spending whatsoever in the last 1 8 months. There have been none in the last three years. Last year there was a 2 1 per cent increase. The year before the rise went from $ 1 7.2m to $ 1 9.5m. There were no cuts at all to the New South Wales service in the 1 8 months; yet the honourable member deceptively proposes to this House that there have been cuts in New South Wales services as a result of Federal cuts during that period. The honourable member has to make up his mind. When were these cuts? Why is the New South Wales Government now cutting its services to the

people, even though there has been a 21 per cent increase in Federal expenditure during the very time that he complains that these cuts have taken place? How is it possible that the honourable member can come into this House and pretend that there has been a cut to New South Wales within the last two years, within-in his termsI 8 months, when in fact there has been an increase in Federal funding? It is deceptive of the honourable member to come into this House and make allegations of that kind which he knows to be untrue, when he deliberately set out to subvert the figures--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member for Macarthur reflects on the honourable member for Cun ningham insofar as he insists that the honourable member deliberately deceives the House, not innocently deceives the House. J must ask the honourable member to withdraw.
Mr BAUMEI withdraw. He obviously did not know.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! It being I I p.m., the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 2. 1 5 p.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 1 1 p.m.
PAPERS The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 3 1 March 1981 , pursuant to statute:
Defence Amendment Act-Interim Determinations Statutory Rules 1981 , Nos. 46, 47, 48.
. S e a t of G o v e r n m e n t ( Ad m i ni s t r a t i o n ) A c t  Ordinances-198 1 -
No. 6-Health Commission (Amendment). No. 7-Plant Diseases (Amendment).
States Grants (Petroleum Products) Act-Amendment of the schedules to the subsidy schemes in relation to the States of Victoria and Western Australia, dated 20 March 198 1 .

Answers to Questions

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 55 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Vietnam: Chemicals
(Question No. 32)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 26 November 1 980:
( I ) Further to the answer by the Minister's predecessor to
part (5) of question No. 5332 (Hansard, 15 May 1980, page 2876) , how many claims for compensation from Vietnam vet erans, based on possible exposure to herbicides, pesticides and other chemicals, had been received by the Department of Vet erans' Affairs by 25 November 1980.
(2) How many of those claims had been accepted by 25 November 1980 and how many of those accepted were attributed to (a) specific chemical exposure and (b) non specific war-related disease or injury.
(3) What are the details of the progress made by the Commonwealth Institute of Health in the conduct of the epidemiological study into the effects of chemicals used in Vietnam on Vietnam veterans and their wives and families as at 25 November 1980.
(4) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the statement made by the United States Federal Department of
Health and Human Services, dated I August 1980, that (a)
there are inherent statistical limitations in the US Air Force proposal epidemiological study, (b) that study would need a significant period of follow-up beyond 5 years and (c) that scientific research other than epidemiological studies is also required.
(5) Has the Minister caused (a) the Department of Vet erans' Affairs, (b) the Commonwealth Institute of Health, (c) any other Federal agency or (d) any other individual or or ganisation to conduct any scientific and/or medical research into the effects of chemicals used in Vietnam, in addition to the Commonwealth Institute of Health's epidemiological study; if so, what are the details; if not, will the Minister give urgent consideration to any other research that may be required.
Mr McVeigh-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( 1 ) Up to and including 30 November 1980, 749 claims had been received (825 as at 28 February 198 1 ) .
(2) U p to the date in question there had been 7 3 cases where disabilities had been accepted as heing service-related but none of these was accepted as causally related to chemical exposure (99 and zero as at 28 February 1981 ) .
(3) A detailed progress report on the conduct of the epidemiological study is contained in a news release, dealing with the offering of free hospital treatment for Vietnam vet erans and with the study, issued by the Minister for Veterans' Affairs on 1 4 January 1981. With respect to the study the news release stated, in part, that:
The Institute has received essential data from the Central Army Records Office in Melbourne on Army personnel who served in Vietnam, and on other Army personnel who are being considered as a control group for the study. Infor mation has also been provided by the Department of De fence on troop locations and movements, and the United States Department of Defence has supplied computer tapes

detailing American fixed-wing aircraft herbicide-spraying operations.
The Institute has pre-tested data collection question naires, and will conduct a pilot study involving some 600 veterans and their families. The purpose of this pilot study is to establish the relative merits of three different types of data collection and various administrative systems which could be used in the majorstudy.
The results of this pilot study will be submitted to the Scientific Advisory Committee which will assess how appropritate the study's methodology is. The major study of all contactable Vietnam veterans, a control group, and families of both groups, is planned to begin during the third quarter of l981.

( 4 ) The Minister is aware of a report by the Department

of Health and Human Services which concerns the

epidemiological study of 'Ranch Hand' personnel, designed by

the US Air Force. TheReport gives the conclusions of the US

Inter-agency Work Group on the Possible Long-Term Health

Effects of Phenoxy Herbicides and Contaminants. The Work

Group, while recognising that there are several limitations in

herent in the study design, strongly recommended that the

study, with appropriate protocol modifications and with out

side peer review and monitoring, be commenced by the Air

Force as soon as possible. The Scientific Panel which advises

the Inter-agency Work Group pointed out in a report on the

'Ranch Hand' Study that this study is but one segment of a

larger effort and that there are other studies that are critical to

the overall effort, some of which are: the US Dioxin Registry;

the proposed International Dioxin Registry; the Case Control

Study of Human Birth Defects; the Health Evaluation of the

Nitro, West Virginia worker population; the proposed US De

partment of Veterans' Administration Epidemiology StUdy;

the 'Agent Orange' male mouse study; and ongoing laboratory

Hstuerdbieicsidseu'cOhraansgethcoosme pwohniecnhtsatroecaasusseessginengettihcedapmotaegnetia(ml uof

tation). It is understood that a decision ceed with the 'Ranch Hand' Study.

has

be.en

made

to

pro-

(5) The Department of Veterans' Affairs is establishing a data base from information contained in the claims of vet erans who cite exposure to chemicals as a possible cause of
their disabilities. Results are not yet available and are unlikely
to be available until a greater number of claims have been de termined. No other bodies have been asked to undertake any scientific and/or medical research into the effects of thc chemicals used in Vietnam and no additional Australian
studies are currently planned.

Conzinc Riotinto of Australia Ltd
(Question No. 64)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 November 1 980:
( I ) Can he say whether the British-based company, Rio
Tinto Zinc Corporation (RTZ) has taken up its full entitlement of shares in the latest 1-for-1 5 rights issue by Con zinc Riotinto Australia Ltd (CRA), as reported in the Financial Australian on 3 September 1980; if so, does this constitute a rejection of an opportunity to increase Australian ownership of CRA.
(2) What benefits does CRA gain from the Government from the promise by RTZ to lower its stake in CRA to 49 per cent.

1 1 56 REPRESENTATIVES 3 1 March 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) Is he also able to say whether RTZ has persistently undertaken to Australianise CRA.
(4) If RTZ has not undertaken to Australianise CRA, what steps will he take to ensure that RTZ complies with Govern merit policy guidelines on this matter.
(5) When does the Government expect Australian owner ship in CRA to reach the level required by Government policy.
(6) Has the government given urgent consideration to a time scale for the Australianisation of CRA; if not, why not.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) Rio Tinto-Zinc Corporation Ltd (RTZ) subscribed to
its entitlement to a I -for-1 5 rights issue announced by CRA Ltd on 2 September 1 980. The reasons for its decision to do so, involving matters of commercial judgment, were advised in confidence to the Foreign Investment Review Board and the Government. The Government accepted that judgement, noting that Australian equity in CRA had increased from 27.4 per cent to 38.9 per cent since early 1979.
(2) Having complied with the necessary policy pre conditions to be granted the status of a naturalising company, CRA is given prior credit for 5 1 per cent Australian owner ship and is regarded as meeting the Australian equity and con trol guidelines in relation to any new natural resource development projects (other than uranium projects) in which it may wish to participate. It may proceed to develop such new natural resource projects without notification to the Government where it intends to carry out the development on its own or in conjunction with other naturalising or naturalised companies or with an Australian-owned company.
(3) and (4) RTZ has given undertakings to the Government that it will pursue the naturalisation of CRA in terms of the policy, and it has also made a public commitment to do so.
(5) and (6) A firm time scale for achieving naturalised status was not set because the Government recognises the rate of progress must depend largely on commercial judgments of what is achievable. As one of tbe undertakings required by the Government prior to tbe granting of naturalising status to CRA, RTZ and CRA are committed to hold regular discussions with the Foreign Investment Review Board to report on the progress being made towards naturalisation. One such meeting was held in September 1 980. I am confident that ad equate opportunities will arise in the future for maintaining an acceptable rate of increase in the level of Australian oWner sbip of CRA, particularly through the financing of new proj ects to be developed by that company. I am equally confident that the naturalisation provisions of the Government's foreign investment policy will encourage increasing participation by Australians in the development of Australia's resources and industries.
Social Security: Allowable Income
(Question No. 144)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 26 November 1 980:
( 1 ) In its assessment of social security beneficiaries' extra income, is the attitude of the Department of Social Security as to what constitutes income the same as that of the Australian Taxation Office.
(2) If not, (a) in what respects do the attitudes differ, (b) why are there two separate attitudes and (c) will the Minister institute changes to bring the assessment of income by the De partment of Social Security into line with the procedure used by the Australian Taxation Office.

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( 1 ) No.
(2) (a) The Social Services Act defines income for pension and benefitpurposes to mean:
"any personal earnings, moneys, valuable consideration or profits earned, derived or receivcd by that person for his own use or benefit by any means from any source whatso ever, within or outside Australia and includes any period i ca l p a y m e n to r be n e fi t by w a y of g i ft o r allowance . . . "
The Income Tax Assessment Act does not contain any definition of income. Consequently, the term is understood in its general meaning determined according to ordinary concepts and usages.
Liability for income tax is based primarily on taxable income, which is calculated by deducting from the assessable income all allowable deductions. Under the Act, assessable income includes some items which are not income within the ordinary meaning of the term, and does not include some receipts which are income within the ordinary mean ing, such as those which are specifically declared to be exempt from tax.
(b) Variations in what is regarded as income validly may exist when the general rationale underlying the respective sys tems differ. The social security system is based on presumed need for income support while the income tax system is based on the principle of ability to pay tax.
(c) In view of (a) and (b) the fact that the laws relating to social security and taxation have different provisions govern ing the determination of a person's income does not of itself indicate that changes to either law are necessary.
"Maintenance of Service Housing
(Question No. 206)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 27 November 1 980:
( 1 ) Has his attention been drawn to the growing levels of complaint from Defence Service families with respect to the neglect of basic maintenance of Service housing.
(2) Will he provide details of (a) maintenance programs for Service housing for 1980-81 and (b) the (i) availability and (ii) response time, ofurgent repair and maintenance work with respect to each area whereServicehousingis established.
Mr Killen -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) J am aware that Defence Service families complain from time to time about the maintenance of married quarters they occupy. However, there has been no increase in the number of complaints made to me personally; and I am informed that there is no evidence that the general level of complaints is growing.
(2) (a) There are approximately 23,500 Service houses in Australia. About one third of these are owned by the Commonwealth Government and maintained by the Department of Housing and Construction. The balance are owned and maintained by State Governments, under Commonwealth/State Housing Agreements.
The Commonwealth Government allocated $5.2m in1980-81 for the maintenance of those Service houses it owns. It also allocated $ 1 .8m for capital improvements to Service houses owned by the States.

Answers to Questions

3 1 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 57

According to State Housing Authorities, about $6.9m will be spent in 1980-81 on the maintenance of houses provided for Servicemen under Commonwealth/State Housing Agreements.
(b) Requests for urgent repairs to Commonwealth-owned Service houses are normally responded to immediately (i.e. the same day) by the Department of Housing and Construc tion. If such repairs cannot be completed then, holding main tenance is carried out.
State housing authorities have advised that urgent repairs and maintenance to Service houses for which they are responsible are carried out promptly. Two State Housing Authorities advised that such work is normally carried out the same day.
Multiple Sclerosis
(Questiou No. 267)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 3 December 1 980:
( 1 ) Will he give consideration to either (a) increasing the allowance paid to multiple sclerosis sufferers for intensive care or (b) taking steps to have the subsidy paid to nursing homes for treatment ofsufferers increased.
(2) Would the proposals outlined in part ( I ) meet, to some extent, the additional expenses incurred by multiple sclerosis patients for intensive physiotherapy on the one or two occasions per year when such treatment is required.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) and (2) There are two types of subsidy payable in respect of patients accommodated in nursing homes approved

under the National Health Act-the basic benefit which varies from State to State and is reviewed annually, and the extensive care benefit. These benefits are paid by the Commonwealth on behalf of patients without hospital insurance, and by registered health insurance funds on behalf of their contributors.
There are also homes approved under the Nursing Homes Assistance Act for deficit financing. Under the deficit financ ing arrangements, the Commonwealth meets the approved operating deficit of the nursing home each year.
In reviewing basic benefits each year the principle adopted by the <;:ommonwealth is that benefits should be set at a level in each State which, together with the minimum statutory patient contribution, would cover fees charged for 70 per cent of beds in the State in non-Government nursing homes ap proved under the National Health Act.
The extensive care benefit is an additional benefit payable in respect of patients who are in need of and receiving exten sive care. The current rate of extensive care benefit is $42 per week and only one rate is payable throughout Australia.
It is not Government policy to pay a further additional benefit in respect of particular categories of patients. The fees that homes charge may include, where appropriate, the services of paramedical staff e.g. physiotherapists. It is known, for example, that in the honourable member's home State, Queensland, multiple sclerosis sufferers are mainly accom modated in Granston Lodge Nursing Home, Dutton Park, Brisbane. This home makes provision for paramedical services, such as intensive physiotherapy, at no additional ex pense to patients.
In 1 979-80 the Commonwealth paid $3 1 2m in respect of patients in nursing homes.


