House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 125, 1981 Tuesday, 22 September 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Petitions

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1567

Tuesday, 22 September 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:

Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament Assembled. This petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that by terminating the Community Youth Support Scheme the unemployed young will be severely disadvantaged. The Com-, munity Youth Support Scheme operates as an essential service in the Acquisition of employment skills, and therefore plays an essential role in the Commonwealth Governments Manpower Training Schemes, It is also the principal mode of involvement for the community in the significant problems of youth unemployment.

O~mmunity Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humbie petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth their anger and condemnation at the Fraser government's decision to abolish all Community Youth Support Schemes on the 31st October 1981.
Further they denounce the decision for the disastrous effects it will have on growing numbers of unemployed young people around Australia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government immediately and fully reverse its decision and restore complete funding to the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Sinclair, Mrs Kelly and Mr O'Keefe.
Petitions received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the decision of the Federal Government to discontinue the Community Youth Support Scheme (CYSS) will further reduce the prospects of young Australians for employment, and place additional undue hardship on the unemployed. '
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Government continue the CYSS program and support the voluntary Community Management Committees in their valuable work to assist the unemployed.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Baume and Mr Humphreys.
Petitions received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that we deplore the action of the Federal Government in terminating the Community Youth Support Scheme. The scheme is effective in dealing with the problems of the young unemployed and provides services that cannot be found elsewhere. We therefore request the government to reverse its decision of the 1981 Budget and refund the Community Youth Support Scheme,
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr John Brown.
Petition received.
r:~;'

Your petitioners therefore pray that; the Budget decision of 18th August 1981 terminating the Community Youth Support Scheme be rescinded and Community Youth Support Scheme funding be continued at pre-Budget level
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howard.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the abolition of Community Youth Support Schemes show a callous indifference and lack of sensitivity to the needs of the unemployed youth of Australia.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government continue to fund the Community Youth Support Schemes throughout Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hyde. Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Through the Honourable A. J, McKenzie, MHR, Member for Calare, we, the undersigned citizens of Australia:
(I) Are concerned with the continuing high level of unemployment;
(2) believe that a need exists within 10caI-communities for Community Youth Support Schemes and in keeping with this belief strongly protest against the Budget decision of 18 August 1981, to close Community Youth Support Schemes;
(3) believe that the Community Youth Support Scheme is particularly vital in country areas in giving young, unemployed persons a focal point and a role in the community at large;
(4) for the preceding reasons, your petitioners respectfully request the government to reinstate Community Youth Support Scheme funding.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr MacKenzie.
Petition received.

1568 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Petitions

Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth:
that the serious youth unemployment problem is a direct result of the community's failure to create sufficient jobs.
In these circumstances the decision to abolish Community Youth Support Schemes (CYSS) is a socially retrogressive step. The CYSS Projects provide valuable support services and work training for many young unemployed.
We the undersigned are concerned that the closure of CYSS Projects may lead young unemployed to become involved in anti-social behaviour such as crime, vandalism, prostitution, rebellious behaviour and mob action. There is the even more frightening prospect that many more young people will give up hope of obtaining a job, become idle and even contemplate suicide.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government reverse its decision to abolish CYSS Projects and provide sufficient funds to enable the various CYSS Centres to continue their valuable work with the young unemployed in the future.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Duffy, Mr Holding, Mr Howe, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Peacock.
Petitions received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker, and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Ballarat respectfully showeth:
(i) that the action of the Government in terminating the Community Youth Support Scheme will have serious effects upon the life possibilities of a significant number of young people who, through circumstances totally outside their control, are not able to find any form of paid employment,
(ii) that the action of the Government fails to understand that many unemployed youth do not fit into the retraining initiatives proposed and that part of the need within the total context of school-to-work transition is to have support structures based around the Community Youth Support Scheme model,
(iii) that the failure to provide such supports will place many young people in a position of high vulnerability to crime, violence, vandalism, drug abuse, and even suicide, and that the incidence of homelessness and family breakdown will be further aggravated.
Your petitioners humbly pray that the Government give immediate attention to the re-instatement of the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham and Mr Mildren.
Petitions received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Geelong respectfully showeth:
That the serious youth unemployment problem is a direct result of the community's failure to create sufficient jobs.

We, the people of the Geelong Community, request that the Community Youth Support Schemes (CYSS) throughout Australia, be restored. We particularly ask that the Geelong and Corio CYS Schemes be on-going after the proposed closure date, 31st October, as they have contributed much to our community. CYSS has provided interests, support, opportunities for service, a voice in the community and job training for its thousands, of participants over' the past four years in Geelong.
CYSS is an important part of our community and we as a community, support it especially in times of high youth unemployment that seriously affects our region.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government reverse its decision to abolish CYSS Projects and provide sufficient funds to enable the various CYSS Centres to continue their valuable work with the young unemployed in the future.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray,
by Mr Scholes.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfulIy showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Ballarat East post office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mildren.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the,Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Fisher respectfu\1y showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade Postal and Mail services throughout Australia, will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:
downgrading a large number of official post offices; reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period; reducing the number of street posting boxes; delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices; downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff; and using private contractors for mail cartage,
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the Postal and Mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Adermann.
Petition received.

Petitions

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1569

Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Darling powns respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade Postal and Mail services throughout Australia, will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:
downgrading a large number of official post offices; reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period; reducing the number of street posting boxes; delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices; downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff; and using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the Postal and Mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr McVeigh.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Wide Bay respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade Postal and Mail services throughout Australia, will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:
downgrading a large number of official post offices; reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period; reducing the number of street posting boxes; delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices; downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff; and using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners thereFore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the Postal and Mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Millar.
Petition received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens respectfully showeth:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other business expenses.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hodgman and Mr Les McMahon.

Petitions received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the proposed changes to assistance to the passenger motor vehicle and components industries after 1984 shall lead to the collapse of the Vehicle ManuFacturing Industry in Australia. Your petitioners thereFore pray that the Industries Assistance Commission report be not given effect.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hurford and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Defence Services Home Loans
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:
That all members of the Women's Services 1939-45 War qualify as "Australian Soldier" under the Defence Service Homes Act for loans because on voluntarily joining the Australian Forces they took the oath to resist His Majesty's enemies making themselves available for combat duty in War Zones, and according to Acts and Regulations of the period the Military women had enlisted for service anywhere, some Naval women to sail in any waters, with all servicewomen available for service ill Papua New Guinea.
As those members of the Royal Australian Navy, the Australian Imperial Force and the Royal Australian Air Force of 1939-45 War who were not sent to War Zones are granted loans, refusal to grant eligibility to all Ex-servicewomen of 1939-45 War is unjust and unfair.
Your petitioners therefore pray that you amend the Defence Service Homes Act by repealing Sub-section 4 (2A) (b) (c) (d) of the Principal Act as amended by No. 137 of 1978, and grant eligibility to all members of the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service, the Australian Women's Army Service, the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force, the Australian Army Medical Women's Service, and the Voluntary Aid Detachment of 1939-45 War.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Barry Jones and Mr Scholes_
Petitions received.
Aboriginal Land Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Federal Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:
That the humble petitioners respectfully believe that the recent report of the World Council of Churches team which visited Australia, June 15 to July 3,1981, emphasises the central importance of land rights to the Aboriginal people.
And noting that all attempts by white Australians to manage Aboriginal affairs for them have failed.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Federal Government will accept its responsibility and use its powers under the Constitution to over-ride racist state legislation, particularly to provide Land Rights with freehold title, and
That in addition the Government fulfil its stated policy of self-determination and selF-management for Aboriginal

1570 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Petitions

people, by funding all housing, health, education, legal, employment strategy and welfare matters concerning Aboriginal people directly through Aboriginal Community-based Community-controlled organisations.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Funding of Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The. undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That women's refuges have provided on a 24 hour a day basis emergency accommodation, child care, financial aid, moral support, legal advice and guidance in dealing with Government departments for over 13,000 women and children in the past year at a cost to the national Government substantially less than $4m which is half the cost of holding the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Australia later this year.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will not proceed with its stated intention to withdraw from funding women's refuges and pass this responsibility to ill-equipped and sometimes unsympathetic State G()vernments and will increase federal funding levels for women's refuges.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Privacy and Personal Information
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Personal Information discussion paper number 14, brought down by the Law Reform Commission in June 1980, undermines the family unit and the authority of parents, which is the Christian basis of our society, by proposing that "between 12 and 16 years, a child should be entitled to object to disclosure of information to a parent."
It is your petitioners sincere belief that:
(a) an adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a mature enough stage of life to decide whether or not the disc.losure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.
(b) as a record keeper has no responsibility for the child, and as his moral standards may be different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.
(c) a parent has a unique position which may enable him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the right to guide the child in the direction he/she feels fit.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Members of the House of Representatives will reject the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission and find some other means to protect children from the excessive abuse of some parents.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrDobie.
Petition received.

Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is incr~asing interest rates on home mortgage loans without due concern for its impact on the general community and ask that the Government re-consider its attitude to low and middle income earners.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert any further effects of increases in interest rates on home mortgage loans which cause financial, social and psychological pressures on families.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrDuffy.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. Because of an anomaly in tax rates a single income family pays nearly $10 a week more tax than a dual income family earning the same total amount.
2. Family allowances established in 1976 have not been increased since then, yet over the same period living costs have increased by nearly 60 per cent.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that:
The Parliament should act-
\. To restore the lost value of family allowances and to index them for future price rises.
2. To increase the spouse rebate from $830 to $1,342 per year.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hodgman.
Petition received.
Aboriginal Land Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the projected repeal by the Queensland State Government of the Aborigines Act 1971-1979 and the Torres Strait Islander Act 1971-1979 will almost certainly lead to the degazettal of all Aboriginal reserves in Queensland, as has already been the case with Aurukun and Mornington Island.
That if, as is likely, the Aboriginal communities from these reserves are placed under similar shire council legislation on fifty year leases, they will be exposed to serious encroachment on their land by mining and tourist interests.
That it is also quite clear, on past evidence, that these interests will have the full backing of the Queensland Government and the rights of Aboriginal people to land rights and self-management will not be granted by that Government.
That the Commonwealth Government has the power to legislate and acquire land for Aboriginal people under its constitutional powers since the amendments to the Constitution in 1967, but it is your petitioners' sincere belief that it failed to act in 1978 and thus, failed in its duty before the people of Aurukun and Mornington Island.

Petitions

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1571

That the Aboriginal people of Queensland have stated that they want land rights and self-management.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government make use of its constitutional and legislative powers to grant full land rights and self-management to the Aboriginal people of Queensland.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
National Roads Construction Program
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth that your petitioners believe that:
The decision to subject the National Roads Construction program to the tendering system will:
(a) threaten the jobs of 790 workers employed in 17 main roads depots in NSW
(b) impair the day labour system and undermine the capacity of Departments of Main Roads to train staff and test road construction concepts ,
(c) have a disruptive effect on the employment opportunities available in small communities
(d) reduce the Hexibility of the Department of Main Roads to handle emergencies caused by Hood or fires
(e) ultimately increase the cost of road construction at taxpayers' expense.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Government withdraw this disruptive proposal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker, and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
We, the people who have signed this petition, ask all parties, Labor, Liberal, Democrats and others, to stop the latest increase in taxes, and the forever increases in taxes which hit all people of the country of Australia on all goods and consumer goods and we call for a referendum on taxes and interest rates.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Jenkins.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the burden of interest payments on housing loans is now at such record levels that most citizens paying off their homes are becoming severely financially distressed.
That the burden of additional expense together with increases in health insurance and hospital charges is putting increasing stress on family relationships.
That the policies of favouring overseas private investors to buy up our resources are causing inflationary pressures, declining public services and ever higher interest rates.

That we support all efforts to give relief to people making house repayments, particularly in the first five years of purchase, but also when the expenses are higher after the first years of marriage.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government will give interest rate relief by way of tax concessions or a subsidy on mortgage repayments.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kerin.
Petition received.
Family Allowances
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the allowable amount of income to be earned by people receiving social security benefits has not been adjusted since 1972 and in the case of unemployed not since 1969.
That the $20 allowable for beneficiaries in 1972 was at a time when the benefit was $18.25 per week.
That if the same principle applied and if the amount earned had been indexed the amount now allowable would exceed $63.20 per week.
That Family Allowances have never been indexed.
That heartless, insensitive, frugal and anomalous social security benefits, allowances and rules are causing severe financial distress to many citizens and causing the breakup of families.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government will bring all allowances and benefits up to the levels which would make them equivalent in real monetary terms to the time when they were set.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrKerin.
Petition received.
Trans Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans Australia Airlines would inevitably result in-
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

1572 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Petitions

I. Our grievance that taxation on interest earned in bank and building society savings accounts is thus a law and-
2. Our grievance that interest charged on home mortgage loans is not at this time, an allowable taxation deduction.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should:
I. Allow interest earned in bank and building society savings accounts-to the approximate amount of $500.00 (five hundred dOllars)-to be not counted as taxable income.
2. Deem that interest-to the approximate amount of $1000.00 (one thousand dollars)-charged on home mortgage loans be an allowable taxation deduction. This is only applicable on the private home of the taxpayer, and not on any investment properties.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Rocher.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not fulfilling its responsibilities in ensuring an adequate standard of living for all Australians, which is causing untold hardship on relief agencies' limited resources, and that the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
I. That the Commonwealth Government raise the level of all pensions and benefits at least to the poverty line.
2. That the Commonwealth Government reconsider its recent decisions in relation to the health system and cuts to Commonwealth activity.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert further poverty and suffering in our community by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Shipton.
Petition received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia being employed in the automotive products industry respectfully showeth:
I. That the automotive products industry is vital to the livelihood and well being of many thousands of Australian workers and their families.
2. That if imported automotive products are allowed to flow freely into the Australian market it will deprive over 100,000 workers in the industry of their work opportunities.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Parliament recognise the rights of Australian workers in this industry and that proposals to reduce the level of protection in the future be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Theophanous.
Petition received.

Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned members of the electorate of Mackellar respectfully shows our concern regarding the proposed introduction of fees for post-graduate researchers in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education, since it appears likely that this action will have a serious and detrimental effect on cultural, scientific and technical research and development within the Australian community.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Government will change the decision to introduce tuition fees for post-graduate study.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Carlton.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned members of the electorate of Bennelong respectfully shows our concern regarding the proposed introduction of fees for post-graduate researchers in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education, since it appears likely that this action will have a serious and detrimental effect on cultural, scientific and technical research and development within the Australian community.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Government will change the decision to introduce tuition fees for post-graduate study.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howard.
Petition received.
Ethnic Broadcasting Station 3EA Melbourne
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, residents of Melbourne and members of the Russian Orthodox Community and their friends, respectfully showeth.
(I) That any person appointed as a broadcaster of the Russian Orthodox Community programmes on radio station 3EA Melbourne be:
(a) of Russian descent (b) actively involved in Russian Orthodox Community
Life and thus conversant with the aspirations, needs and tastes of our community.
(2) That the management of radio station 3EA work in close cooperation with local Russian Ethnic Organisations who can assist in the selection of Broadcasters and programmes.
And your petitioners as in duty bo'und will ever pray.
by Mr Harris.
Petition received.
Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1573

The petition of the undersigned people who live or work in the Shire of Werribee showeth that we protest most strongly at the Razor Gang proposals to cut funds to the Community Health Program.
Your petitioners therefore respectfully request that the Federal Government ensures that:
(a) the Community Health Program remains a Federal Government responsibility.
(b) proposals to cut funding to the Community Health Program are withdrawn.
(c) every effort be made by the Federal Government to meet the health care needs of the Australian Community-by re-instating a growth program with increased funding and expansion of services.
Your Petitioners most humbly pray that the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled will give earnest consideration to this most vital matter.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Barry Jones.
Petition received.
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-I inform the House that the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) left Australia on 18 September to attend the United Nations General Assembly in New York. The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) will act as Minister for Foreign Affairs until Mr Street returns on 25 September. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) left Australia on 18 September for consultations overseas. The Minister for Finance (Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle) will act as Treasurer until 11 October. The Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) will represent the Treasurer in this chamber.
FRASER GOVERNMENT
Notice of Motion
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House censures the Government for its failure to ensure proper and adequate standards of administration by senior Government Ministers, including the Ministers for Communications and Industrial Relations, and for its failure to give effect to the Prime Minister's statement of 12 March 1978 that 'Without integrity-without the appearance and reality of integrity-no government can hope to have the confidence of the people, or the trust of the people'.
Suspension of Standing Orders
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House)-I seek leave of the House to move a motion to enable the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) to move forthwith the motion of censure of which he has given notice for the next sitting day.

Mr Scholes-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. Does the Minister recognise the motion under Standing Orders as a censure motion?
Mr SPEAKER-That point will arise after the motion has been put. Is leave granted? There being no objection, leave is granted.
Mr SINCLAIR-I move:
That so much of the Standing Orders J:>e suspended as would prevent the Leader of the Opposition moving forthwith the motion of censure of the Government of which he has given notice for the next sitting.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House)-To satisfy the curiosity of the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) I inform the House that the Government accepts the notice of motion given by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) as a motion of censure of the Government for the purposes of Standing Order 110.
Motion of Censure
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (1.54)-1 move:
That this House censures the Government for its failure to ensure proper and adequate standards of administration by senior Government Ministers, including the Ministers for Communications and Industrial Relations, and for its failure to give effect to the Prime Minister's statement of 12 March 1978 that 'Without integrity-without the appearance and reality of integrity-no government can hope to have the confidence of the people, or the trust of the people.'
The Opposition moves this motion of censure against the Government because of its persistent, discreditable record in ministerial administration. The Fraser Government reels from one scandal to the next with self-destructive determination. In six years 14 Ministers have been sacked, suspended or forced to resign. It is an unmatched record in the history of the national Parliament and it is a record which does not match the elevated principles of ministerial responsibility and integrity in government of which the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has spoken so much in the past. Three more Ministers should go today. All will stay. The Government has decided to tough it out and to try to brazen the problem away once again. In the process, a lot of personal abuse will be heaped upon those people in this Parliament, not only on the Opposition side but also within the Government's own ranks, who have raised, quite genuinely and seriously, criticisms about defectiveness in government administration. Two will stay because they belong to the National Country Party. The other will remain because he belongs to the Prime Minister's faction in an increasingly factionalised government. He is loyal to the Prime Minister and on that rare

1574 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

characteristic, of course, is attractive. He is also very servile and fawning.
The Prime Minister' is confrohted by one National Country Party Minister who has been branded by his colleagues as a person whose word is worthless. He is confronted by two National Country Party Ministers who have displayed manifest administrative incompetence in handling the affairs of the departments for which they are responsible. He is confronted by the blundering damage of the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) and he is confronted by the public white-anting of the Government's inadequate performance by the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock). All of this is clear evidence of the disaffection and disarray within the Government's ranks and, equally worryingly, he is confronted by a Department of Primary Industry which has been exposed by a Senate standing committee as slothful, self-serving and deceitful. For all of that, for all of the searing evidence which undermines the credibility of the Government and shatters its self-confidence, the Prime Minister is prepared to provide a cast iron pledge of support for the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) and he is prepared to do it without even having read the report upon which the criticisms are based. He does not believe in evidence, he does not believe in facts; he believes in rigging the Parliament with the numbers that he has.
I quote from an article by Russell Barton in the Sydney Morning Herald last 'Saturday morning. The Prime Minister was asked whether he had confidence in Mr Sinclair, the Minister for Communications. He replied firmly:
'Obviously'.
The report also states:
Mr Fraser said yesterday he would be reading the Senate committee report over the weekend.
He had made up his mind before he had even seen the evidence. The undeniable fact is, and it is a cause of continuing aggravation within the coalition ranks, that there are special indulgences for National Country Party members of the coalition. The Prime Minister cannot shrug this scandal off as lightly as he would wish to pretend. Senator Withers was sacked over a phone call. Mr Sinclair, the Minister for Communications, is declared by his colleagues, by members of his own Party, by members of the Senate, by a Senate standing committee, unanimously, as not being a believable person. His colleagues declare that. In fact they say that in unequivocal terms at page 174 of the report from the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations

on its inquiry into the Australian Dairy Corporation and its Asian Subsidiaries. I quote:
The Committee concludes that on the balance of probabilities, Mr Sinclair's recollection of the events was not as reliable as that of Mr Webster. In other words, it appears to the Committee that on the balance of probabilities, Mr Sinclair was told of the terms of the compromise which necessarily involved a continuing breach of GATT.
The Government will, with greater vigour, seek to paint Mr Webster as a rogue. Let it go ahead and do that. What it has to accommodate in doing that is this simple declaration of the Senate committee report; that a person whom the Government will seek to declare as a rogue is more believable in the eyes of members of the Senate than the Minister for Communications.
That was not a decision that was lightly arrived at. It was a unanimous decision. Four of the six members of the committee are lawyers. Three of those four lawyers are Government members. One of those Government lawyer members is Senator Lewis, a man who is independent in his personality, with a reputation for intellectual toughness, a product of the Western Districts of Victoria and a close associate of the Prime Minister. He has not engaged on some sort of spiteful campaign to try to undermine the Minister for Communications. On the contrary, he would have weighed the evidence as fairly and as impartially as he could, according to the ethics of his profession, but with some sentiment for the Minister for Communications as a fellow member of the Government. On the basis of that evidence he found that he was forced to come down and declare that the Minister for Communications is not believable.
The Committee was clear-sighted about Mr Webster and his deficiencies. That is abundantly clear in the report which has been compiled by the Committee and which, I repeat, was endorsed unanimously. But acknowledging all of those deficiencies, the Committee declared that it preferred to believe the word of Mr Webster rather than the word of the Minister for Communications. The Minister for Communications argues that at no time until late in 1976-at no time leading up to that point-was he made aware that Australia was seriously and persistently breaching her internationai treaty obligations in relation to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. This arose from the sale of skim milk powder. The price had fallen to the minimum level acceptable to GATT. In spite of that, a rebate of $25 a tonne was provided, which meant effectively that the GATT rules were being circumvented.
Now, the Minister displays an extraordinary curiosity in relation to this matter. A letter was

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1575

sent by Mr Webster to the Minister after he had been made aware of the circumstances-that negotiations had been conducted in South East Asia and that an amicable resolution had been arrived at in relation to the matter. Nothing further was done. No questions were raised, and no consultation was sought with the Department of Primary Industry, in spite of the fact that representatives of that Department are, by legislation, members of the, board of the Australian Dairy Corporation. They are there to represent the Government, to ensure that the Department of Primary Industry is well aware of developments taking place at that board level and to ensure, through the Department, that the Minister is well versed in relation to those developments.
In spite of all those facts, the Minister for Communications declares that he was satisfied with the letter which said nothing more than that an amicable resolution had been arrived at in terms of this problem. What sort of amicable resolution was it? A serious breach of our GATT treaty obligations had been committed-and persistently committed. That having been made clearly known to the Minister, it was a matter of great responsibility for him to ensure that those obligations were being met forthwith. He seeks to invoke the support of a Mr Wallace, a departmental representative at one stage on the ADC. He seeks to invoke him as verification of the fact that he would not have been aware of what had been taking place prior to late 1976 when he was officially advised of this breach of our treaty obligations. I will quote from page 173 of the report to establish how believable Mr Wallace is. The report states:
Regrettably Mr Wallace's evidence was so guarded and qualified and his manner so evasive that far from providing unqualified support for Mr Sinclair's version of the events, Mr Wallace at best only offered luke-warm and tentative confirmation,
That is scarcely the sort of evidence in support that one would care to call if one's reputation were dependent on the sort of contribution that person could make.
I ask honourable members to consider the baffling sequence of events which are related to these circumstances. A departmental officer, a Mr O'Bryan, sitting on the board of the Australian Dairy Corporation, at a meeting on 2 April 1976, heard discussion about what essentially were the ingredients of this breach of our international treaty obligations. Nothing was done. I draw the attention of honourable members to pages 193 and 194 of the report. I will refrain from quoting from the report as the evidence is there. Nothing

was done, he says. The Department of Primary Industry was advised on 2 April 1976 by a minute, which was received by a Mr Wallace, which outlined all of these ingredients which together go to make up a breach of our GATT treaty obligations. I will quote exactly what Mr Wallace said subsequently in his evidence to the Senate Committee. He stated:
I did not tie them together at that time.
The Minister for Communications invokes the competence of both Mr O'Bryan and Mr Wallace as witnesses to verify that he would not have known, did not know, and could not have known of the circumstances of this breach. Here are two people who are highly skilled, one presumes; highly professionalised. They are certainly highly placed in the Department of Primary Industry, specialists in their field, presumably, who are present when discussions are taking place wherein the ingredients are presented which make it clear that we are breaching our GATT treaty obligations. Even a person with a fairly fundamental understanding of the GATT treaty obligations would have immediately apprehended the nature of the breach being committed. I find it hard to believe, to be quite blunt about it, that from April 1976 to late 1976 neither of these people and no one in the Department of Primary Industry ever understood that the evidence clearly before them culminated in evidence of a breach of our treaty obligations. The Department said in its evidence in May 1981 that no minutes or documents were ever kept documenting or recording discussions between Mr Webster and the Minister for Communications in relation to an oral briefing which Mr Webster swears on oath that he provided for the Minister about the way in which this problem was 'amicably resolved'. Yet last Thursday, in this House, the Minister for Primary Industry flew in the face of that evidence when-I quote him exactly-he said:
The conclusions-
Of the Committee:
are contrary also to all the minutes and documentation that were available to the Department of Primary Industry.
The best source of response to that, of course, is Senator Peter Rae. He gave the lie direct to what the Minister was saying. The following day he said:
These statements of Mr Sinclair are extraordinary when placed against the actual evidence given to the Committee by the Department of Primary Industry who stated that there was nothing on Departmental files which related to the matter in question,
The Departmental evidence' was that there were no relevant minutes, notes, correspondence or documents.
He went on:

1576 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

If such evidence is available as is now claimed by Mr Sinclair then the evidence given to the Committee was untrue-in fact it would amount to perjury.
If the sworn evidence to the Committee was true then it is Mr Sinclair who has made untrue statements to the House of Representatives and to the press conference.
Nothing could be more direct than that. That is the lie direct to the Minister for Communications on the second occasion. But Senator Rae does not stop there. This morning, on the radio program AM, he was interviewed again on exactly the same matter. He said:
Well, if Mr Sinclair is not able to produce the documents, the written evidence which he now says the Committee's finding was contrary to, and I just emphasise that last Thursday to the House of Representatives Mr Sinclair said that the Committee's finding was contrary to the written documents, minutes and records, correspondence, available to the Department of Primary Industry; if he can't produce those now, he misled the House last Thursday.
That is another grave charge against the Minister for Communications. Let us be clear in understanding what is transpiring here. This is not a petty little tea room spat; it is not a squabble between a couple of friends. The implications are large and portentious in their dimensions. This is a very serious confrontation between a Senate committee and the Government. It represents a very serious confrontation between those members of this Parliament who believe in integrity in office, in discharging responsibility properly and adequately, and in being candid and consistent to the Parliament, and a Government that is determined to cover up once again and try brazenly to get away with it. Public comment is properly severe. The Sydney Morning Herald last Saturday stated:
However, for all the furore over this fracas, it involves only one aspect of what has assumed the proportions of a major scandal. This relates to the grave administrative deficiencies within the Department of Primary Industry reaching up to ministerial level. The evidence of laxness by the department in failing to exercise proper supervision of the ADC and to detect glaring abuses within it occurred when Mr Sinclair was Minister.
It went on:
The clear inference from this expanding chronicle ofapparent ineptitude by the department is that something is disturbingly amiss within it, and that Mr Sinclair and Mr Nixon, as Ministers presiding over the department's failings, should bear some responsibility for them.
It concludes:
The revelations of its inadequacies during the terms of Mr Sinclair and Mr Nixon have left its reputation under a dense and noxious cloud. Who or what is to blame? Mr Sinclair and Mr Nixon should come forward with satisfactory explanations . . . this is not an issue to be left up in the air until it blows away. Country Party Ministers are close political cronies of the Prime Minister. In the final analysis it is up to the Prime Minister to ensure that the Government enjoys public confidence.

The Government will not while this sort of preferential treatment is meted out to members of the National Country Party. The Senate Standing Committee not only demolished the veracity of Mr Sinclair, the Minister for Communications, but also accused him of something extraordinarily serious. By implication it accused him of misleading this Parliament-that is, of committing a grave contempt-because the Minister for Communications, while refusing to appear before the Committee to give sworn evidence, stood in this Parliament and made a declaration about his knowledge of events in relation to the Asia Dairy Industries problem. He said then that he saw that declaration as tantamount to a statement on his honour. I leave it to honourable members to make a judgment as to what value there is in the honour of the Minister for Communications.
I remind honourable Liberal Party members of the coalition that Senator Withers went out of office on the basis of a telephone call, a relatively minor transgression and impropriety. The honourable member for Fadden went from his lofty office as Assistant Whip for belling the cat, for telling people that something crooked had gone on in Queensland in relation to a redistribution. But the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) and his predecessor, who is now the Minister for Communications, are guilty of outrageous behaviour in their administration of their departments, their general display of incompetence and the way in which one of them, the Minister for Communications in particular, has been declared by his colleagues from the coalition Government as a person whose word cannot be believed. The Government standards are squalid, self-seeking and offensive to decent-minded people.
Let me remind honourable members of the lofty declarations of the Prime Minister in one of his earlier statements just after the 1975 elections. He said:
We commit ourselves to responsibility in the management of the nation's affairs.
We commit ourselves to integrity in government of the kind that Australia has a right to expect.
It would have been more accurate if he had said 'of a kind that the country had never known before and would wish that it had never known'. When he sacked a colleague, Senator Withers, who clearly took the rap for him and a couple of his colleagues, on 15 August 1978 he said:
We had no doubt that our first and foremost responsibility was the maintenance of the high standards of propriety set and maintained by this Government.

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1577

Fourteen sackings, dismissals and forced resignations in six years-certainly distinctive standards, although I dispute whether they were high. Referring to a statement that he made on 8 August after saying how sad he was and how much it hurt to sack Senator Withers, he said:
The community rightly demands a high standard from the Ministers of the Government.
Mr Scott-When are we going to get it?
Mr Morris-When are we going to get it?
Mr HAYDEN-Exactly. He continued:
The judgments on Ministers are more exacting and sometimes more harsh than the judgments which might be passed on those outside the sphere of public life.
If he believes that, he is yet to put it into practice where the Country Party is concerned. He continued:
If these standards were not upheld, the people's confidence in Government-a confidence which is fundamental to Australian democracy-would be undermined.
He concluded:
The Government has an obligation to uphold them even though the cost can be and is in this instance a high one.
Why does the Government not uphold those standards now? The facts cannot be ignored. The Minister for Communications and the Minister for Primary Industry have imperilled this country's export markets. They have done unparalleled damage to Australia's international reputation. On the evidence available to us, they have been lazy and inattentive in their administrative responsibilities. They have politicised the Department of Primary Industry so that now it is just one more link in the chain of operatives serving the National Country Party constituency.
The Minister for Communications, on the judgmentof his peers from his own party, cannot be believed. Both Ministers have tolerated an extraordinary level of gross inefficiency and stark incompetence when they have been in charge of the Department of Primary Industry. Of course, the defence will be abuse and bluster. There will be personal attacks but there will be nothing which will attend to the central core of these complaints. The Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) has started already. He says that the report is prejudiced and that the members of the Committee are prejudiced.
Even if he were correct-we dispute that on the evidence before us-he is, by terminating his observation there, still accepting a mighty condemnation of the administrative incompetence of the Minister for Communications and the grubby indolence of the Department of Primary Industry. The only prejudices are those against the facts, and those prejudices are harboured by the

National Country Party. The National Country Party will try to tough it out. It has no sense of shame and no respect for the Parliament or the public. If a Liberal member of parliament were involved he would have been out of office weeks ago. He would have been out with less ceremony than that which attended the departure from office of Senator Withers. We know who runs this country under the Fraser Government-a rich grazier from the western districts of Victoria, a Victorian dairy farmer, a northern rivers pig farmer and a hobby farmer from New I;:ngland. So much for the so-called businessman's government.
The Minister for Communications believes nothing succeeds like excesses. He is determined to die a political death of a thousand self-inflicted cuts. Let us look at the Australian Dairy Corporation under his administration-a commercial vehicle careering out of control. It had a weak, selfserving administration which he never once sought to upbraid, to give direction to, or to ensure that it fulfilled its responsibilities properly. It went its way-all over the place---:and as long as it kept away from him he was happy.
Let us look at the findings of the Senate Committee report. The Committee found that the Corporation had breached international treaty obligations, its statutory authority and its articles of association. The report also stated that it improperly engaged in tax avoidance on an international scale. No wonder the Government is always reluctant to do anything about tax avoidance in this country. The Committee found that the Corporation engaged in improper rebate arrangements, that there was evidence of a conflict of interest, that there were slack expenditure controls and unauthorised payments. The Committee found that millions of dollars are missing which are unaccounted for. All this has occurred under the 'distinguished'-I use inverted commas to ensure that the irony is not missedadministrative skills of the hobby farmer from New England, masquerading as the Minister for Primary Industry on that occasion. This is more like the record of a shady one dollar company front conducted by corporate pirates than a commercial flag carrier drawing on the prestige of this country to conduct its affairs. The evidence is that the two Ministers-the Minister for Communications and the Minister for Primary Industryknew of the material facts and have sought over an extended period to submerge as much as they could the hard evidence and the concrete justification for widespread national concern on this matter coming before the Parliament.

1578 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

Let me return to a point I made earlier. It is clear that the defence of the Minister will be: 'Obviously there have been blunders; I knew nothing about them'. I do not believe him on the basis of the evidence which I see before me, on the considered conclusions of the Senate Committee in its report and on the basis of the rather prevaricating approach of some of the witnesses from the Department of Primary Industry in responding to cross-examination before that Committee. I do not believe, as bad as I think his incompetence is, that it is so excessive that he could not have known for the extended period that he claims not to have known about this serious treaty breach. I do not believe that, as deficient as I think his attention is to detail, he would have neglected to follow up such a vague letter as that which came to him from Mr Webster declaring that matters had been settled amicably. He will say: 'It is a blunder'. He will say that he knew nothing about it. Let me quote what the Prime Minister used to believe about this. This extract was contained in a publication entitled The Australian Institute of Political Science; Proceedings of 38th Summer School-29-31 January 1972'. This goes right to the heart of this issue. The Prime Minister said:
But if a major blunder occurred in a department, of real importance to Australia, and if the minister were unaware of it, the minister should accept responsibility for the mistakes of his department and offer to resign.
I throw it back in the teeth of the Prime Minister. He should stand by the declarations of principle that he enunciated so loftily then. Or is it that the indulgences are so free and easy for the National Country Party and that the tough measures are for those outside the Fraser faction in the Liberal Party? Look at the attempt by the Minister for Primary Industry at concealment. He embarked in this Parliament on a prolonged and unsubtle campaign to cover up. For more than two years now he has had the Auditor-General's report on this matter. Look at the defences he has hopped on-from one to the other. He said: 'It would be delicate and commercially sensitive to release it'. When that did not wash, he said: 'It would not be proper for it to be released'. Then he said that the Auditor-General would not allow the report to be released. But that was refuted by a representative of the Office before a Senate Committee. Finding that that would not hang, he said that the police were handling the affair. Then he said, most outrageously, on 15 November 1979 that matters had been rectified. This report makes it clear that matters are still outstanding, require rectification, have not been attended to, in spite of the Minister's misleading the Parliament. He promised that there would be a statement in the autumn session of 1980, and he never delivered it. On 10 June this

year he said that he hoped to make a statement that day. The fact is that he has tried to keep it on the back burners to keep it away from public attention. We have in the Minister for Primary Industry and the 'Minister for Communications, indisputably two tough politicians but two totally incompetent public administrators, and that is what counts. The Department of Primary Industry, on the record of this report, is undeniably incompetent. It has been drifting along oblivious to what has been happening and indifferent to its responsibilities. In all of that there has been a complicity by the Minister. Page 176 of the report states:
Summarising our views here, we consider that such Ministerial involvement in the ADC should not be by way of a 'request' (which does not become known to the parliaf11ent or the public). He should give a formal direction which is recorded in writing and brought to the attention of the Parliament as soon as possible notwithstanding that this will disclose Australia's breach of a treaty. We also believe that there is an obligation on the Minister to ensure that a direction is complied with once it is given. Ministerial inaction in the face of a known continuing breach cannot be condoned.
That is the charge by clear implication of the Senate Committee-ministerial condoning of a breach by inaction.
Mr Speaker, there are other matters to be raised and they will be raised by other speakers from this side of the House. I conclude on this point: There is one key question to be asked in this affair. It is a question which this Government and this Prime Minister refuse to face up to. It was asked by the Canberra Times only two days ago in a leading article on the subject of ministerial responsibility, a subject which this Government does not want to recognise. The question is:
What does a Minister, or a political party, a Government or a government department have to do before the person or organisation is held responsible for things which should never have happened? Responsible, that is, to the point of sackings or resignations, removal of or restrictions on responsibilities, even portfolios? Responsible, too, for actually, finally, eventually, admitting to Parliament and the people what went wrong, and why, and how and when?
That is the question. That is the real issue now before the Parliament. It is a question made more pertinent by the very promises, the pledges, given by this Prime Minister to the Australian people six years ago and by the very grave abuse of the standards of integrity which he declared so loftily, grave abuse which has quite evidently been committed by the Minister for Communications in association with the Minister for Primary Industry.
Mr SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?
Mr HAWKE (Wills) (2.24)-1 second the motion moved by the Leader of the Opposition

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1579

(Mr Hayden). In particular, I shall direct my remarks to the activities of the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) and the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) to sustain the motion moved by the Leader of the Opposition. I have had occasion before to inform this House and to prove to it that the Minister for Industrial Relations is guilty of deliberately misleading it. The Minister's euphemism for his action on that occasion was to say:
It might fairly be said that my. answer last week contained an error of fact.
The Minister has again treated this House with contempt, but on this occasion in circumstances infinitely more damning and deserving of censure by this House. Let us come straight to the Minister's performance in this House last week. At the outset, let us get this point perfectly clear: All the public criticism of the Minister for Industrial Relations since his performance last Tuesday has simply been in terms of his incompetence. The suggestion that has been made publicly and widely is that the Minister made a blunder. Indeed, he did make a blunder, but much more important than the fact that he made a blunder is this: The Minister lied to the House; and he knows that he lied to the House; and even more importantly the Prime Minister of this country knows that his Minister for Industrial Relations lied to this House.
The genesis of this extraordinary performance goes back to the events in House of Representatives Estimates Committee E on the preceding Tuesday evening of 8 September. At that meeting of the Estimates Committee the Minister for Industrial Relations was very rigorously questioned about his handling of the preparation of the application for the deregistration of the Builders Labourers Federation. That questioning, as a matter of record, was predominantly directed by me and by the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock). The Minister did not fare well in that episode. In the proceedings before the Estimates Committee on that evening of Tuesday, 8 September, the Minister's criticism of the lack of preparedness of his predecessor and the promise of the present Minister for Industrial Relations to expedite deregistration proceedings were contrasted with the fact that then, in September, no application had been made or was likely to be made before next year and the fact that to that stage at least $750,000 had been spent on or committed to that exercise in this financial year.
As I have said, the Minister for Industrial Relations did not fare well in those proceedings before the Estimates Committee on the night of Tuesday, 8 September. But the Minister is the sort

of man who could not leave it there. He was obviously upset by the grilling that he had received from the honourable member for Kooyong and me. So what did the Minister do?
It is vital that every member of this House understand the sequence of events after the night of 8 September. The Minister was concerned about what happened. On the following Tuesday he raised in the Cabinet room, with people including the Prime Minister, what in fact had happened at the Estimates Committee on the previous Tuesday night. A decision was made then, collusively between the Prime Minister of this country and the Minister for Industrial Relations, that they would get the honourable member for Kooyong, the previous Minister for Industrial Relations. And how they would get him? They collusively decided that a Dorothy Dix question on this issue~the forms of this House would be usedwould be directed by a member from the Government side of the House to the Minister for Industrial Relations. I remind the House of precisely what happened. On that day the honourable member for Kingston (Mr Chapman) directed a question to the Minister for Industrial Relations. This is the concocted, collusive perversion of the forms of this House, collusively arrived at between the Minister for Industrial Relations and the Prime Minister. This question was directed to the Minister:
Is the Minister for Industrial Relations aware of recent reports which suggest delay by the Government in taking action against the Builders Labourers Federation? What progress has been made in preparation of the case for deregistration?
The Minister's answer, which will be well remembered I am sure, went in these terms:
I have seen reports of the kind referred to by the honourable gentleman. Last week, on 8 September, in Estimates Committee E some questions were asked of me on this subject.
Were they ever! The Minister's answer continued:
Because of these developments, since last week I have examined the file from its-inception.
We will come to that file in a moment. He said he had examined the file from its inception and he went on to say:
Therefore I think it is appropriate that I place some facts on the record so as to show the circumstances surrounding preparation of the case and the state of unpreparedness when I assumed responsibility for the portfolio.
I re-emphasise to every honourable member of this House what was happening. There was a Dorothy Dix question and then the Minister came in and said: 'I am going to put the facts before the House so that I can give to the House the, information concerning the state of unpreparedness when I assumed responsibility for the portfolio'. Honourable members will recall that he then

1580 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

started to quote from a memorandum from the Senior Assistant Crown Solicitor to the Attorney General (Senator Durack). Of course, he s~arted off by quoting the memorandum which stated:
Progress in the preparation of the case has been very
slow . . .
He had not got very much further when the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) asked that he table the document. The Minister proceeded to table that document. Of course, honourable members did not have the document before them at that stage. It is very interesting to note that what he went on to quote was extraordinarily selective. It is of interest, if one looks at this memorandum from the Senior Assistant Crown Solicitor to the Attorney General, to see what sentence comes after the sentence which the Minister for Industrial Relations had quoted. He had quoted: 'Progress in the preparation of the case has been very slow'. The memorandum went on to state:
The principal reason for this has been the delay in support from the private building industry. You will recall' that the industry sought and obtained certain assurances from the Government to protect companies from loss due to industrial action after de-registration.
Of course, the Minister did not quote what was the primary reason for the delay; he simply went to the fact that it was slow. Having done that he went on to rubbish the honourable member for Kooyong because of the state of preparedness and the lack of preparation that he, the Minister for Industrial Relations, asserted he had found when he took over on 16 April this year from the honourable member for Kooyong. He proceeded to rubbish him and to contrast that lack of preparedness which he alleged he found when he took over the portfolio with the action which he initiated after he assumed responsibility. As I said, he did not read the whole of the document. Of course, as we know, and what all the emphasis has been upon in the document, reference was made to one particular company-Costain Australia Ltd. We all know what happened as a result of the tabling of that document by the Minister, involving as it did an absolute breach of the basic undertakings that have been given by the Government to employers in the construction industry that there would be no disclosure because they feared retributive action by this organisation. I and the Opposition come in here with no brief for that organisation nor do we condone or support its action. The Department, the Ministers and the Government knew that if there was any disclosure there could be that sort of action and an absolute binding undertaking had been given by the Government that there would be no naming of people before the situation had been reached in

the court when everyone would be named. We have all that problem involved in the undertakings being broken.
All that is as nothing to the point to which I come now. What I now reveal to this House should lead every honourable member of this House to say that he can no longer tolerate the lack of integrity involved in the activities of the Minister for Industrial Relations and the collusive involvement of the Prime Minister with those actions. The Minister knows that what he attempted to convey to this House on Tuesday of last week about the alleged lack of preparedness in the Department when he came into that Department after 16 April was precisely the opposite of what he, as Minister, had conveyed in a written memorandum to the Cabinet at the beginning of May this year.At the beginning of May 1981, just after he had taken over the portfolio, the Minister submitted to the Cabinet a written memorandum which covered a report of the Department of Industrial Relations for the month of April. In that written memorandum to the Cabinet in which, in part, he dealt with the question of what stage had been reached in the preparation of the application for the deregistration of the Builders Labourers Federation, the Minister for Industrial Relations expressed great satisfaction with the state of preparedness he found in the Department on this matter of the application for deregistration. He expressed great satisfaction about the extent of the progress that had been made and the quality of the preparation that had been undertaken. That was the written report on this issue to the Cabinet at the beginning of May. That was the considered report of the Minister for Industrial Relations undertaking his obligation to report to Cabinet in writing about the state of play; and he expressed great satisfaction about the extent of progress and the quality of preparation.
Such is the utter contempt in which this Minister holds this House that when, in collusion with the Prime Minister, he seeks to use the forms of this House to pursue a personal intra-party vendetta, he will convey to this House, over which you preside, Mr Speaker, the exact opposite of the true position he has earlier conveyed to Cabinet. I ask the Minister to note what I now say. The Minister knows that what I am saying is the truth, as does the Prime Minister. I challenge the Minister for Industrial Relations, when he replies in this debate, to refute what I have been saying by producing his written report to the Cabinet of early May this year covering his report on the Department of Industrial Relations and specifically

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1581

covering the state of preparation of the prosecution in respect of the application for deregistration, particularly in terms of the expression of his attitude of satisfaction or dissatisfaction on the state of progress and the quality of preparation. I challenge the Minister to deny what I am saying-to refute what I am putting-by producing that written document.
I ask honourable members of this House: What more do they want as grounds for censure of a Minister and of a government than that the Minister, collusively with the Prime Minister, will tell the truth to Cabinet and will not tell the truth to this House; will in fact lie to this House, and will do that for the naked purpose of pursuing. a vendetta-I repeat, collusively with the Prime Minister-against a member of their own party for what they perceive as their advantage in pursuing a dangerous opponent? I put it to you, Mr Speaker, that if members of this House will tolerate this, they will tolerate anything. If they will tolerate this delinquent deception whereby the Cabinet is told the truth and they, as members of the House, are told lies, they put themselves just as much in contempt of this House as do the Minister and the Prime Minister.
Let there be no doubt about what is involved here. We are not simply dealing with the Minister for Industrial Relations telling lies to this House, telling the opposite to the truth he has told the Cabinet. What we are facing is a situation where that has been done with the collusion of the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister and the Minister for Industrial Relations were aware of the truth in the Cabinet minute of early May 1981. The Minister said to the House last Tuesday: 'I have looked at the file from its inception.' The file from its inception obviously contains the report to the Cabinet. In that report to the Cabinet, the Minister unqualifiedly expressed his satisfaction with the extent of progress and the quality of the preparation of the case that has been taken. What do they do? The Minister then gets together with the Prime Minister in the Cabinet room and the conversation goes like this: 'Look, the honourable member for Kooyong gave us a bit of a rubbishing the other night. We are also getting somewhat worried about where he may be getting in the numbers game. So what will we do? We will go into the House of Representatives, misuse its forms by having a question put and you, the Minister for Industrial Relations, will tell the House of Representatives the opposite of, in fact, what you have put to the Cabinet in that memorandum'. If the Prime Minister of this country is going to be involved in that collusive practice to

get the Minister to tell lies to the House of Representatives in absolute contradiction of the written memorandum which he has put to the Cabinet, where is the integrity of this Government? It simply does not exist.
I ask honourable members to dwell upon the frequency of this situation. What is the context in which this matter has arisen? The Minister for Industrial Relations and the Prime Minister have said: 'We demand of the trade union movement standards of behaviour. We cannot tolerate the Builders Labourers Federation because it does not keep .its word. It breaks agreements. Its members do not act honourably'. That is what this is about. The Government says: 'Because the Builders Labourers Federation does not act honourably, does not abide by its agreements and has double standards of behaviour, we, the Government, from our position of moral indignation against this organisation say: "We will do two things. We will proceed to apply for its deregistration and we will also have a royal commission into its activities.".' It is these people who say that those are their standards and, at the same time as they appear to set those standards or purport to set those standards for others, what are they doing? They are conniving collusively in the Cabinet room of this country to ensure that the forms of this House will be deliberately used to tell lies to the House of Representatives. The truth is on the record.
I repeat my challenge to the Minister for Industrial Relations: When he gets up to reply in this debate, I challenge him to produce his written memorandum. That is where the truth is. If that record is produced, it will show that he expressed his unqualified satisfaction. But he got up then to talk about the state of unpreparedness. He did that a week later after the Estimates Committee hearings.
Mr Speaker and honourable members of this House, we have reached a position, as the Leader of the Opposition said, where there is no integrity in this Government and there is no integrity in the Prime Minister. But, worse than that, there is this sickening hypocrisy which spends millions of dollars to impose penalties upon trade unions because it is said that those unions are not abiding by proper standards of behaviour when these people are lying collusively to this House of Representatives. They lack integrity. They should resign.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister) (2.45)-1 will deal with these matters in the order in which they were dealt with by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) and the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke). I

1582 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

would like to start with some comments about the work of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations because it is obviously on that report that the Leader of the Opposition rested his case. The Committee has produced a wide-ranging report on a considerable
number of matters concerning the Australian Dairy Corporation. The report covers matters of management, it raises issues about the subsidiaries of the ADC as well as the ADC itself, and it considers the broader issue of the relations between the Australian Dairy Corporation and bodies like it and the Government. The Committee has gone right back to the establishment of the Australian Dairy Corporation in July 1975.
Honourable members will know that action has already been taken in relation to a large number of points raised in the report. Indeed, I should point out that it was the actions of the former Minister for Primary Industry that led to the Audit Act being changed so that there could be an Auditor-General's report on this matter. He referred many matters in relation to the Australian Dairy Corporation to the Auditor-General in March of 1979. There has been more than one re-
port. There have been police investigations as a consequence. I think it is worth noting that it was not until November 1980 that the Senate Standing Committee began its inquiries. So the point that needs to be noted by the House is that the Government acted well before the Senate Standing Committee in matters that required action, action is still in train and the Minister is at this moment waiting for what hopefully will be a final police report in relation to these matters.
As to the body of the report, the Government will be responding to the Senate on the substance of it and doing it in the proper way. But of all the aspects of the report, this motion concentrates on one aspect and on one aspect alone. I want to refer to that and deal with it. The only issue before the House today in this matter is whether there was a conversation on some unspecified date in November or December 1976, at some unspecified place, providing some unspecified details at which the former Minister for Primary Industry was told by Mr Webster that an arrangement was in operation which involved a continuing breach under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Whether he was so told is a question that has to be answered wholly on the basis of the recollections of the people involvedwholly, in fact, on the basis ofMr Webster's recollections alone, because no other evidence has been presented anywhere in the Senate Committee's report or, as far as I am aware, outside the Senate Committee's report which supports the view that

the conversation took place in which Mr Webster, despite his letter to the Minister, indicated to the Minister that there was a continuing breach of the GATT arrangement.
The Senate Committee has come to the conclusion that on the balance of probabilities Mr Sinclair's recollection of the events was not as reliable as that of Mr Webster. But it is important for honourable members to remember that the Senate Committee made no suggestion that any-
one had any intention to mislead. The report does not challenge the genuineness of the Minister's recollections; nor has the Senate Committee made any recommendation arising out of its conclusion. It needs to be made plain from the start that neither the evidence on which the conclusion was based nor the conclusion itself would have provided any foundation for a recommendation. But, while there is no recommendation from the Senate Committee, the House needs to look closely at the evidence. While there is no question about the integrity of the Committee, it is ob-
viously the responsibility of this House to reach its own conclusions about the evidence and the recollections of the people concerned. The starting point has to be Mr Webster's recollections because there is nothing else, apart from his recollections, which indicates in any way whatever that the conversation took place in which Mr Webster had indicated to the Minister that there was a continuing breach of GATT, a conversation which, if
it had taken place, would have had to contradict his letter which had earlier gone to the Minister as a result of that Philippines meeting.
I will first submit to the House an analysis which shows that Mr Webster's evidence does not
provide a sufficient basis for reaching the conclusion that he told the Minister of the breach. Secondly, I shall submit to the House that the other evidence which is available strongly supports the Minister's account of the matter. It is, of course, not in doubt that when the Minister was
initially informed by Mr Webster that an arrangement was in force which breached GATT he gave instructions that the arrangement must cease. Nor is it in doubt that after a special trip to the Philippines undertaken to terminate the arrangement Mr Webster informed the Minister in a letter of 19 November 1976 that an amicable solution to our outstanding difficulties had been arrived at. Nor is there any doubt that the only interpretation which the Minister could conceivably put on those words was that the breach had been overcome.
It is here that we come to Mr Webster's statement and his evidence before the Senate Committee. The details were given orally; that is, the

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1583

details about the solution of which Mr Webster had advised the Minister in his letter. The inescapable point is that in his evidence Mr Webster did not, at any point, say what the details were, not did he eVer actually say in his evidence that he told the Minister that the GATT minimum was being breached. Mr Webster was given six or seven opportunities, some of them quite sharp prods by senators' questions, to say that he told the Minister that the GATT minimum was being breached; but he did not once use those words. He said that he advised the Minister of the facts, but he did not say what the facts were. He was then asked: 'Was there.any conversation between you about the implications of the continued breach of GATT?', to which his reply was: 'I could not honestly recollect specifically'-that is a wonder~ ful collection of words-'what the conversation was. I can clearly'remember that I reported'the facts'. Again, words overladen with doubt. If he had told the Minister it i& inconceivable that they would not have discussed the implications. Yet Mr Webster says he could not honestly'recollect specifically what the' conversation' was; Senator Evans, apparently disappointed with this reply, asked: 'You cannot recollect?'. M( Webster replied: 'Not the details. I know that the problem must'-I ask the House to note that word 'must'-'have been defined '!i.'nd the basis of a solution determined and that was made available'. The word 'rn'ust' in this reply is a significant word indeed. It is the word used by a person who does not know or recollect what was said but has come to a separate and later conclusion. It is hard not to think that this answer is an account not of what he did say to the Minister but rather of what he ought to have said but did not say to the Minister.
Mr Webster had more to say, which has a significant bearing indeed on the reliability qf his recollections. It is commort for a notetaker to be present at discussions with Ministers. It is not surprising that Mr Webster was asked whether a notetaker was' present on this' occasion. He-was asked: 'Do you know if any officer of the Department of Primary Industry was present during that discussion?', to which he replied: 'I think so, but I would not be categoric'. lie thought, arid he was not categoric. His recollection is that somebody from ,the Department was present He' was then asked: 'Was thatMr Wallace or Mr a'Bryan?'. He replied: 'Either one or the other,but I would not be categoric on that'. He, is not a very categoric person. He is not a very certain person in the evidence that he provides. Mr a'Bryan has said categorically that he was not present and the Minister accepted that.

I would like the House to note at a later point that the Committee found Mr a'Bryan a creditworthy witness because there were other things that Mr a'Bryan said which are relevant to this particular matter but which, on my reading, were not in fact contained in the report, but they are in the evidence. Mr Wallace also has said categorically that he was not present, but because of the basis of some of the questioning and answers the Committee wanted to qualify that. So be it. But even if it is so qualified-which I do not accept, but the Committee did-the very strong probability is that neither Mr Wallace nor Mr a'Bryan was present at a meeting at which a Minister was told of a continuing GATT breach. The strong probability that Mr Webster's recollection is incorrect on whether an officer of the Department was present is further confirmed by the fact that there is no departmental note. If an officer had been present, surely there would have been a note of the conversation; certainly there would have been on an important matter.
In addition to the doubts that must be in anyone's mind, on a simple analysis of Mr Webster's recollections other significant factors need to be taken into account. There is the evidence of the Minister which clearly states that he had no recollection of a meeting and which states categorically that 'certainly no evidence was presented to me~-that is, the Minister-'to indicate that the ADC's share of the credit was being used in breach of the GATT minimum price'. There ought to be no doubt in this place about the importance of a statement made in the Parliament by a Minister or any member of parliament. The Minister's account is therefore supported by the evidence of Mr a'Bryan and Mr Wallace but there'is also further significant evidence that poi'nts the same way. It strongly supports the view that the conversation in which the Minister is alleged to have been told of a GATT breach-even though Mr Webster never used the words in reporting or talking of that conversation between himself and the Minister-did not take place at all. There iS'evidence on page 186 of the Hansard transcript of the, Committee's meetings which, I regret, seems to have been overlooked in the report,and is not part of the report as I am advised. This evidence seems to me to be significant indeed. It has major relevance to the reliability of MrWebster's recollections and whether he told the Minister that the GATT minimum price was still being breached. Mr Norwood, General Manager of the Australian Dairy Corporation, in his evidence to the Committee said:
I should like to make one other point which may help you to
understand this information flow. There is no record in official minutes to show th~t the matter was discuss~d by the ADC

1584 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

board; there are, however, references in other documents to discussions which took place at board meetings. When this matter came up yesterday, I obviously wanted to check as best I could. I spoke with three members of the board who were also on the board of the Corporation at the time. They confirmed that immediately prior to the meeting with the Minister and the meeting with Mr Uytengsu, discussion was held by the board of the Corporation who endorsed the decision that the $25 arrangement must cease. They also confirmed that at the first Board meeting after the return of the party from Manila-I do not remember the date-the Board were advised that the arrangement had been terminated.
In other words, Mr Speaker, orally and apparently without a written record, the Board was told that the breach of the GATT arrangement had, in fact, been terminated. That, therefore, is consistent with the letter which Mr Norwood had written to the Minister which is on the public record.
I ask the House to note that Mr Norwood spoke to these Board members quite directly and found that they had no hestitation in saying that they were advised that the arrangement had been terminated. We must assume that Mr Norwood's evidence is correct. It has not been challenged. It is also worth noting that Mr Norwood said that what the Board had been told, whilst not identical, was certainly the same in meaning as .the advice given to the Minister by letter. The letter left open only one conclusion, that is that the breach had been overcome. I point out again that Mr O'Bryan, whose evidence as contained in the report was accepted by the Committee, wrote to Senator Rae on 22 April 1981. There are some references to this letter in the report, but not, I think, to tbis particular point. Mr O'Bryan, whose evidence in other places and in the record of the report was accepted, in paragraph 34 of tbis letter said:
On my return to duty I was informed of Mr Webster's written advice of 19 November 1976 to the Minister that an amicable solution had been reached with HOMP/. And I indicated at the hearing I interpreted that as meaning that agreement had been reached between Mr Webster and Mr Uytengsu for the withdrawal of the rebate payment.
His interpretation, qui~e plainly, was the same as the interpretation of the Minister, the same as that of any person who had been involved in these matters, and the same as that of any person who had given an instruction to the chairman of the Board to go and do a job and who then gets a letter saying that the matter has been fixed up. There could be only one interpretation of that, and that is the interpretation Mr O'Bryan and the Minister placed on it. The fact that this is consistent with Mr Norwood's evidence in that the Board was also told that the arrangement was terminated is highly significant indeed. I ask all honourable gentlemen to go to the transcript and read that part of the evidence because it helped to put other aspects into balance.

It is worth noting, I think, that the letter left open only one conclusion, that the breach had been overcome. I point out that Mr O'Bryan came to exactly the same view of it. Is not Mr Norwood's evidence further strong evidence that no conversation occurred in which Mr Webster clearly pointed out to the Minister the consequences of continuing a GATT breach? I ask the House: Is it conceivable that Mr Webster would officially tell the Minister one thing, advise the Board of the same thing, but then secretly tell the
Minister something else? Such a proposition is absurd and utterly unreal. If Mr Webster had put himself in that position, he inevitably would be confronted with his own contradiction. Granted that the Minister had been so forthright earlier in saying that if there were a breach it must be overcome, surely Mr Webster would know that if the Minister were advised that the breach was continuing he would report the matter to his Department and seek advice, or speak to his colleague, the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) and seek advice. So whichever way it went, the matter would not have been contained which, if there had been such a conversation, was plainly Mr Webster's intention.
Would a person like Mr Webster put himself in a position where, the first time the Minister and the Board met-as inevitably they would-the Minister would have said to the Board: 'We have a mCl.jor problem. The breach with the Philippines is continuing. What will they do about it?' The Board members would say: 'But didn't Webster report to you? It has been terminated and overcome. It has been fixed up'. Mr Webster would be faced immediately with his now contradiction.
Again these circumstances and this evidence strongly indicate that a discussion with the Minister did not take place, in the terms which have been mentioned, and in which the Minister was advised that there was a continuing GATT breach. If one were to come to such a conclusion, it would be contrary to all the evidence except the shaky recollection of Mr Webster. We are left with that shaky recollection of Mr Webster pointing in one direction, albeit vaguely, and the statements of Mr Sinclair, Mr Wallace, Mr O'Bryan and Mr Norwood collectively pointing very strongly in the other direction. I do not doubt the integrity of the Senate Committee. But I must say that the Government comes to a different conclusion. Plainly, this is a political occasion. I ask honourable members to think calmly for a moment and to consider who in this House would want to be condemned on the basis of the uncertain, unconfirmed recollections of one person about a possible conversation five years ago? If

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1585

that were the basis of condemnation in this House there would be few people uncondemned.
I will finish the point I am making by noting that in the report the Committee came to a conclusion on the balance of probabilities but, in coming to this conclusion, it seems to have overlooked some very considerable improbabilities. Despite the fact that the Minister gave the initial instructions, despite the fact that there was a special trip to Manila to implement them, despite the reassuring terms of Mr Webster's letter to the Minister, despite the fact that Mr Webster's evidence to the Committee implied that he had not carried out the Minister's instructions and had misled the Minister in his letter of 19 November, and despIte the evidence in the opposite direction of the Minister, Mr O'Bryan, Mr Wallace and Mr Norwood, I do not believe that any honourable member of this House would want to be condemned or be asked to resign wholly and solely on the basis of one person's recollections of a conversation five years ago, especially when those recoilations are unconfirmed. If they were equivocal on the central issue, as Mr Webster's recollections were, and if their truth would have meant that Mr Webster knowingly put himself in an impossible situation vis-a-vis his Minister and his board, there is no caSe for any action or resignation. There is no substance in this motion and I reject it totally.
The seconder of this motion, the honourable member for Wills, tried to extend a question of a disclosure in this House in response to the tabling of a paper into another matter indeed. I think it ought to be noted that the honourable gentleman has consistently advised the Cabinet of significant difficulties in relation to a deregistration action. That is continuing and it is something that has not altered over time. What the honourable member for Wills really was saying was that the advice given by the Attorney-General's Department to the Attorney-General in that minute, which he asked to have tabled--
Mr Hawke-I did not.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Was in fact-----;-
Mr Hawke-I did not.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Some honourable gentleman from the Opposition did ask.
Mr Hawke-Get your facts right. That is about as accurate as you are in the whole of your speech. That is typical of your accuracy.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Wills will remain silent.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-It was the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr

Holding). I can understand the honourable gentleman not wanting to be confused with him. The honourable member for Melbourne Ports asked that the matter be tabled, and it was so tabled. The basis of that note is plain enough and it is clear for anyone to see. The basis of that is consistent with advice that the Minister has given to the Cabinet in many discussions, that is, that this is a difficult matter and gaining evidence is a difficult matter. Involved in what the Opposition is saying in this matter is a totally absurd charge. It was the Opposition that asked for the tabling of a document and the Minister, seeking to meet the wishes of the Opposition, tabled that document. Now members of the Opposition seek to move a censure motion criticising the Minister for meeting the requests of the Opposition. What absurdity, what humbug, what total and absolute hypocrisy on the part of the Opposition in a matter of this kind! The Minister meets its request and is censured for meeting that request.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Mr Speaker, this is a very strange matter indeed. I think it is worth asking ourselves what in fact the Labor Party's motives are in relation to that. Were Opposition members, in that minute, hoping to get a name? Were they hoping to assist the Builders Labourers Federation against employers? Were they h~ping to enable the Builders Labourers Federation to point its industrial action in one direction or another?
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr MALCOM FRASER-Were they seeking to silence the building and construction industry and to prejudice the royal commission or subsequent judicial proceedings?
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I think that members of the Labor Party have misdirected their motion of censure.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman will resume his seat. Honourable members on the Opposition benches are carrying their continual interjections far too far. I ask honourable members on my left to remain silent while the right honourable gentleman is putting his defence against the censure motion.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-If members of the Labor Party want to censure anyone in this matter, they ought to censure the Builders Labourers Federation, the action it has taken, the industrial ~narchy it has caused and the harm to the building mdustry and progress in the State of Victoria

1586 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

which is still continuing, aided and abetted by the actions which members of the Labor Party have taken in this Parliament. The actions that have been taken against Costain as a result of the Opposition's request are designed quite deliberately to have Costain go broke--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-As a result of the Labor Party's request--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Honourable members on the Opposition side will remain silent.
An incident having occurred-
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Newcastle will put that down.
Mr Charles Jones-I beg your pardon, Mr Speaker?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Newcastle has been a member of Parliament long enough to know that his behaviour demonstrates a lack of dignity that even he should not commit. I call the Prime Minister.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The censure of the Opposition ought to be of the Builders Labourers Federation, which at this moment is quite deliberately trying to have some building firms sent bankrupt. The Labor Party is silent on that issue. Occasionally the Leader of the Opposition piously says that he is against unjustified strikes and bans, but when has he ever condemned any strike or ban which has caused so much harm to the people of Australia? In this instance we have the Builders Labourers Federation, which has been expelled from the New South Wales Trades and Labour Council, which has been attacked by other unions, such as the Federated Iron workers Association of Australia, which has indicated that it will use violence and intimidation against workers, against its own brethren, which has blackbanned work on Victorian police stations, causing unemployment, and which stormed the Canberra office of the Australian Workers Union. The union is led by a man who is prepared to say: The day the application for deregistration is lodged in the Federal Court and the first employer comes forward and gives evidence against the union will be the day that the 35-hour-week campaign will start in this industry'. Gallagher has threatened employers. He has threatened anyone who wants the normal protection of the law. This Government and the Victorian Government will not allow Gallagher and the Builders Labourers Federation to get away with the tactics they are presently pursuing.

The Labor Party has merely misused information that the Minister made available in tabling that document. The Labor Party has misdirected its censure motion. It should have been directed at the Builders Labourers Federation. We are not going to give any corner to the Builders Labourers Federation or to the Opposition. The tactics of the Builders Labourers Federation cannot be tolerated and will not be tolerated in any civilised community.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (3.12)-We have just listened to a pathetic defence by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). It was framed on the basis that his Ministers have done nothing wrong. Let us deal with the Prime Minister's last point first. From listening to his speech and taking note of what he said, all the trouble is due to the Opposition asking that a document be tabled. Let me make it very clear: Are the Ministers now so incompetent and so unable to cope that we have to rely on the Opposition to help them as to what they should disclose and what they should keep confidential? How are we to know what a Minister has in his hand? Everyone here knows that when a Minister quotes from a document he runs the risk of being asked to table that document. You, Mr Speaker, pursuant to Standing Order 321, have asked Ministers time and again whether documents are confidential. If a Minister says that it is, the document does not have to be tabled and its contents do not have to be disclosed. So the defence of the Prime Minister is in tatters immediately from the point of view of what we are about.
A more substantial point of view was put by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke). It was put on the basis that the act in this House of the Minister whom the Prime Minister is now purporting to defend was an act of collusion and connivance to bring down the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock)-one of the Government's own team. The Government is paralysed by its fear of the honourable member for Kooyong. He does not worry the Opposition, but he is frightening the life out of the Government. That is the real issue. If one goes to the parliamentary dining room one can see little coteries getting around trying to find out whether the honourable member for Kooyong has the numbers and whether he will make a move next week. That is the Government's problem. But administrative integrity is the nation's problem.
The honourable member for Wills said that there was a Cabinet minute in May which said that the proposed prosecution of the Builders Labourers Federation was progressing satisfactorily. Is this true? Today the Prime Minister,

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1587

surprisingly, read every line of his defence of the
censure motion. What was going to be said today
was prepared over the weekend. I am amazed that the Prime Minister thought that he could answer
the allegations that there had been a Cabinet
minute in May saying that everything was fine and that progress was satisfactory by adopting the
very unusual position of letting a Minister use a
Dorothy Dix question from his own back bench to downgrade and to vilify the honourable member for Kooyong, an honourable member on his side of the House. He got up here specifically to say
that the honourable member for Kooyong had not done his job, that he was slothful, that he was a
laggard and that he should not have been in the business. He spoke in those terms. Therefore, he
was entitled to say to the Parliament what was wrong with the honourable member for Kooyong.
Why was that done? It was a premeditated action
to downgrade the honourable member for
Kooyong, and nothing else. It does no justice or credit to the Minister and does nothing for the
Government. The honourable member for
Kooyong is one of the Government's own team. We do not mind if the Minister downgrades the
honourable member for Kooyong. But what does
it do for the Minister's credibility? As the honourable member for Wills said today the Government
had discussed the matter in May. There was a
mi~ute wh.ich said.that everything was proceeding satlsfactonly. I thmk that is the crux of the situation. My colleague says: 'Why not table the
minute?' The Minister obviously will take part in the debate. We challenge him to table that
minute. But to have this utter nonsense from the Prime Minister that we are responsible for the troubles of Costain Australia Ltd is incredible.
The only person who has disclosed confidential in-
formation is the Prime Minister's own Minister.
That means that his Minister ought to be sacked. He cannot run his own portfolio. If we put the
matter to Costain it would want the Minister sacked immediately because it knows from where
its trouble stems. Nobody is condoning any trade
union actions, as the honourable member for Wills said. But to come in here on the defensive
and suggest that we are allegedly supporting the
actions of the Builders Labourers Federation is
n.onsens~: The whole issue here is about the integnty, abIlity and, what one might term, the re-
sponsibility of this so-called government. To have a leader of that Government come in to make the weak defence that he has, does no credit to him-
self, his Cabinet or the Government itself. I can readily understand now why the honourable member for Kooyong thinks his chances are very
bright indeed. Is it any wonder that the likes of Senator Withers and others are saying what is

wrong with this Government? There is a lot wrong with it.
We will not waste too much more time on the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) who has the almost impossible task of trying to defend himself against even the Dorothy Dix arrangement. He cannot defend that in front of us. We have never seen a worse performance than arranging for one of the Government's own back bench members to give a question which will vilify one of the Minister's colleagues. That has never been done before. It belittles the Minister and convicts him out of hand for what he had in mind by way of collusion and premeditation.
Let us go on to a couple of other matters which were mentioned in this debate. I refer, of course, to the primary industry portfolio. I think it is rather surprising to think that the Prime Minister says: 'Well, look, there is nothing wrong with what my colleagues have done in this area'. He proceeded to quote some of the evidence that was given. I want to make this very clear: We have had a limited time to read this report. If one reads the evidence in the report-that is all that we have-we will see at page 147 the reported evidence of Mr Webster. Mr Webster is the one who said that he told the Minister, that is, the Minister for Primary Industry who is now the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair), that there was a breach of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade because of the rebate on the milk powder that was sold. In relation to that matter Senator Evans said:
Was the Minister made aware of the fact that the GATT minimum was still being breached by the virtue of the post 15 November arrangements?
Mr Webster-I advised the Minister of the facts.
Senator Evans went on to ask whether there was a conversation. Mr Webster said yes, there was a conversation. Mr Webster makes it very clear that whilst this information might not have been in a written report it was in an oral report and it was very clear that he would have to tell the Minister all about it. The substance we are discussing is this: The Minister has a responsibility to guarantee that there is no breach of GATT. The Senate Committee was told that it was known that there was a breach of GATT and that the Minister was told orally of this. The next question is: What did the Minister do about it? Of course, nothing was done about it-that is the issue. When the Minister was asked to give some evidence he declined.
The issue at the present time is that we have Mr Webster saying that he told the Minister and the Minister did nothing about it. The Minister, of course, says: 'I was not told'. He has made a statement to the House to that effect. He has not given

1588 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

any sworn evidence but the person who has given the sworn evidence in this case, of course, is Mr Webster. If the Government is convinced that Mr
Webster perjured himself in front of the Senate Committee I challenge the Government now to charge Mr Webster with perjury. That is the alternative. The Minister should not come in here with a whitewash saying: 'Well, everything must be all right because I told you so'. The fact is that the man gave the evidence. He gave it on oath. He is obviously deemed now to be a liar. If that is the situation, if that is the only defence here this afternoon, then the Government has the responsibility of laying a charge of perjury against Mr Webster. There is no other way out of it. We need not have any more explanations from the Minister as to what he said and what Mr Webster said. Mr Webster is on record as saying that he told the Minister.
There is a very interesting backgroup.d as to why perhaps all this was kept very quiet indeed. One can look at this report and talk about a rebate system in respect of milk powder. This was a most dishonest system anyway, one that no reputable government could agree to. In fact it related to a shonky arrangement made whereby $25 a tonne of milk powder was paid by way of rebate to somebody's account in Singapore and Hong Kong. Nobody can find out what has happened to the money. I think it is important to have a look at what happened to the money. If we look at pages 132 and 133 of the report of the Senate Committee we see the fact is that these amounts are very substantial indeed. In fact, the Committee found that the sums involved amount to millions of dollars. I repeat: Millions of dollars were sucked off into an alleged legitimate sale and were dumped into an account that nobody from the Government or a Government department could operate. But a couple of gentlemen whose names are in the report have access to the account. I assume the account has now been milked dry, to use that phrase. The fact is, though, that the money happens, perhaps on the face of it, to belong to the milk producers in Australia. That is the first matter. Secondly, I ask: What about a judicial inquiry as to what has happened to the funds? Who got the funds? They amount to millions of dollars. This is just not a simple issue of
Mr Webster being a liar and the Minister for Communications being honest. As I say, that can be tested in any court on a criminal charge of perjury.
What has happened to the millions of dollars involved in the rebate that caused the suggestion of a breach of GATT, the money that was appropriated to somebody else? What did they do with

it? If one looks at some of the other factors of this amazing inquiry into Asia Dairy Industries one can see that substantial sums of money were given to groups and individuals for reasons that cannot readily be understood. In fact, the Auditor General addressed his mind to this. He made the point that those amounts were getting into hundreds of thousands of dollars. We have had some minor matters of somebody getting a trip in cash, some next door neighbour of the Deputy Chairman getting a free trip and somebody buying a car in some unusual circumstances. These are relatively small matters, one might say. But let us look at what the Auditor-General said about this subsidiary company. The Auditor-General said:
The Audit report noted that the auditors of Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd slated in reporting on the company's account for the year ending 3I December 1979 that they were unable to verify independently the expenses amounting to $675,571 incurred or paid on behalf of the company by the corporation and other related companies and which were properly chargeable to Asia Dairy Industries.
There is a great smell about this whole operation as to what has gone on. Not only the present Minister for Communications but also other Ministers would be involved in this issue. What an incompetent department the Department of Primary Industry must be to think that millions of dollars can be wasted, misspent and perhaps siphoned off to somebody not entitled to them. Certainly, if one talks about the report one will see that the whole arrangement related to tax evasion, tax avoidance, bribery and corruption. We have the whole lot in this report. All we get here today are statements that there is nothing wrong, that the Ministers have done everything appropriate. It is no defence to say: 'Well, look. The Minister told them not to go ahead with it'. It continued on after the Minister told them not to go ahead with it. Why would that be the reason that it would continue on? Do not the difficulties it was having appear in Mr Webster's evidence as recorded on page 148 of the report? I will quote what he said:
We had a problem and we had to find the solution and there were very few options. Not only did we have a problem of this nature, we had a mountain of skim milk powder.
He was desperate to get rid of it. He could not sell it; so he had to come to all sorts of arrangements to sell it under the counter and in every other way. Can honourable members imagine him going to the Minister and saying: 'I have sold every ounce of the milk powder'? Or would he say: 'I have mountains of the wretched stuff'? Would he not have been more likely to say the latter-'We are in dreadful trouble here, Mr Minister. There are mountains of the stuff. Bow am I going to get rid of it unless I can offer this rebate'? Is that not the more normal thing to have done? Would not

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1589

everybody in the nation know that there were mountains of the stuff here? This man is saying that; that is his problem. He is saying: 'We knew what the options were in respect of price, what would be done by way of reducing the price'. He said that the Corporation had to make what he calls euphemistically 'a commercial decision '. He continued:
I made that decision in consultation with my colleagues. I reported it back to the board; I reported it to the Minister; I took it upon myselF as chairman to carry the responsibility For making the decision and making that knowledge available. Something had to be done. I did it and reported what I have done. OF course it was on my mind.
Is it not normal and natural that a man with this problem of mountains of skim milk powder has to talk about the problem with somebody? Nobody is going to remove it unless he does something about it. He said that he spoke to the Minister. He would have to talk to the Minister about it. Naturally, the Minister said: 'Keep going, son. Do the best you can. Sell the wretched lot'. Of course, he had to do that. If I may say so, that is a typical Country Party approach, a cattle yard approach; sell at any price, get rid of it, but make a profit if possible. Really, the fundamental issue is this: The man, I believe, is honest. He had this problem. He attempted to solve it, and he solved it in a way which was completely dishonest and unethical and which in fact broke an international law. He did the lot. But we cannot blame Webster for that.
Mr Beazley-He did it witha powerful ally.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-That is right. He has some doubtful allies as well as powerful allies. But the point we come to is this: Where is this leading this nation from the point of view of integrity and probity? I summarised in this way my answer, which I have to make, to the so-called defence that Mr Webster's evidence is not to be accepted and that of the Minister is: It can easily be tested on a number of grounds. As I say, a charge of perjury against Webster will test it immediately. Of course, that can be done tomorrow. The evidence is there on record. It is very significant that all the members of the Committee are convinced that Mr Webster was telling the truth. If I may phrase it in my own way, if honourable members go around the parliamentary precincts, they will hear it said that they are convinced that the Minister was not prepared to tell the truth. That is the position. That does the Minister no credit. It does the Government no credit.
Of course, Senator Durack is deemed to have given some legal report to the Cabinet. I refer to the words of another famous Liberal, Senator Withers. He has challenged the Government to

table the legal opinion that shows there is no evidence to cast some doubt on the veracity of the Minister for Communications. A perjury charge would certainly clear the air. But at the moment, from the point of view of the nation, I would say that the probabilities are, because of the difficulty Webster had of having to shift all this skim milk powder, that Webster told his Minister everything he knew. That is the position. I would like some more discussion about the fund because it amounts to millions of dollars. I would like to know what happened to it.
If we had a judicial inquiry into that fund people could be asked to appear and to produce their bank accounts and statements of their assets so that we could find out what happened to the money that has gone through all the Ministers and the public servants. That would be the normal thing to do to prove that there was no improper allocation of those funds which run into millions of dollars. It is not going to happen to the other two gentlemen who got the account in their names, but to suggest that there may be kickbacks and secret commissions is not beyond the bounds of probability. That should be put, certainly at the very highest level. I hope the Prime Minister takes note of it and does something about it because the matter will not go away. I think Mr Webster has some knowledge of what has been happening to those moneys and could help the Government in that regard.
So the issue is very clear. We are discussing a motion of censure which should never have been needed had the Ministers met their responsibilities and carried out the administration of their departments. Had the Minister for Communications told his colleagues on the Senate Committee the truth of the situation, we would not have had this debacle. In respect of the first matter, the Minister for Industrial Relations knows that what he did in incorporating a document in Hansard is his responsibility. We know that it was a dastardly act to try to destroy a colleague, the honourable member for Kooyong, which is how the tabling was brought about. But, as the honourable member for Wills said, what about tabling the minutes which would clearly show whether there was collusion, connivance and premeditation? If these positions are found to be just, as I would think there is strong evidence to show, not only should the two Ministers be removed but also the Prime Minister should give the game away. He is the only defender they have. I do not think they have any on their own back bench. Whilst I understand there are plenty more speakers in the debate, I think honourable members will find that

1590 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

all the facts and all the new matter will come from Opposition members.
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources) (3.21)-The Opposition has censured the Government--
Mr Charles Jones-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. When is the Minister for Communications going to defend himself and when is the--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Newcastle will resume his seat. He knows that there is no point of order.
Mr Charles Jones-Haven't they got a defender?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Newcastle will remain seated. I call the Minister.
Mr ANTHONY-The basis for the charges laid by the Opposition is largely the findings of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations and, in particular, one finding which in my view is wrong and cannot be supported. Obviously the Opposition too has some doubts about the situation because it has hedged its bets by roping another Minister into this censure motion. The Opposition is unsure whether to concentrate its efforts on the Senate Committee's report. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden), putting aside his vindictiveness, said that the Department of Primary Industry had blundered in its dealings with the Australian Dairy Corporation and its subsidiaries. Let me say this: The Department has not blundered. It if did anything wrong, it was because it was conned by some very clever and very skilled people in the Australian Dairy Corporation who over a period of years were able to hide the facts and divert attention away from what was going on.
The Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) to his credit has recognised the seriousness of some of the situation surrounding this Senate Committee report. But the honourable senators who undertook this hearing seem to have missed the seriousness of some of these points, which were brought out in a letter written by Mr O'Bryan to the Senate Committee. The letter makes the point which the Deputy Leader of the Opposition made: What happenedto the money? Should there not be a clear investigation into this point? Yet the Senate Committee completely overlooked this question. The Government has not suggested for one minute that Mr Webster perjured himself. What we say is that the Senate

Committee was inefficient in its cross examination of Mr Webster to get the facts from
him.
Like the Leader of the Opposition, I intend to speak only about the Senate Committee's report and the implications of it. In the terms of this debate, the central issue raised in this report is whether Mr Webster, when he returned from Manila in November 1976, told Mr Sinclair that the so-called General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade breach was continuing. On this key point, Mr Sinclair has maintained that he was not told that this so-called GATT breach was continuing and that he was told just the opposite. Mr Sinclair's statement was strongly supported by two senior officers of the Department of Primary Industry. On my reading of the Committee's report and the evidence, Mr Webster did not tell Mr Sinclair that the so-called breach was continuing. I take that view not just because the Minister said that Mr Webster did not tell him, but because at no time in his evidence did Mr Webster say that he told the Minister that the so-called breach was continuing. Yet, it is on the Committee's assertion and acceptance that Mr Webster did say that to the Committe that Mr Sinclair is now, so to speak, on trial if he has not, in fact, already been charged guilty by some people.
The House may find my repetition of this point tedious, but I make no apology for that because it is the point of greatest importance and it needs to be understood. The question is whether Mr Sinclair or Mr Webster is to be believed. The Committee says, in fact, that on the balance of probabilities it believes Mr Webster and it does not believe Mr Sinclair. The issue around which these questions revolve is whether Mr Sinclair knew that there was a continuing so-called breach of the GATT after he instructed that that breach must cease. Honourable members will note that I have been using the phrase 'the so-called breach of GATT'. There was, in fact, no breach of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. There was a breach of what is known as the arrangement concerning certain dairy products. This was an arrangement entered into by a limited number of parties to the GATT, dairy producing nations and administered within the GATT framework. It is unfortunate that, in attempting to find a shorthand description, the words used have tended to convey the impression that the breach related directly to Australia's obligations under a major international treaty.
So, there was a breach of an arrangement under GATT. When Mr Sinclair became aware of it, he told Mr Webster that the breach must cease. He asked Mr Webster, on 9 November 1976, to take

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1591

action to rectify the situation. No one, Mr Webster, the Committee or anyone else-disputes that. Mr Webster went to Manila and held a meeting there on 15 November ostensibly to fix the problem. He wrote to Mr Sinclair four days later saying that an amicable solution to the outstanding difficulties had been reached. Mr Sinclair could only reasonably have taken this to mean that the so-called GATT problem had been solved. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) pointed out a very significant point and that was that Mr Brian Norwood, the general manager of the Australian Dairy Corporation, told the Committee that the board had been told, after the Manila meeting, that the arrangement that had been causing the breach had been terminated. He said that three members of the board had confirmed that the board had been told that the arrangement had been terminated. So here we have Mr Webster writing to Mr Sinclair telling him that the matter had been amicably resolved in Manila and that the Australian Dairy Corporation board had been told by Mr Webster that it had been resolved. Yet, the Senate Committee believes-and asks us to believe-that Mr Webster told Mr Sinclair orally that it had not been resolved.
The Committee believes Mr Webster wrote to Mr Sinclair, told him one thing and then spoke to him and told him something else. The Committee believes Mr Webster told his board one thing and told Mr Sinclair another. Well, I do not believe it.
I do not think anyone with an ordinary capacity for understanding would believe it either. Of course, the truth is that there had not been an amicable solution reached or, indeed, any solution reached at all in Manila. But Mr Webster did not tell Mr Sinclair or, indeed, the board about that. Mr Webster told Mr Sinclair that there was a solution. He told the board the same thing. But there was not, as the evidence before the Committee shows. Mr Norwood told the Committee that there had, in fact, been a violent argument in Manila-a fairly, hectic debate. The Committee found, quite correctly, that the problem which Mr Webster went to Manila to solve was not solved. Yet, the Committee, in the final result, believed what Mr Webster told it rather than what Mr Sinclair told it. In doing so, the Committee made a grave error.
Let us look at some of Mr Webster's evidence and, equally important, let us look at some of the questions Senator Evans asked him. The~e are questions in the course of which Senator Evans quoted Mr Webster's letter to Mr Sinclair, saying, wrongly, that an amicable solution had been reached. Senator Evans asked Mr Webster

whether he knew that the arrangement reached in Manila continued the GATT breach. Mr Webster said that it was a question of degree. He said that he was aware of all the facts. He said that he had to make a commercial judgment. Senator Evans asked Mr Webster whether Mr Sinclair had been made aware that the GATT breach was continuing. Mr Webster did not answer that question directly. He said: 'I advised the Minister of the facts'. What facts? Senator Evans asked Mr Webster if there had been any conversation between him and the Minister about the GATT breach. Mr Webster said that he could not honestly recollect specifically what the conversation was. He said that he could clearly remember that he had reported the facts. Again, I ask: What facts? Senator Evans pressed the point again. Mr Webster said that he could not recollect the details, but the basis of a solution had been determined and that was made available. What was made available? Is this the best that these eminent lawyers could do? One could drive a horse and cart through the evidence--
Mr Barry Jones-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. I ask the Deputy Prime Minister to read the exact words and not to paraphrase what the exchange was. It is very critical and very important to the argument.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order. The right honourable gentleman is entitled to put his argument as he chooses.
Mr ANTHONY-In none of his answers did Mr Webster come right out and say that he had told Mr Sinclair that the arrangements reached in Manila meant that the so-called GATT breach still existed. Despite that, neither Senator Evans nor any other members of the Committee appear to have tried to elicit such categorical statements from Mr Webster. Surely on this absolutely key issue, the Committee needed to be sure about that. Why did not the Committee, riddled with lawyers as it is, insist on being told whether the alleged facts included the all-important one that the GATT arrangement breach was continuing? We will search in vain if we look for a straightforward statement from Mr Webster that he told the Minister that the GATT breach was continuing. To the contrary, he reported in writing that the problem had been amicably solved. On my reading of this evidence, he did not even purport to say that the Committee thinks he said it. In fact, I believe he was very careful not to say it.
There is another relevant matter that comes to my attention. I invite the House to consider what I will say and ask itself what these facts suggest about the reliance that can be placed on Mr

1592 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

Webster's evidence. On 13 October 1976, a month before Mr Webster went to Manila, there was a meeting in Melbourne between two members of the Trade Development Council, Mr Webster and a senior marketing officer of the Australian Dairy Corporation, Mr Alan Page. The two members of the Trade Development Council present at the meeting were Sir Leslie Price and Mr Charles Clements. They had sought a meeting in connection with some general studies that the Council was undertaking in relation to long term contracts for the sale of rural commodities. Mr Michael Blamey, who was then an officer of my Department, was also present at the meeting and prepared a report of the discussions. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard an extract from the record of discussion containing the relevant material.
Mr SPEAKER-Is leave granted?
Mr Keating-Leave is granted, conditional upon Mr Webster's full evidence going into Hansard.
Mr SPEAKER-There can be no conditions.
Leave not granted.
Mr ANTHONy-it seems strange that the Opposition does not want this evidence.
Mr Keating-You are trying to make a liar of a man by selectively quoting from the documents of the Senate. If the Minister wants to put in the full quotes we will agree, but if he does not--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order. The Standing Orders are quite clear. Leave has been sought and refused, but I will ask again. Is leave granted?
Leave not granted.
Mr ANTHONY-I table the document. This document shows that Mr Webster, in the course of a general discussion on contracts for rural commodities, referred to the matter which, in the light of the Senate Committee's report, has now assumed such significance. Mr Webster said that a discount of $25 per tonne had been provided on skimmed milk powder sold to the Philippines. He then said that this discount had applied, according to the reported discussion, until recently when the minimum price specified under the GATT arrangement had been reached. The record goes on to show that Mr Webster said that when this occurred-that is, the price fell to the agreed minimum-the Corporation had invoked the majeure clause in the contract in order to discontinue sales to the Philippines at prices which would have been inconsistent with the minimum agreed to under the GATT arrangement.

Let us be clear about the import of these comments. Mr Webster was saying that the problem with the GATT arrangement no longer existed; it had been solved. That was on 13 October 1976. Yet less than a month later he discussed the problem with the Minister, Mr Sinclair, and accepted Mr Sinclair's instruction that it had to be fixed. In other words, on 9 November Mr Webster discussed with Mr Sinclair a problem he had claimed on 13 October no longer existed. On 15 November he was in Manila ostensibly to fix a problem which he said on 13 October had been solved. What Mr Webster said on 13 October to two members of the Trade Development Council obviously was not true. He even told the Senate Committee that he had been to Manila on two occasions before 15 November to try to resolve the problem and had made no progress. Why, then, did he tell the Trade Development Council representatives that the problem had already been solved? This is the man whose word the Senate preferred to that of Mr Sinclair.
The Committee has accepted the uncorroborated word of a man who has been shown to have given the Trade Development Council information that was wrong. It has accepted the word of a man who wrote a letter to Mr Sinclair saying that the GATT arrangement problems had been resolved when they had not been resolved. It accepted the word of a man who told his board that the problem had been solved when it had not been solved. The Committee has accepted the word of a man who resigned from his position with the Dairy Corporation after a series of questions about the Corporation's activities was raised by
the Auditor-General. The Committee has accepted the word of a man whose opinions, given in evidence, about the purchase of motor vehicles were described by the Committee as riddled with inaccuracies, as can be seen on page 346 of the report. Why did the Committee do this? I can only believe that the Senate Committee fell into error through being affected by a form of unconscious prejudice.
Quite clearly two things affected the Committee, upset the Committee and gave it the feeling that it had been slighted. Those two things were, firstly, the refusal of Mr Sinclair to make a statutory declaration and, secondly, the attitude of one of the witnesses before the Committee, Mr Wallace of the Department of Primary Industry.
Mr Sinclair chose to give evidence by means of letters and backed them up with a statement in this House. I believe and the Government believes that this was the proper course for a Minister to take. The Committee takes the view that the oaths of office sworn by a Minister are not

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1593

sufficiently binding to enable it to believe that statements a Minister makes carry the weight of statements given in sworn evidence. The Committee, while recognising the significance of a statement made to Parliament by the Minister, apparently felt that a statement made on such a basis was not good enough in itself.
It seems to me that the Committee sought to place itself above Parliament and to demand of the Minister something which the Parliament itself would not demand. For the Committee, a considered and clear statement made to the Parliament by a Minister of the Crown under the highest compulsion and demands of his office and the oaths he has sworn in full knowledge of the gravity of his responsibilities to this Parliament was not good enough. So the Committee felt slighted. It found itself unable to accept the Minister's word.
The Committee described Mr Wallace's evidence as guarded and qualified and his manner as evasive. I will quote a couple of Mr Wallace's answers when he was asked whether he had been at the meeting between Mr Sinclair and Mr Webster. Mr Wallace said:
No, because there was no meeting.
Is that guarded, qualified or evasive? He also said:
I did not attend any meeting.
Is that guarded, qualified or evasive? I invite the House to compare the directness of these answers by Mr Wallace with the indirectness 'of those answers by Mr Webster. (Extension of time granted). I thank the House for its indulgence. I could go on and quote more of what, to me, is vintage Al Wallace, but all I want to say is that I can understand the Committee being put out a little by Mr Wallace's attitude. I have known Mr Wallace for a long time and I can understand that he might on occasions be a little terse or irritating with people. But I have known Mr Wallace to be an absolutely reliable and dependable public servant. He worked with me for a considerable period and was largely responsible for the work done in bringing forward the Australian Wool Corporation in the 1970s. As a result it seems to me that the Committee formed an opinion of Mr Wallace that coloured its views on the whole matter and influenced its findings. The Committee seemed to find difficulty, too, in a different way with the evidence of Mr John O'Bryan, who appeared before it after having left the Public Service because of ill health and without being able to consult departmental files about matters which took place six or seven years before. What does concern me is that the Committee appears to have placed practically no weight at all on a long and

detailed supplementary statement in writing by Mr O'Bryan after he was able to look back on departmental records.
I take this opportunity to point out that I said earlier today that there was no reference to Mr O'Bryan's letter in the report. I have looked again at the report and I find that there is a reference to one or two matters in Mr O'Bryan's statement. But I remain very concerned at what seems to be a lack of interest by the Committee in this most significant statement. It is a statement that throws a lot of light on many matters, including the fact that a most important reference in the draft minutes of the Australian Dairy Corporation Board meeting to the GATT arrangement breach was deleted in the final version of its minutes. Mr O'Bryan's written statement, which he asked the Committee to include in the public record of evidence, also raises the most important question of what authorisation there was of the November 1976 agreement in Manila between Mr Webster and Mr Uytengsu for the payback of accumulated money in the Singapore bank account by way of rebates against future shipments. This was a point that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition brought out. I should have thought that the Committee would have latched on to it and made it the prime part of its investigation.
However, there does not seem to be much response from the Committee. I have no reason to have the slightest doubt about Mr Wallace's honesty or Mr O'Bryan's integrity. No other reasonable person could have doubts having read the evidence put forward in that report. In fact, that is the key issue put to the Committee. Evidence given by Mr Wallace and Mr O'Bryan was categorical, unqualified and direct, and that evidence supported Mr Sinclair. At the same time, the finding against Mr Sinclair was based on unsupported evidence of Mr Webster about whose role and evidence I leave the House to make a judgment. As a layman it seems to me that the bringing down of such a report by the Senate Committee represents a fundamental breach of individual rights and a serious departure from all the accepted principles of justice.
The Committee's report is s'aid to be one on the Australian Dairy Corporation and its Asian subsidiaries. It is,in fact, a very limited analysis of these bodies. It focuses on certain negative aspects of the managerial practice and defects in legislation and obviously it has detected serious inadequacies. It is silent on many big policy issues such as the appropriateness of the ADC's charter in today's circumstances, whether some of the trading activities of the ADC should be invested

1594 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

in the private sector, whether the Asian subsidiaries should be sold and whether the ADC Board should be restructured. It is especially surprisirtg that the Committee is weak on such issues. It received ample evidence of the all persuasive continuing conflict of interests and objectives of various members of the ADC Board and Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd. Because of these conflicts of interest it seems to me that there were many occasions for various sectional interests to withhold information, to disguise the facts and to evade questions about the facts. It
seems to me that some parties concerned have, over a long period, become skilled in withholding material facts, in diverting attention and generally
circumventing the possibility of an inquiry ~r interest from the Department of Primary Industry and the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr
Nixon) and hence from this Parliament. In these circumstances, the report fails to give adequate recognition to the problems faced by the Department of Primary Industry in carrying out its responsibilities.
Mr Speaker, I reject the Committee's finding about Mr Sinclair. It is a finding that is not supported by evidence. It is a finding that runs counter to the evidence given by Mr Sinclair and senior departmental officers. It is certainly a finding that is not supported by Mr Webster's evidence. Mr Webster's evidence can hardly be said to stand on firm foundations. It is a finding inspired unconsciously perhaps by the proper refusal of Mr Sinclair to place the Senate Committee above this House. It is a finding inspired, again I hope unconsciously, by the reactions of the Committee to the attitude of Mr Wallace. The Committee has come down with the wrong findings and the House should treat it for what it is. This has been the basis for the Australian Labor Party's attack today. It must have been unsure of its circumstances otherwise it would not have tried to collaborate other Ministers in this very important issue. It is a serious issue. It is a serious issue when the Senate cannot do its work properly and come to the proper conclusions. That is why I have taken time to speak in detail as to the facts which were presented to the Senate Committee and as to how the evidence of Mr Webster is incomplete and contradictory to what
he has said on a number of occasions to other people. I leave it to the House to make a judgment of who is correct in what has been said-Mr Webster or Mr Sinclair.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (4.0)-In case anyone listening does not realise it we are talking about the failure of the Government to ensure proper and adequate standards of administration by

senior Government Ministers. The attack, the censure motion, is on the Government. All we have heard today is calculated innocence from the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony), injured pride and a lot of defence for the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair). We have to respond to that defence. We are reinterpreting 377 pages of the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations and reinterpreting something like 1,500 pages of evidence in the heat of debate. This is not a cool analysis of evidence and witnesses over months and years, not a cool appraisal of submissions put before the Committee and not an analysis of the way people behaved at the Committee hearings. We are reinterpreting what actually went on in that Committee. We have had a heck of a lot of selective quoting.
We must accept, from the outset, that the report we are basically debating in relation to the Minister for Communications came from a unanimous finding of people such as Senator Rae and Senator Lewis whose integrity is beyond question. Yet we are to believe that these people calmly, over a period of months, have made the wrong conclusion. Let me reply to some of these questions and comment on the way that the report has been misinterpreted and the way we are getting selective quoting. First of all, the response by the Deputy Prime Minister was that no one could possibly read the transcript of the evidence and say that Mr Wallace did not give emphatic answers to the questioning. Over the weekend I showed these transcripts to a barrister, a solicitor and a police prosecutor. They all said that he was a very evasive witness indeed. The Deputy Prime Minister said Mr Wallace was emphatic but Mr Webster was not. On page 147 of the report it is stated:
Mr Webster-I advised the Minister of the facts. . . I reported the facts.
Senator EVANS-It must have been very much on your mind, though, was it not, the fact that the GATT minimum was in fact still being breached by virtue of the arrangements?
Mr WebsterYes.
That is an emphatic yes. On page 148 Mr Webster stated:
. . . I reported it to the Minister; . . . something had to be done. I did it and reported what I had done. Of course it was on my mind.
On page 149 Senator Evans asked:
Was the decision to continue those shipments through until June 1977, notwithstanding the breach of GATT, brought to the full knowledge of the Government?
Mr Webster-It was aware.
That is supposed to be non-emphatic evidence, whereas the evidence of Mr Wallace is supposedly

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1595

very emphatic. I ask anyone to read the evidence and the transcripts and makean independent decision. The next thing we heard from the Deputy Prime Minister over the weekend, or it may have been yesterday, was that the O'Bryan letter, which was in the transcript of evidence on pages 1470-1473, was going to clear everything that had not been taken into account by the Committee. Quite clearly, if it was in the transcript it had been taken into account by the Committee. It was not ignored by the Committee. Again, this is another bit of weak evidence. Today we have this statement which has been tabled. On the face of it there is some evidence, but whether or not what was going on there was true is quite apart from the facts of the evidence and the report which we are debating. There is no sense in saying that Mr Webster told Department of Trade and Resources officials that we were to run short of skim milk powder when we actually supplied a lot more in that year. We are talking about whether or not Mr Webster gave some incorrect information to the Department of Trade and Resources. What he said in evidence to the Senate Committee was on oath. Let me go back to this O'Bryan letter. All it did was clear up a few details.
I want to summarise some of these matters. I can say a few more things about the selective quoting. I refer to the speech by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). At no time previous to this censure motion coming up today has the Minister for Communications taken the point about Mr Webster's evidence not being clearly opposed to his account. Again, we can refer to the Senate report itself, the Rae letter of 25 March-it appears in the report on page 157-and subsequently, the replies from the Minister for Communications which appear on page 158 and 162. We can also look at Senator Rae's statement which appears on page 164. The weakness that is being put forward today in Mr Webster's evidence has all the earmarks of a recent invention. Let us not say that all this has been apparent all along. The Minister is concerned to be making public statements. The Chairman of the Committee, Senator Rae, has also been making statements. Not until this stage have weaknesses in Mr Webster's evidence been pointed to by members in the House. Let me refer to more of this selective quoting.
Mr Nixon-You ought to. You are an expert at it.
Mr KERIN-We are responding to the selective quoting that Government members have used. Let us take an example. I have already shown that Mr Webster was emphatic. I cannot

read all the tangled verbiage of Mr Wallace. It

goes on for pages. At one stage the Chairman of

the Committee said: 'The laughter there was at

you, not with you.' In another place Mr O'Bryan

and Mr Wallace, whose evidence the Minister for

Communications and members of the Govern~

ment are relying on heavily, contradict Mr Nor-

wood. In another case, they take Mr Norwood's

statement as being fact. I refer to page 1230 of the

transcript. The Prime Minister said that Mr

O'Bryan's evidence Dairy Corporation

stated that the had been advised.

AJlIh,Iellt.rtaralinan-

script stated:

CHAIRMAN-Were you present at a board meeting'after
the discussion had taken place about GATT and after Mr Webster and others had been to Manila to renegotiate the
sales arrangements with Mr Uytengsu?

Mr O'Bryan-Mr Webster returned from Manila about 19 November. There was a board meeting on 25 November which my deputy attended.

CHAIRMAN-Who was that?

Mr O'Bryan-Mr John Sainsbury, He is at present in Rome.

CHA~RMAN-Did you receive any written report from him when you came back to work?

Mr O'Bryan-No,

CHAIRMAN-Did you receive an oral report from him when you came back?

Mr O'Bryan-Yes, I received an oral report.

CHAIRMAN-What is your understanding of what was said at that board meeting in relation to this question?

Mr O'Bryan-To my knowledge nothing was said. I have looked at the minutes of the meeting and there is no mention ofitatall.

It will only confuse people if I keep on reading parts of the transcript but if we compare that evidence with what the Prime Minister said we immediately have a contradiction. The same thing goes for Mr Norwood's evidence. The Prime Minister quoted from page 186 of the transcript of evidence. I will continue the quote. The transcript
stated:

They also confirmed that at the first board meeting after the return of the party from Manila-I do not remember the date-the board were advised that the arrangement had been terminated,

CHAIRMAN-Has that been admitted?

Mr Norwood-No, on'neither occasion,

CHAIRMAN-When you said that the board was advised of the termination of the arrangement, do you mean that they were given the relevant details?

Mr Norwood-I believe not.

Again that contradicts the prepared speech which
the Prime Minister brought into the chamber today. If we put that evidence against the statement of Mr Norwood that the Prime Minister
quoted we have a clear contradiction and another case of selective quoting. We have to make this
basic point very clearly and very thoroughly. We

1596 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

are talking about the unanimous report of an all party committee, consisting of people who are trained lawyers. We cannot accept the usual argument of the honourable member for Moreton (Mr Killen) about people being tried by committees and found guilty without any due protection. The members of the Committee are trained lawyers. They will not make wrong conclusions from the evidence presented. Quite frankly, the main evidence-I am convinced that the Minister for Communications knew that the breach was continuing-flows from the context in which all the evidence was given and the situation surrounding the arrangement.
Let us consider all the evidence. The people from the Department of Primary Industry and theletters tendered to the Department or the Australian Dairy Corporation, from the Attorney General's Department and the Department of Trade and Resources emphasise the seriousness of the breach of GATT arrangements. We are led to believe that when this was reported to the Minister and he sent Mr Webster to renegotiate the agreement, Mr Webster came back and no direct reference was made to what was actually concluded in Manila. We are led to believe that from that point on the Minister was not informed in writing or verbally in any way, shape or form. Members of the Australian Dairy Corporation did nothing to follow it up. People from the Department of Primary Industry did nothing to follow it up. We know that Mr Webster may have preferred to deal with the Minister on an oral basis but that is pure speculation. What is beyond speculation is that it is not real to expect, with all the seriousness of the breach of GATT and the discussion beforehand, and all the knowledge in the Department and various other areas, including the Minister's office, of the problems of the Australian Dairy Corporation and its subsidiaries and the problem of the notification of the GATT breach, that Mr Webster went to Manila, magically came back and wrote an obscure letter and that no one else checked out the matter or followed through from that point.
To my mind that is the most commanding evidence that the Minister was aware of the continuing breach of GATT. Last Thursday I predicted that the Commonwealth Police report would be made public and that it would show that Mr Webster has certain things to answer for but that is not the main point. Mr Webster gave evidence under oath. The Minister chose not to do so or to make departmental records available. If he had made them available he would have contradicted what he said in this House. Senator Rae pointed

out very clearly after the statements of the Minister for Communications in this House that Mr Sinclair's charge that the Committee had rejected the evidence of all the minutes of the Department of Primary Industry and the correspondence available simply meant that the sworn evidence of the Committee was true. He said:
. . . it is Mr Sinclair who has made untrue statements to the House of Representatives and to the Press conference.
Another piece of commanding evidence is the demeanour of the witnesses. I have no wish or willingness to prosecute Mr Wallace. I have read his evidence but I say quite clearly that it was not emphatic. I think Mr Wallace was placed in a particularly difficult situation. We should get away from one or two paragraphs of the transcript and read the rest of it. It is clear that the structure of our statutory corporations and the roles of the people appointed to them in various capacities is not clear. On many occasions people do not know what their roles and who their constituents are. Often they do not know who they are defending. Members of the Australian Dairy Corporation did not know who they were defending before the Committee, if they were defending anyone at all. The Deputy Prime Minister has already said some kind words about Mr Wallace. It is my view that Mr Wallace did not know whom he was defending, whom he was supposed to defend or his role on the ADC. He did not know whether he was representing the ADC, the Department of Primary Industry, the taxpayers or the dairy farmers.
It is only in this way that we can possibly explain-I am being as fair as I possibly can-that senior departmental officials on the Australian Dairy Corporation would do nothing to follow up breaches of GATT. It simply does not add up. I accept that Mr Wallace was in a difficult situation. What I do not accept is that no one in the Department followed up the letter and that there was no correspondence between the Australian Dairy Corporation and the Minister and no contact between Mr Webster and the Minister. It is beyond reason. There are enormous gaps in the evidence. The Dairy Corporation first knew of the breach on 2 April 1976. It took until September before the Dairy Corporation made recommendations on what should be done. The Minister was informed some time in November. I do not know the exact date. To his credit he immediately sent Mr Webster off to fix up the problem. With all the seriousness of the breach it is not conceivable that no checking was done from that point on. Honourable members should read through all the evidence. In September 1977 evidence given by Mr Wallace stated that there was an awareness that the breach continued. In other words, the

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1597

breach would have continued if the price for skim milk powder had gone above $350 a tonne. I find all this very strange and mysterious. It is hard to believe that the Minister was not informed and that people in responsible positions did not take all these matters into account. To my mind,. the Senate Committee had a lot of time to look at the evidence. Senator Rae, Senator Withers and Senator Lewis were members of the Committee. Does the Government want to impute motives to Senator Lewis? He is a Fraser man. He is not out to get the National Country Party. He looked at the evidence and he made the same decision as the other members of the Committee.
I will not indulge in Country Party tactics by making an attack on Mr Baxter. I point out that Baxter was not on Senator Wriedt's staff when he served on that Committee. The fact that he may or may not have written a column for the Bulletin is quite beside the point. I think it is pretty shonky when an attack is made on a man who cannot defend himself.
Time does not allow me to go through all the evidence in this case. I have made the points that I want to make. But I would like to say that the Government must accept responsibility somewhere down the line. For goodness sake, is there no longer any concept of ministerial responsibility in this Parliament? The honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) has already pointed to the fact that the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner), who is at the table, has quite clearly breached any principle of ministerial responsibility, that he is not prepared to take the consequences of his actions and that he is prepared to lie in this House. Why has there been a cover up subsequently in all these matters by the current Minister for Primary Industry? Month after month we have been told that the Minister will make a statement on the police inquiry which is quite separate to the report of the Australian Dairy Corporation. This report covers a far wider range of matters for which the Minister is responsible. That is why the motion before the House states that there is:
. . . a failure to ensure proper and adequate standards of administration.
The buck must stop somewhere. The buck stops with the Minister. Let us assume that Mr Webster had been freewheeling, and the Australian Dairy Corporation and representatives from the Department of Primary Industry could not keep up with him. If that scenario were put forward, I simply wish to put to honourable members again: Why was no follow-up action taken? Why does the Minister not accept responsibility for the Australian Dairy Corporation? There has been a long

history of problems with the Corporation going back to the Australian Dairy Produce Board and its subsidiaries. Why were there no controls on travel,- accommodation and entertainment expenses? Where are the millions of dollars that are mentioned on page 133 of this report? The report states:
The matter is complicated even more by the fact that the ADC paid moneys to the foreign banks significantly over and above the rebate payments. These amounts can loosely be described as routine discounts or price protection payments and totalled several million dollars. The eventual whereabouts of these funds is also unknown to the Committee.
Why is this not relevant? Why is this not a matter on which the Minister must accept some responsibility? Why is it that the Auditor-General could not get on to these amounts of money? There have been reports within the Department of continuing difficulties. If that is the situation, why is the Minister not prepared to come here today and simply say that there have been large problems and that he is responsible for some of these matters actually being brought to account or being solved?
I think one of the. really big problems in the whole system by which our statutory corporations are run is that the people on them wear too many hats. By and large they move from one board, body, advisory committee or advisory council to another. It is a rather seductive atmosphere and they all know one another.
I could list the names of some of the people and all the many organisations that they represent. Take, for example, Mr Pyle. He is a farmer representative, Deputy Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation, President of the United Dairy Farmers of Victoria, president of the Dairy Commodity Group of the Victorian Farmers and Graziers Association, member of the Australian Dairy Industry Council, and also a dairy farmer. I am not making any comments about Mr Pyle's competence. I know him well and I like him. What I am saying is that if one were to go through all the key people in the industry, one would find. that the people in the departments are moved from one board, authority, advisory council, com" mittee or rural organisation to another. By and. large the position is the same for the departmental people. They are not sufficiently aware of their role, functions, or what are their constituencies. They think they represent the dairy farmers. They are not sure whether they represent the Australian Dairy Corporation or the Department of Primary Industry. We have a mass of organisations and statutory corporations in the industries. Eventually someone has to be responsible. The person who was responsible then was the Minister for Communications. At that time he

1598 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September. 1981

Fraser Government

was Minister for Primary Industry. By and large nothing seems to have been cleared' up. The Government says that it will now act on the report but it has had ample evidence over the years that there was a need for a lot of action a lot earlier than this.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman's time has expired.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (4.20)--'We have heard from the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) a convenient allegation against me as Minister for Industrial Relations for the obvious purpose of gaining the headlines arising from this debate. We know how much in competition the honourable member for Wills is with the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). Quite clearly, he has under-' stood that if one makes the allegation extravagant and if one makes a big lie in the House, one is assured of succeeding in the headline hunting which the honourable member for Wills is indulging in by the assertions he has made to the House. I would like to take the House back to the proceedings of House of Representatives Estimates Committee Eon 8 September. Firstly, I will read briefly from an answer that I gave on page 43 of the Hansard record of that date. I said:
Let me complete my answer. It was. utterly impossible to lodge the proceedings in April because they simply were not prepared. The whole material was not gathered and that material was not in a form appropriate for filing of any documentation. What I sought from the Department was an intensification of effort in the gathering of that material and in the preparation of it.
Later, on page 44 of Hansard I said:'
I think Mr Peacock asked a question and I would say I have not sought to investigate the activities of my predecessor in relation to this matter. I have' been concerned to pursue it my: self according to my responsjbilities and my desire to see the matter proceed as rapidly as possible.
That was the position before the Committee. It was the fact that on 8 September I had-not gone back into all the old files. I had taken the situation as I found it. 1 had sought to accelerate the preparation of the deregistration case in order that it might be put before the court as rapidly as possible. Last Tuesday in this House I pointed out that, since the Estimates Committee proceedings, I had examined the file from its inception. Also in the House last Tuesday I referred to a report to the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) being an advice from one of his senior officers. That report was concerned with a central fact which was the state of preparedness for the case to be ready for lodgment and the completion of that case through the courts. That document, to which I referred, came from an independent source. I believed, being independent, it would be a verification of

the things that I had been saying before the Estimates Committee the week before. I repeat that it was not a self-serving document. It was obtained from an independent sourc~. That advice to the Attorney-General was directed to the very point of the questioning of me at the Estimates Committee hearing the week .before. It also .went to statements which were made out&.ide the House with respect td the progress of the deregistration proceedings. I will quote from one other passage of the. Estimates Committee hearing on 8 September which is to be foundon page 42. It is part of a question asked by Mr Peacock. He said:
Before your assumption of the office it was the intention of the Government, noted by the Cabinet, that applications would be filed in April.
Therefore, the gravamen of the information that I gave to the House last Tuesday, based on the independent source from the Attorney-General's Department, was to demonstrate that that assertion made in the Estimates Committee was not correct and that the proceedings could not have been filed in the Court in April. It seems to me that a Minister in my position in the face of those assertions before the Committee quite properly came into this House in' order' to put down the facts and .to establish that the allegation that the case was ready for lodgment in April was not correct. I .have referred the House to the state of readiness in ~he preparat}on of that case. .
Mr Hawke-He. is off again.
Mr VINER-I say this to all--
Mr KeatingHe is making it w~rse.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable geI,1tleman will resume his seat. I remind honourable gentlemen on my left that this is a censun; motion in regard to which direct allegations have been made against the Mini~ter. It is the. practice of the Parliament to allow the Minister to make his defence in silence. I call the. Minister for Industrial E,elations.
Mr VINER-Mr Speaker, I say to all honourable members of this House that at all times I have been at pains to explain to the Government and to all persons with whom I have had dealings with respect to the preparation of this case, the complexity of it and the difficulty facing the Government in the preparation of the case and taking the proceedings through the court. It is something I have never underestimated and it'is something I have always reported upon to the Government. Of course, the Attorney-Gerieral, who had the report from his senior officer, also has reported to the Government on the basis of that document and at other times on precisely those same matters. Before this House last week I

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1599

quoted passages from that advice to the Attorney General related to the question I was answering. That document was not marked 'confidential'. The Opposition called on me to table it, and I responded. We all know of the kind of industrial action that has been taken by the Builders Labourers Federation--
Mr Uren-Because you are dumb; that is why.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Reid will remain silent.
Mr VINER-We all know of the kind of industrial action that has been taken by the BLF in singling out Costain Australia Ltd. We also know of the kind of industrial action taken by the Builders Labourers Federation over a number of years. We are also aware of the public threats made by a leading officer of that organisation to take militant action against any company which provides evidence in support of the deregistration proceedings. Those threats and those actions by the Builders Labourers Federation show the true colours of that organisation and its contempt for the laws of this country. I was rather perturbed at the kind of throwaway line by the honourable members for Wills when he said: ' I do not condemn and the Opposition does not condemn the kind of action--
Mr Hawke-Condone. You cannot even get that straight. What chance have you got? Does that upset your argument at all?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Wills will remain silent.
Mr VINER-As I was saying-and there is no need for the honourable member for Wills to look at the gallery and seek the headlines again; there is no need for him to do that it was indeed a throwaway line.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will resume his seat. I indicated to honourable members on the Opposition benches that the practice of the House is to allow a person who is under accusation by censure motion to make his defence in silence. I ask honourable members to comply with the practices of the House. I call the Minister.
Mr VINER-As I was saying, it was indeed a throwaway line by the honourable member for Wills and obviously was one not to be taken seriously either by those of his own party behind him or by unions and leaders of unions and, more particularly, by the Builders Labourers Federation. It is as well to remind this House that the honourable member for Wills was the President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions at the time when the Builders Labourers Federation was

deregistered in 1974. It is as well to remind ourselves that the ACTU, under the leadership of the honourable member for Wills, was quite prepared to see that organisation continue as if it had not been deregistered, engaging in industrial action, and was quite prepared to see the Builders Labourers Federation reinstated-re-registeredbefore the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. I have not, until that throwaway line in this House, heard the honourable member condemn the kind of industrial action that the Builders Labourers Federation has engaged in over all these years. I wonder where the honourable member stands in relation to his leader. His leader said that the Australian Labor Party will not hesitate to condemn irresponsible trade union action. That was in April 1979. Mr Hayden said that unions sometimes acted without justification and that that deserved to be condemned, but we did not hear from the Leader of the Opposition in these proceedings any condemnation of the kind of action which has led this Government to take steps to prepare a case for the deregistration of that union.
As I said, no one can underestimate the complexity of a case of this kind, the necessity for obtaining detailed and comprehensive affidavits, the necessity to approach the task most meticulously and with great detail because this union has a catalogue of abuses to its credit and has prevented any reasonable order in the building industry being achieved. Standover tactics, bans, the breaking of concrete pours, walk-offs, intimidations and blatent disregard for the decisions of the Arbitration Commission became part and parcel of the everyday scene where the BLF was concerned. It was in the face of the persistence of that kind of action in private industry and from the Commonwealth's own experience with the BLF that it became clear that at some time the BLF would have to be dealt with. Against that background, the task of preparing a case is indeed a most complex and difficult one. It is not one to be undertaken lightly. It is not one which is to be pursued lightly. The case requires the proof of a multiplicity of incidents constituting the total conduct alleged to justify deregistration. Inevitably, the course of such a case in court is long and complicated. For example, in 1973 preparation of the case for deregistration occupied 21 sitting days. It was virtually undefended and it may well have taken three times as long if it was fully defended. It involved the calling of more than 100 witnesses. The case took 18 months to prepare prior to going to trial. The present case spanning the activities of the BLF in four States and the Australian Capital Territory will be at
'21

1600 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

least as long and at least as complex. It has been prepared within six months. If the proceedings were issued forthwith, the time taken through the court's processes would be very lengthy. In preparing for such a case, it is not sufficient simply to receive accounts from employers and others about the actions of the BLF; the evidence has to be presented in a legally admissible form and it demands the fullest co-operation of the employers concerned.
What the Commonwealth has been faced with, and what I have been faced with as Minister since I have undertaken this responsibility, has been an enormous exercise of much greater magnitude than the earlier case and it is one in which the bulk of evidence has had to be gathered from the employers. That material has been assembled. The application, which runs into more than 200 pages, has been prepared. The Commonwealth's application is ready to be filed. I think it is necessary to elaborate on this matter at some length for the House and for the public to understand what is involved in the preparation of a case of this kind for deregistration. The exercise concerned with preparing the application has been carried out in a most studied, deliberate and businesslike way. Government, industry and legal resources have been pulled together to get this application assembled. Evidence has come from three areas of activity: Private building contractors, State projects and Commonwealth projects. It has been necessary to establish lines of communications and a range of procedures to handle the flow of information. In the case of private industry this has closely involved industry organisations. To collate, examine, and prepare evidence on Builders Labourers Federation industrial action, a task force, which included officers from the Department of Industrial Relations and the Attorney-General's Department, was established. The work of the task force included interviews with company officials, leading to the preparation of draft statements. These were then settled by the legal officers and then drafted by legal counsel into draft form. The documents were then returned to witnesses for swearing and ultimate presentation in court. More than this, every aspect of the process had been subject to careful checking and repeated reference back to the deponents. It should be remembered that all of this was carried out with employers and others in four States and in the Australian Capital Territory. It has involved the identification of over 450 separate incidents, the interviewing of more than 250 persons and the settling of well over 150 individual statements. It is not surprising, then, that this exhaustive task took six months to complete. It contrasts

with the lead-up time of 18 months for the 1974 deregistration case which the employers mounted. It is not surprising, then, that I was concerned to tell the Estimates Committee that when I took on the responsibility of this office I was concerned to accelerate the preparation of this case and to see that it was prepared as rapidly as possible and brought into court as soon as possible, given the complexity of it, the vastness of the material to be gathered and the magnitute of the task of collating it and putting it into admissible form.
I understand, because word has already been sent into the chamber to me, that the honourable member for Wills has made available to the public the document to which he was referring. I think, therefore, whatever that document says, whatever it is that the honourable member for Wills has already released to the public, that what I have said to this House shows the way in which I have gone about discharging my responsibilities in the preparation of this case.
Mr Hawke-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. The Minister says that I have released a document. I have released no document. I ask the Minister to withdraw. We want the Minister to release the document. Where is it? He should release it.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Wills will resume his seat.
Mr VINER-The honourable member for Wills disdains any knowledge of or any guilt in releasing a document of this kind. I accept what he says. The fact is that I am advised that that document has already been made pUblic. I invite anyone, I invite all members of this House and I invite the honourable member for Wills, to study whatever bit of paper the honourable member for Wills had in his hand against what I have said.
Mr Keating-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. The Minister was referring to a document. If the document has been made public, by whatever means, the Minister should now seek to table the document.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
Mr VINER-There is no document. I have no document. If the honourable member for Wills has released a document or if someone else has released a document on the honourable member's behalf, the Opposition should stay with it. I will just bring the matter right up to date. The Victorian Government established a royal commission into the Builders Labourers Federation on 20 August. The Commonwealth joined in that royal commission at the request of the Victorian

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1601

Government. The commission is to. investigate immediately certain matters revealed in a report by the Victorian and Federal Police into activities of officials of the Builders Labourers Federation. That report became available to the Government at a time when the preparation of the application for deregistration was virtually. completed in a form to enable a Commonwealth application with co-applications by the Victorian, South Australian and Western Australian governments. The police report required an immediate response because of the nature of the alleged activities of the Builders Labourers Federation. Following the tabling of the Attorney-General's Department's advice last Tuesday, the Builders Labourers Federation took action which nobody can accept. It has taken action deliberately to flout the laws of this country. Threats have been made to anyone who gives evidence in support of deregistration proceedings. That kind of conduct cannot be condoned by anyone.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister's time has expired.
Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (4.40)-Rarely in this Parliament have we seen a more shabby performance than that of a Minister attacking a fellow colleague, a former Minister, and in the process of so attacking him destroying a company's viability by the actions of the Builders Labourers Federation on Costain Australia Ltd. In so attempting to destroy a colleague, the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) has destroyed himself by virtue of the fact that he has given the Parliament advice contrary to the advice he gave to his own Cabinet. He came into this chamber today and said in a miserable, weak-gutted speech that what he was really saying was that the case was unprepared for reasons other than ministerial accountability. The Minister is now telling us how difficult it is and how it is now a broader case. But what did he have to say last week? Last week he was talking about the state of unpreparedness when he assumed responsibility for the industrial relations portfolio. He went on to say:
No prior consultation was taken by the then Minister with employer organisations.
One does not talk in this Parliament about a former Minister of one's own party, the Minister of a couple of months earlier, without that being a premediated vilification of that Minister. It was a spiteful vendetta hatched up by the Minister and by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in an attempt to vilify the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock).

Looking at this whole matter today, it is obvious that the answer given last week by this Minister for Industrial Relations was an implication of tardiness on the part of the former Minister, the honourable member for Kooyong, in the matter of the deregistration of the Builders Labourers Federation. Yet when we examine the document of the Attorney-General's Department we find that the former Minister was not in a position to_ get companies to give affidavits because they wished to go through their various employer organisations. The Attorney-General's Department document says that the principal reason for this was the delay in the support from the private building industry. It was not the fault of the honourable member for Kooyong at all. Now, today, we find that advice given by this Minister in May-a couple of weeks after he took over the portfolio-is completely at odds with the advice he gave to this House. Putting it in simple terms, the Minister lied to the House last week, and he has been caught lying to the House.
What do we do with a government which is so dishonourable that the Prime Minister sits it out-I will get on to the former Minister for Primary Industry, the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair), in a few minutes-while we have this outrageous set of circumstances in-which a Minister has been caught red-handed misleading the parliament over a matter as serious as the administration of a former Minister in the same government. Yet the Prime Minister was talking about reprehensible circumstances when two Labor Ministers missed a telex date. He called for their dismissal. That was the reprehensible circumstance that the 1975 general election was called upon, the dissolution of the Parliament, the appeal to the Queen's queen to break up the Par-
liament of Australia so that the right honourable member for Wannon could be Prime Minister of this country. This is the sort of reprehensible circumstance we find today.
Despite all the protestations about propriety in government and how there will be moral standards for Ministers, what have we seen? We have seen the shabbiest, most miserable, weak-gutted attempt by a Minister to try to explain away an answer to a Dorothy Dix question of a week earlier attacking a former colleague, a potential leader of the Minister's own party, to destroy that potential leader's prospects. How could we on this side of the House have any respect for this Minister? How could Costain have any respect for him? How could private industry in Australia have any
respect for this Government? How could this Government have an industrial relations policy when it has a fool such as this as the Minister?

1602 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

Quite obviously nobody in outside industry in Australia holds this Government in high regard any more. They regard the Minister as a sycophant of the Prime Minister; as a snivelling, crawling Minister who will do whatever the Prime Minister wants. The Minister has come into this chamber and made a low, mealy-mouthed attack on a colleague when it is in complete contravention of the evidence which has been put to the Cabinet. How a man can come into this chamber and do that and still try to retain his seat in the ministry and how the Prime Minister can condone his actions are beyond me.
The Government is now simply a rabble. It ought to be pushed out of power. If it wanted to go to an election we would beat the hell out of it. All the Government succeeded in doing in 1975 was getting to an election at the time of its choosing. If we could get to an election at the time of our choosing we would beat the Government as we beat the Liberal Party last weekend in New South Wales. We would beat the hell right out of the Government and it damn well knows it. It would take more than the honourable member for Kooyong to save the Government's flagging stocks. Look at who runs the Government-the three farmers from the National Country Party and the Prime Minister who could virtually be a de facto member of the National Country Party. Who knows that he is not McEwen's Philby, another Oxford mole sitting right inside the Liberal Party with National Country Party sympathies. Certainly it seems as though there are National Country Party sympathies when we get on to the Minister for Communications and his brazen, dishonourable act of trying to besmirch the reputation of Mr Webster, the former Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation, in the advice he gave. Today we heard the Prime Minister, in the poorest defence that I have ever heard in the 12 years I have been a member of Parliament of a Prime Minister and his Government, trying to discredit the evidence which was given to the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations.
Everybody knew in 1976 that there was a massive over-supply of skim milk powder and casein on the world market. Through the common agricultural policy of the European Economic Community skim milk powder was piled up in Europe and was then released on to the world market. This depressed prices. The Australian Dairy Corporation took the step of giving the $25 a tonne rebate to move the tonnes of milk powder. That was well known. The Minister would have known that. But he came in to say that he never knew this

when, in fact, an officer of the Department of Primary Industry actually sat on the board of the Australian Dairy Corporation. In fact, two officers were on the board over that period-Mr O'Bryan and Mr Wallace of the Australian Dairy Corporation. Of course, a subsidiary of that Corporation was Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd. What a joke it is to suggest that the Minister did not know that these breaches had taken place. The Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) came in here today calling into question Mr Webster's evidence and reading selectively from what Mr Webster had said to the Committee. Let me go over a couple of quotes to put the record straight about what Mr Webster told the Senate Committee. He said:
I made that decision-
That is, the decision in respect to the $25-
in consultation with my colleages. I reported it back to the Board; I reported it to the Minister.
There can be nothing more unequivocal than that. He said that he had reported to the Minister. But the Deputy Prime Minister chose to read a whole lot of selective quotes today leaving that quotation out. He then went on further to read the transcript which stated:
Senator EVANS-Did the Minister endorse the solution that you had reached in Manila or did he tell you to go back and renegotiate it because GATT was clearly continuing to be breached?
Mr Webster-The Minister noted what I said.
The record goes on further:
Senator EVANS-Was the decision to continue those shipments through until June 1977, notwithstanding the breach of GATT, brought to the full knowledge of the Government.
Mr Webster-It was aware.
There are three unequivocal quotes from Mr Webster to the effect that the Minister was aware of everything which was going on. I put to the House the suggestion which the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) made earlier that the Minister said: 'I will turn a blind eye to this. You go your hardest. Move as many tonnes as you can'. But no names, no pack drill is really what has happened. Finally the matter was brought to the Minister's attention and he was obliged to respond by requiring that the breach be repaired. Mr Webster in a subsequent letter in November 1976 talked about an amicable solution. In terms of ministerial competence or accountability why would the then Minister for Primary Industry accept the two words 'amicable solution' as being compliance with his request in respect of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade? Would not one reasonably expect that he would inquire of Webster, that he would ring him

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1603

up, that he would say: 'Look, did you fix the prob-. lem about the breach? Does this amicable solution mean an amicable commercial solution or does it mean a repair of the breach?' That was never asked, according to the Minister. Well, of course it was asked.
Another issue which arises is that, of course, Mr Webster gave his evidence on oath. The Minister was invited to give his evidence on oath and' declined. The Minister in a number of speeches since last week, and also the Deputy Prime Minister have called into question the advice of the two departmental officers. They were equivocative and as far as Senator Rae was concerned their evidence could not be taken seriously. Senator Rae says of Mr Wallace's evidence that it was not considered reliable. He described it as offering only lukewarm and tentative confirmation. So much for the reputation which the Deputy Prime Minister and the Prime Minister have proposed here today. An interesting matter to emerge is that in Hansard of last Thursday 17 September the Minister for Communications said:
The conclusions are contrary-
This is the conclusions of the Senate report-
also to all the minutes and documentation that were available to the Department of Primarflndustry.
Senator Rae and the members of the Senate Committee have said that no evidence was provided by the Department relating to the position of the Minister for Communications. I am now saying to the Minister, because he is following me in this debate, that we expect him to put up or shut up. We expect to see that correspondence, that documentation and the minutes that he referred to last Thursday in about another 10 minutes time. We expect to see that sort of substantiation of the position. If the Minister is not able to produce the evidence he has clearly misled the House. If he has misled the House he should be stood down immediately and should be dismissed. The Prime Minister should be decent enough to uphold the standards of ministerial propriety and integrity that he promised the nation in 1975, in 1977 in the policy speeches and on a number of subsequent occasions. The test will be whether the Minister can offer the kinds of minutes and documentation that he says were available from the Department of Primary Industry but which for some reason were withheld from the Committee.
Senator Rae went on to say, after having heard that statement from the Minister, that if such evidence existed the evidence given to the Committee was untrue. In fact, it would amount to perjury. As the Deputy Leader of the Opposition said earlier, if the Minister and the Government

believes that Mr Webster has perjured himself, let them prosecute him for perjury. Of course the Government will not. It will try to brave it out. It will just try to sit there and let the storm blow over like it has on so many other occasions. The Government just believes it should sit' it out and
let the matter blow over. This was not the case with Liberal Party Ministers. They all paid the price with their ministerial careers but not the Lavender Hill Mob-the three people who run the National Country Party-the Minister for Communications, the Minister for Primary Industry and the Deputy Prime Minister. Let us look at the Minister for Primary Industry. He is the same. Whenever he was asked in the last couple of weeks about the meat scandal-he has the whole meat trade with the United States of America crumbling about his ears-and interviewers quoted to him the comments of various other people learned in the industry he said: 'Oh, don't take any notice of what they say. They don't know what they are talking about'. All the time we had this mealy-mouthed attack on everyone else's reputation bar his. Who has done more damage to
Australia's meat trade with the United States than the present Minister for Primary Industry?
Let us look at the administration of the Department of Primary Industry under the present Minister and under the former Minister, the right honourable member for New England. It is pathetic. In the report of the Senate Standing Committee we find that millions of dollars, through the $25 a tonne rebate on each tonne of skim milk powder and casein, are lost. They have just simply disappeared. This issue is over and above the issue of whether the former Minister knew about the breach of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Where did this money go to? The Minister for Communications was then the Minister for
Primary Industry. We can look at the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations which fou)1d the Australian Wheat Board to be in the same position. There were years and years of delays in producing annual reports. There was inadequate accountability in terms of funds. There has been a complete bungling of administration in the area of primary industry. What is happening is that the present Minister for Communications and the present Minister for Primary Industry are being protected and defended by the Prime Minister as will be the Minister for Industrial Relations because he is part of the support squad that the Prime Minister needs to survive any attack which may come about from the honourable member for Kooyong in respect of the Liberal Party leadership. That is where we are in this Government
today.

1604 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

This is not a government of integrity. It has no cohesion. There are disagreements on South
Africa. There are disagreements between the National Country Party and the Liberal Party on the exchange rates. There is disagreement over the management of various portfolios. There are attacks by members on each other in the Parliament. What sort of government is this? If it can-
not do anything about it, why does it not get out and let somebody decent and with some real integrity have a go at governing Australia? When Labor Ministers breached just the letter of a commitment in the House, they were stood down. Two good men were stood down. When we look
at the joke of their dismissals, we see that their careers suffered. For what? To see the people opposite get away with the sorts of things we have seen in the last couple of weeks-the Minister for Primary Industry knowing for two years that people were bringing kangaroo meat and horse meat into the Australian meat trade and doing nothing about it, and the present Minister for Communications allowing and sanctioning the breaking of an international trade agreement just to sell a bit of milk powder so that he made sure he was right with the dairy farmers in Gippsland, where Mr Nixon comes from and where the dairy industry is very strong, or up in New England?

That is what it is all about. It is not about any

standards of propriety. We were foolish enough to

believe in honesty, integrity and propriety in

government. When somebody even breach~d

those principles, out he went. The people opposite

put themselves up as the Government of

Australia-as people of integrity and honesty, as

the business people who were born to lead this

country. The best they can do is economic growth

of 2.2 per cent in five years and they are a bunch

of cheats and crooks into the bargain. They are

unworthy to stay in government. The Minist.er for

Communications may laugh on the other Side of

his face in regard to this matter. Jumping Jack

sFclraasph~sl,ikbeuat

cat his

with nine lives, has survived integrity and his words are

many worth

nothing. Nobody on this side of the House t~kes

him seriously any more. He could not get a piece

of toilet paper through Cabinet. He is ~ot t~ken

notice of in Cabinet. He has no respect In pnvate

industry. Let us consider the Deputy Leader of

the Liberal Party, the right honourable member

for Flinders (Sir Phillip Lynch). Who has any re-

spect for him in the motor industry, in Australia's

manufacturing industries or in the mining indus-

tries? They think members opposite are a .lot of

yahoos. The iron ore industry and the coal Indus-

try are both losing money because the Deputy

Prime Minister cannot stand the Japanese upcannot even get some decent prices. Honourable members opposi te are not businessmen's bootlaces. Not only that; they are also not administrators when one considers the administration of their departments.
Where do they stand today as the government of Australia with the poor speech from the Prime Minister trying to defend the indefensible-trying to defend the wicked behaviour of the Minister for Industrial Relations last week in trying, in a premeditated way, to besmirch the reputation ~f a colleague and former Minister? Fancy condomng that sort of behaviour! How do honourable members on the Government back bench have any respect for a Prime Minister or for Ministers who allow that to occur? What about those honourable members opposite who are sympathetic to the honourable member for Kooyong? How do they sit by and let that sort of thing go on, seeing a snivelling, crawling and contemp~uo~s thing like Viner come in here and attack him In this way?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will use the appropriate term-'the Minister'.
Mr KEATING-I will, Mr Speaker. But how is that tolerated? We on this side of the House are tired of slick answers and evasive replies. We put up an honest censure motion based on honest issues. We produced evidence. We are looking at the evidence now. What have we seen in respect of the Senate Committee? We have seen attacks by the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister on the basis that the three Labor members and three Government members of the Committee are prejudiced. Nobody wants to hang a Minister if he is right. There are too many poor attacks on people in public life. I like to think that people in public life do not attack each other and that they see some virtue in a job well done, ev.en by one's opponents. I reject any notion of preJudice on the part of that Committee. But no, the Deputy Prime Minister, with his mouth op~~, asked how anyone could dare countenance cntlcism of the administration of the primary industry portfolio, just as the Minister for Pri~ary In?~s try did a week ago. Of course, the Pnme MIniSter's performance today, with his selective quoting of material put before the Committee, was nothing short of scandalous. I quote once more from the evidence of Mr Norwood. He said:
I would find it very surprising if the results of those negotiations were not conveyed to the Minister in some way.
The Prime Minister did not read that quotation. He tried to suggest that Mr Norwood had believed

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1605

there was no communication with the Minister government Ministers. I want to look at that be-

when the reverse was the case. There has been no cause I think that is where we need to begin, for a

attempt by this Government today to answer any large part of the debate has been around the

of these charges satisfactorily. We will hound this administration of my colleague, the Minister for

miserable, lying Government. We will not sit in a Industrial Relations, and a report from the Senate

parliament which should have honour and integStanding Committee on Finance and Govern-

rity and tolerate the liars on the other side of the ment Operations. I want to go through that report

House.

in a little detail because I think it is important that

Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications) (5.0)-The slipshod diatribe from the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating), who preceded me in this debate, demonstrates effectively the total incompetence of the Opposition. Indeed, it echoes the motion that it moved in the House today. It is sad, because the Builders Labourers Federation is universally condemned by this side of the House. Yet the Opposition brought forward this afternoon, through its

we realise just how it relates to this motion, and how the motion reflects the total inadequacy and the total lack of competence of members of the Opposition and the concern that we have for the way in which Senate committees can assist in trying to ensure that statutory authorities, members of those statutory authorities, members of the Public Service and members of the Ministry too ensure that the interests of those parts of the community which are their charge are upheld.

spokesman on industrial relations, an argument which berates not only the efforts of my colleague, the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner), but also those of my colleague, the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock), both of whom have sought to lay before the people of Australia a proper argument for the deregistration of one of those unions which have completely abused the whole of the industrial process in Australia.
The Minister for Industrial Relations has quite rightly endeavoured to ensure that a case before the courts of Australia is successfully and effectively prosecuted with every expedition, as indeed before him did the honourable member for Kooyong, for both those honourable gentlemen have the task of trying to uphold the rights of the people of Australia. But not the babble across the way here. Their interest is in trying to support the BLF, the Norm Gallaghers of this world. They are not interested in the rights of the average citizen-the people who want to build their own homes, the people who want to try to proceed in

First of all, let us look at the basis of this Oppo-
sition motion, which refers to adequate standards of administration. Even at the very beginning of the Senate Committee's report it was acknowledged that there had been a reference by me to the Commonwealth Auditor-General. There is a reference to the fact that that reference had been made subsequent to some changes to the Audit Act which enabled an audit under section 63p of the Act. On page 3 of the Senate Committee's re-
port the details of that section are set down. Let it be known throughout this place and everywhere else that my successor, the officers of the Department of Primary Industry and I are most concerned that the abuses which have taken place apparently within Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd, in any of its associate companies or in any of the affiliate companies of the Australian Dairy Corporation should be identified, that the persons responsible should be upbraided for whatever that action might be. A proper report should be made.

the normal commercial way to build a public building or a factory and who use builders to do so. Oh no, they are not interested in the rights of those people. Their concern is rather for those who abuse the trade union process and the concili-

When I was Minister for Primary Industry, the Auditor-General advised me that the initial re" port be provided to me could not be tabled in this House. In due and proper time, however, my col. league, the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr

ation and arbitration process. Honourable members opposite are all for them. They are the only sort of people that honourable members opposite support. That part of this motion which condemns my colleague, the Minister for Industrial Relations, needs to be treated with the complete contempt that it deserves.

Nixon), has advised the chamber that a report will be made. So, in terms of proper administration, let there be no doubt in the minds of dairy farmers and members of the public alike that the proper procedures are being followed and that the Auditor-General, in a correct way, is analysing and dissecting those things which need to be iden-

This motion, of course, does not deal only with tified and pursued. However, i think it un-

that. It deals also with the overall administration fortunate that the Senate Committee has not pur-

of the Government. Its basis is the proper and adsued some of those things which are identified in

equate standards of administration by senior evidence before it. I will refer to that in a moment.

1606 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

I think the second thing that we need to be aware of is that this whole cause relating to the Asia Dairy Industry report arises because of an alleged breach of GATT. As my colleague the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) said, it is not; in fact, a breach of GATT but a breach of an arrangement entered into under GATT. I think we need to identify the fact-it has been acknowledged at page 138 of the report-that there was a reference by me directly to the Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation, immediately a breach of this arrangement under GATT had been identified, requesting that he terminate those arrangements and ensure that the obligations under that arrangement be met. I draw the attention of honourable members of this House to paragraph 9.S on page 138 of the report. The report says:
According to evidence given by Mr Norwood 'The matter was discussed by the Chairman of the Corporation with the Minister for Primary Industry on 9 November . . . On his return to Melbourne after the discussion in Canberra the Chairman reported to me that he had discussed the matter at length with the Minister. He said that the Minister had acknowledged the reason this contract had been entered into with the rebate but pointed out that as the arrangement now breached GATT it must cease.'
I have said that it was the arrangement entered into under GATT that was breached and was not a breach of GATT. I draw the attention of the House similarly to my letter of 16 March 1981 at page 139 of the report which states:
I recall discussing the situation with the then Chairman of the ADC, Mr A. A. S. Webster in November 1976 and requesting him to take action to rectify the situation so that the GATT minimum price would be observed.
Let there be no doubt on anybody's behalf that I, my successor or any member of this Government condone that type of breach, be it an arrangement under GATT or anything else, where it is in breach of an arrangement which we have entered into in the interests of the industry and in accordance with the responsibilities of government. So much for the concept that, in some way, we have condoned the continuation of a breach!
Of course, the balance of the report and the debate this afternoon are centred, rather, on some allegations that have been made and some inferences that have been drawn by the Committee. I think it would be interesting if we had a look at a Press statement issued by the Chairman of the Committee who identified the fact that the Committee pursued its inquiries for a considerable length of time. The Chairman said:
The fact is that the Committee studied the evidence over a period of months, carefully weighed the evidence, heard and saw the witnesses and studied their demeanour. In other words we-
I emphasise the word 'we'-

did all those things which juries around Australia are every day asked to do.
I am a very strong supporter of the parliamentary system of committees. I am worried that the product of the slip-shod way in which this conclusion was reached is that the credibility of parliamentary committees, whether in this place or in the other place, is likely to be threatened. I do not want to go into the details of the number of persons who were present on each of the occasions when evidence was called, but I can mention to honourable members of this place that at no time were any more than four of the members of the Committee present on any occasion when either Mr Webster or Mr Wallace was examined or cross-examined by the Committee. So much for the whole Committee considering the witnesses, their demeanour and so on.
The third point I make is that it is important that we try to identify the role that parliamentary committees should play. We should try to ensure that we support those committees in ways which enable them validly to pursue their proper tasks. Let us not, for one moment, assume that members of committees are capable of examining evidence and coming to conclusions on evidence in circumstances where they assert that they are lawyers but do not practise as lawyers because, in this place, they are practising not as lawyers but as parliamentarians. The whole of the personal explanation that I gave in the House the other day was directed to the fact that there is evidence that has been before that committee-evidence through witnesses, evidence through letters and evidence through minutes-which rebuts the conclusions which have been reached, particularly in respect of me. We need to look and see just what that conclusion was and realise what the Committee is talking about. I refer to paragraph 9.38 on page 174 of the report which, in part, states:
The Committee concludes that on the balance of probabilities,--
I referred to that the other day; I will come back to that-
Mr Sinclair's recollection of the events was not as reliable as that of Mr Webster.
In other words, it is not coming to a conclusion on the events; it is coming to a conclusion on my recollection of the events. I contend, as I did in my personal explanation, that, if one takes the list of letters and memoranda that,have been presented to that Committee and no more, no jury considering the evidence, as the Chairman of the Committee contends, would have reached that conclusion.
There are, of course, a number of inferences that we also want to draw. Perhaps I did not refer

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1607

to it specifically in my personal explanation the other day but the fact is that there are no memoranda from the Department of Primary Industry in that great volume of literature that comes from the Department, which, in fact, reports that Mr Webster, as chairman of ADI came to me, as he alleged, and reported that the breach of the arrangements under GATT was continuing. Indeed, there is no minute in the Department of Primary Industry that even identifies what happened to that $600,000 that was distributed. There are no reports or minutes that identify the consequences of the advice that was supposed to have been given to me. Do honourable members really think that, having told the chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation: 'Look, we cannot as a Government support a corporation or a subsidiary of a corporation that is going to breach an international arrangement or an agreement made under an international arrangement', he will come back to me and say: 'Look, I am terribly sorry. We were not able to do that. We had some problems'. I will come to the question about the mountain of skim milk powder. There was a suggestion by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) that, because there was a mountain of milk, it was a natural arrangement for him to enter into. Let me, perhaps, turn to that mountain of skim milk in powder in a moment.
There is a very real conclusion that we need to reach and that is that no Minister in his right mind, having received confidential advice contrary to the written letter given to him, would not ask the officers of his Department: 'What are we going to do about this?' It was the officers of my Department who told me about the breach. It is suggested that I am going to keep it all very quiet. I am not going to tell them. I am not going to call the members of the Australian Dairy Corporation before me and say: 'Look, what the devil are you fellows doing? I told you to cease that breach of the agreement and yet you are continuing'. Do honourable members think that that suggestion is credible? Of course it is not.
In relation to the mountain of skim milk powder, I think it is worthwhile looking to see just what that is all about. It is true that the Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation, in the course of his evidence, identified to the Committee that, at that time, there was a problem. I refer to page 148 of the Committee's report. I will quote Mr Webster in response to questions by Senator Evans. He said:
We had a problem and we had to find a solution and there were very few options. Not only did we have a problem of this nature--

he is talking about some other matters relating to the floor price-
we had a mountain of skim milk powder. We knew what the options were in terms of price, that we would be down another couple of hundred dollars a tonne, and we had to make commercial decisions. I made that decision in consultation with my colleagues. I reported it back to the board;
I want to talk about that in a moment because that, of course, is rebutted by evidence given by Brian Norwood, the general manager of the Corporation and is rebutted by other members of the Corporation. Mr Webster continued:
I reported it to the Minister, I took it upon myself as chairman to carry the responsibility for making the decision and making that knowledge available. Something had to be done. I did it and reported what I had done. Of course it was on my mind.
It was so much on his mind that he gave entirely contrary evidence in a report that was presented by my colleague the Deputy Prime Minister in a meeting held about the same time with a number of other chairmen of statutory authorities who were considering just where we would go in a number of areas of trade policy.
I refer to this aspect because I think it is terribly important to look at where we go. This is an extract of a record of interview with Mr Tony Webster, chairman, and Mr Alan Page, senior marketing officer, Australian Dairy Corporation in Melbourne, 13 October 1976. I draw the attention of the House again to the fact that the Opposition was so apprehensive about this evidence that it refused my colleague permission to incorporate it in Hansard. I will not go through in considerable detail the areas that he canvassed but I suppose it is unfortunate if I do not read this part because it is important. He said:
In the Philippines a discount of $25 per tonne on the world price had been provided until recently when skim milk powder prices reached the minimum specified under the GATT-SMP arrangement. When this occurred the ADC had invoked the Majeure clause in the contract in order to discontinue sales to the Philippines at prices which would have been inconsistent with the GATT minimum.
On 13 October 1976 he said to a number of people in Melbourne, other chairmen of statutory authorities and officers of the Department of Trade and Resources, that he had terminated this arrangement. Yet a month later he accepted directions to go to the Philippines in order to ensure that exactly that was done. Let us read on about this mountain of skim milk powder. The document continues:
As a result of this action--
That is, the termination by Mr Webster-
it was likely that Australia would supply half of its expected sales of 25,000 tonnes this year. New Zealand would supply the extra powder which the recombiners needed. This development in the Philippines coincides with a shortage of SMP for export from Australia.

1608 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

This is what Mr Webster said on 13 October 1976. According to page 148 of the Senate Committee's report, quoting from the evidence given before the Committee, Mr Webster said:
Not only did we have a problem of this nature, we had a mountain of skim milk powder.
Honourable members heard the Deputy Leader of the Opposition give us a great burst on that. He said: 'If you had a mountain of skim milk powder, of course you would come to some sort of arrangement. We would be embarrassed by the surfeit of it'. Even the honourable member for Blaxland, for all his incompetence, identified the same point. Yet we have this development in the Philippines coinciding with a shortage of skim milk powder exports from Australia. I wish Mr Webster would get his facts straight and I wish, taking into account those sorts of inferences, that we would come to a position in which there could be a reconciliation of facts with the evidence presented to the Committee. The other part of that quote to which I want to refer is that Mr Webster reported back to the Board. I will not have time to read out all those areas in which there is evidence of the matter being--
Mr Vreo-When are you going to give us the document?
Mr SINCLAIR-Look, you idiot, I have just pointed out that there is a long list of documents that were presented to the Committee. They range from Department of Primary Industry telexes and letters to minutes, all of which have been presented to the Committee. If honourable members follow the evidence in them they will see that they contradict the conclusions that the Committee has reached. Within the Department of Primary Industry there was no evidence, other than that which was presented, which indicates that there was no report to me in the manner that the then Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation concluded.
I think it is important that we look at Mr Webster's credibility. I have pointed to the fact that he says that he reported back to the Board. Mr Norwood says that he reported to the Board and he reported to the Board in such terms that he said the arrangement had been terminated. I point out to honourable members that Mr McGuire, the Managing Director of Murray-Goulburn Cooperative Ltd, was a member of the Australian Dairy Corporation. If one looks at one of the memorandums that my colleagues are so anxious to look at one will see that reference is made on page 6 of the memorandum of 8 April 1976 from Mr O'Bryan to the fact that there was strong

pressure from Mr McGuire to allow MurrayGoulburn to offer 40,000 tonnes of skim milk powder to Cuba at the GATT minimum price of $350 per tonne, with the knowledge that the final price might be around $300 per tonne. This was rejected by the Corporation. That was in a minute of 8 April 1976 from O'Bryan to Wallace. Why did the Corporation reject it? It rejected it because the price would be below the GATT minimum. Can honourable members opposite tell me that at that time, if the Australian Dairy Corporation had known that the other arrangement was going to continue, Mr McGuire would have accepted that advice for a company of which he was the Managing Director? Of course he would not.
My colleague the Deputy Prime Minister also referred to another matter that I think is deeply disturbing. As far as the Committee is concerned, there was a letter of 22 April 1981 from Mr O'Bryan, a highly respected former officer of the Department of Primary Industry, this letter rebutting some of the earlier verbal evidence given by him, in accordance with the arrangements that he had made with the Committee. He did so because he had been suffering from ill health and had not had time to peruse all the records of the Department as he had been retired for some years. That evidence was not taken account of by the Committee. Indeed, in paragraph 11.16 on page 194 of the report, the Committee concluded directly contrary to the evidence given by Mr O'Bryan in that letter. On every ground this report unfortunately--
Mr West~Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I draw your attention and the attention of the Minister to a statement he made here on Thursdaylast--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order..
Mr West-The conclusions are contrary to all the minutes and documents--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
Mr West-The Opposition challenges the Minister to table those documents before he finishes his speech.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. If he continues I will name him without further warning.
Mr SINCLAIR-The documents that I refer to are in the report. The evidence and the conclusions were before that Committee. I do not believe that they sustain the conclusion that I referred to. I totally reject the motion of the Leader of the Opposition. I believe it is unfortunate that

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1609

Senate committees have tried to take unto themselves the role of courts of law in areas which demonstrably I do not believe they are competent to do so.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (5.21)-This debate has raised many more questions than it has answered. The first question that I want to raise with the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair)-he has continually refused to answer this question; he would not do so-even in response to the point of order of the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West)-is: Where are these documents to which the Minister referred in this House on 17 September? He said:
. . . The conclusions are contrary also to all the minutes and documentation that were available to the Department of Primary Industry.
On 18 September, the Minister is reported as sayingon the program PM:
But it's not only my evidence, what I think you want to look at is that what the Committee has done is reject the evidence of Mr Wallace, of Mr O'Brian, of myself, of all the minutes from the Department of Primary Industry, and of the correspondence that's available, and they have chosen rather to accept the evidence of the Chairman whose activities were the genesis of The Australian Federal Police inquiry.
The Minister said that if only the Committee had looked at the written evidence, the minutes and the documents that were provided by the Department of Primary Industry it would have had to come down on his side and reject the evidence of Mr Webster. Let us see what Senator Peter Rae has said about this matter. Senator Peter Rae, in very measured tones, put out a Press statement on 18 September in his capacity as Chairman of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations. He said:
In a personal explanation to the House of Representatives . . .
He quotes the Minister as saying:
. . . the Committee's findings . . . were contrary to all the minutes and documentation that were available to the Department of Primary Industry'.
This statement was repeated at a press conference-
I repeated that a moment ago-
when Mr Sinclair said that the Committee had rejected the evidence 'of all the Minutes from the Department of Primary Industry and of the correspondence that's available'.
He referred to the Committee's findings as 'against all the written evidence that's available'.
Senator Peter Rae went on to say:
These statements of Mr Sinclair are extraordinary when placed against the actl,13l evidence given to the Committee by the Department of Primary Industry who stated that there was nothing on Departmental files which related to the matter in question.
The Departmental evidence was that there were no relevant minutes, notes, correspondence or documents. This

matter was checked again after there had been a further opportunity to check the Department's files. Again it was confirmed on 20th May 1981.
This evidence is part of the public transcript.
If such evidence is available as is now claimed by Mr Sinclair then the evidence given to the Committee was untrue-in fact it would amount to perjury.
If the sworn evidence to the Committee was true then it is Mr Sinclair who has made untrue statements to the House of Representatives and to the press conference.
That is the point that the Minister has not answered. Either the Department was lying when it went to the Committee and said there were no notes or documents of any kind on this matter or, alternatively, the Minister is lying when he says that there were documents which the Committee ignored, that the Committee failed to take into accountdocuments, minutes and notes which would have confirmed his position and disproved the position which the Committee accepted; that is, the position of Mr Webster. That is the only point on which we wanted to hear this afternoon from the Minister. What we want to know is: Where is this documentary evidence? Where are these documents which would get him off the hook? The Minister has failed to produce them. We can only conclude that they do not exist or, if they ever did exist, that they do not exist now. Therefore, what the Committee was told by the Department was true; that is, there was no record in relation to the matter which is under discussion today.
The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) in their defence of this indefensible Minister have tried to question the consideration of the Committee and the evidence. The Prime Minister has rubbished the evidence given by Mr Webster, and he relies on the flip flop evidence of Mr Wallace. The Deputy Prime Minister went a stage further and said that one could not believe anything Webster said in any case. As a result, no doubt, of some desperate scurrying around in the Department, he dredged up some evidence of the fact that Mr Webster had misled some other Government body on this question at about the relevant time. I will return to that in a moment.
Mr Nixon-Slow down.
Mr DAWKINS-Why does the Minister for Primary Industry not take part in this debate? He is as guilty as anyone for the cover-up which has taken place in the last two years. He is the one who has repeatedly refused to table the Auditor General's report. Had he tabled that report of the Auditor-General--
Mr Nixon-Slow down.

1610 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

Mr DAWKINS-I have a lot to say, and I have a lot to say about you. If I have to speak quickly to get it in, I will speak quickly. I will speak with some enthusiasm too. I, like everyone on this side of the House, am outraged at the conduct of this Government and particularly the Minister. Of course, everybody knows that the evidence is, to some extent, unsatisfactory in that it all relies on the recollection of a number of people, recollections--
Mr Morris-Ollie, you are in this.
Mr DAWKINS-He wishes he was in this. Honourable members will remember how the 'Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman), who is now leaving the chamber, was shoved out of a debate on an earlier occasion by the National Country Party. Let us look at what the Committee was confronted with. It had to rely on varying and conflicting recollections of events which took place some years ago. Webster said there was a meeting and he said that there was someone there. He did not know whether it was O'Bryan or Wallace. O'Bryan said it was not him and Sinclair said there was not a meeting. Wallace said there was no meeting and, therefore, he could not have been there. When Wallace was saying that, people in the room listening to him were sent into convulsions of laughter. Nobody believed Wallace. Wallace was all over the place. He did not know whether he was to tell the truth or give the evidence which the Minister had told him to give; that is, he had been handed a letter by the Minister, the Minister had written a letter to the Chairman of the Committee and sent a copy to Mr Wallace. They were Mr Wallace's riding instructions when Mr Wallace went before that Committee. No wonder Mr Wallace was in some conundrum. Was he to tell the truth or was he to back up his Minister's letter? He chose to back up his Minister's letter. We do not blame Mr Wallace for this. He was put in an impossible position by the Minister as a result of the Minister's letter. What does Senator Rae have to say about the evidence of Mr Wallace? According to the transcript of the PM program of 17 September, Senator Peter Rae stated:
In fact the Committee did not accept the evidence given by Mr Wallace on that and a number of other matters and it has made some fairly severe criticisms of Mr Wallace's behaviour. As a lawyer who practised in the courts for many years, and who still practises occasionally, and who's chaired very many committee enquiries, J would say that that was probably the worst piece of evidence that I've ever had the misfortune to hear given.
We are not talking about some 10hnny-comelately. We are not talking about someone who came down in the last shower of rain; we are talking about Senator Rae who is a distinguished

senator. Sure, he is a senator for whom the Prime Minister does not have much time, but he is a senator who has been repeatedly elected by the--
Mr Morris-A member of the Government.
Mr DAWKINS-Indeed, a member of the Government. He was a member of the shadow ministry under a former leader. The point is that Senator Rae is experienced in these matters and he says that Mr Wallace's evidence was rejected simply because he and the rest of the members of the Committee could not believe it. As has been said, among the other members of the Committee were a number of distinguished lawyers. I mention Senator Withers. He must be one of the brightest legal brains ever to come out of Bunbury. There were other distinguished lawyers with very long experience who know when witnesses can or cannot be believed. The Committee was in the position of having to accept Mr Webster's recollection of events or to accept Sinclair's. The Committee was in the position of having Mr Webster on oath. Mr Webster had come before the Committee, taken an oath and subjected himself to the cross-examinatidn of the Committee. Sinclair refused to take the oath, refused to come before the Committee and refused to answer questions which would have been put to him by the Committee. He would not put his evidence in the form of a statutory declaration. He simply chose to come in here and make certain statements.
Everybody knows that when it comes to the question of truth in this House it is a matter of numbers. If there are enough people in this House to say that one is telling the truth, one is telling the truth. That is what it comes down to. Sinclair knew that so long as he was in here, so long as he had the numbers of mindless Government members ready to back him up, he could say what he liked and pretend that it was the truth. He was not going to subject himself to the scrutiny of the Committee. He was not going to be cross examined by anybody. He was not going to swear on oath because the Committee has other forms of discipline that it can draw on when somebody is guilty of perjury. That is why he would not go before the Committee. He can get away with it in here, but cannot get away with it in front of a Senate Committee. All this spurious nonsense about how he, as a Minister in the House of Representatives, was not going to appear before the Committee of the Senate is quite fatuous. We all know he was too gutless to go before that Committee because he did not want to have to subject

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1611

himself to the sort of vigorous and rigorous cross examination to which he was likely to be subjected had he agreed to go before that Committee.
To boil it all down, the Committee was faced with the fact that it had the sworn evidence of Mr Webster and it had the unsworn parliamentary assertions of the Minister for Communications. The Minister for Communications said that he did not really have to take an oath because he had already taken a couple. He had taken an oath in terms of being a Minister and he had taken an oath in terms of being an Executive Councillor. He said that that ought to suffice. He said he wrote the letters and made the statements as a Minister and in pursuance of those oaths. Those oaths do not say that he will tell the truth. The ministerial oath states:
I . . . do swear that I will well and truly serve Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second, Her heirs and successors according to law, in the office of Minister of State for . . .
There is nothing in that oath which says he has to tell the truth, not like the sort of oath which Mr Webster had taken when he appeared before the Committee. When one really looks at the matter, one see that the Committee already knew about the allegations about Mr Webster. It already knew that he was a little untrustworthy. In fact, it already knew that Mr Webster had been carrying on practices in relation to the breach of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade arrangement which he had told other people were not going on. It already knew that his track record was not too terrific. Knowing all that, knowing what Mr Webster was like and knowing about the allegations surrounding his other activities, the Committee still chose, on the balance of probabilities, to accept his evidence against the unsworn evidence of the Minister. That seems to be a pretty mighty condemnation of this Minister. If six senators can sit down, four of them experienced lawyers, and decide that---
Mr Morris-Government members.
Mr DAWKINS-Including three Government members, as the honourable member for Shortland rightly points out. If they are prepared to accept the evidence of someone like Webster instead of the evidence of Mr Sinclair that is a very severe condemnation of the Minister for Communications. The Minister was probably quite right in deciding not to go before the Committee because he would have got a mauling had he gone there. It would have cross-examined him on a lot of matters which he wanted kept well and truly secret. He was an accomplice to all the activities of the board. He knew what Mr Webster was up to and he did not want that to come out.

The Minister had another problem as well. If he had gone before the Committee he would have had to make a choice about whether he was an accomplice to the breach, an accomplice to the activities which the Committee was investigating, or whether he was so incompetent as a Minister that he did not even know they were going on and apparently did not care if they were going on. There is no question about the fact that the breach continued long after most people thought it had been discontinued.
What questions did the Minister ask? What was the level of the Minister's inquisitiveness? What was the level of his curiosity in relation to these very important matters? Did he pursue these matters with Mr Webster or with anyone else? Did he pursue these matters with the departmental representatives who sat on the board? What was he doing? This was not some independent outfit. This corporation is, in fact an arm of government. It was something which was responsible to government and being responsible it had to report to him as Minister. What questions was he asking about this once he knew that the Australian Dairy Corporation had been engaging in these improper activities in breach of the GATT arrangements? What did he do to find out whether that had been stopped? What inquiries did he make about the totally irregular and corrupt practices used in order to transfer money from one person to another? He said today that he still does not know where the money has gone. What inquiries did he make at that time? Obviously he was disinterested in this matter. He could not have cared less. That is what he did not want to come out. That is what would have come out had he gone before the Committee. Even if he did not know it is perfectly clear that the Department did. The Department was represented on that board. If it did not know what was going on it was a dereliction of duty on the part of those people who represented it on the board. Those people were the direct representatives on the board of the Minister. They should have been keeping him informed and, no doubt, they kept him informed. If they did not it does not matter. The Minister is still responsible for their activities or their negligence. Therefore, he should take responsibility for their failure to clean up this racket in the Corporation.
The Deputy Prime Minister said-the Minister himself repeated this a few moments ago-that we could not take any notice of what Mr Webster said in any event because, after scurrying around the files of the Department of Trade and Resources, they had discovered a minute of a meeting in which Mr Webster said that the practice had 'been discontinued, yet it was revealed a

1612 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

couple of weeks later, when he reported to the Minister, that it was still continuing. If they knew about that at the time why did they continue to allow Mr Webster to remain as Chairman of the Corporation? If they knew at that time that he was deceiving them and boards of the Government why did they not remove him immediately? Of course, the Minister for Communications, who was then the Minister for Primary Industry, was in no position to discipline anyone. His personal conduct was on such a level that he could not discipline Mr Webster or sack him just because he was fiddling the books or dipping in the till. The Minister himself was doing exactly the same thing in his private activities. He was receiving stolen money and still has it in his possession.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member for Fremantle extends the debate beyond the parameters. I require him to withdraw that personal reflection on a matter quite unrelated to the matter before the House.
Mr Sinclair-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. I ask the honourable member to withdraw that totally unjustified remark.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair has required the honourable member to withdraw.
Mr DAWKINS-I was saying that we now know, as a result of the Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister telling us, that they knew that Mr Webster was not telling the truth at the time. I am saying that the Minister was in no position to take action against him because of his own personal conduct.
Mr Sinclair-I take a point of order. I ask the honourable gentleman to withdraw those allegations about me.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Chair required the honourable member for Fremantle to withdraw.
Mr DAWKINS-It is well known, Mr Deputy Speaker--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will withdraw.
Mr DAWKINS-I withdraw. However, I say that the Minister received stolen money and still has it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member again offends. He expressed a view that is not necessarily substantiated by fact or record. The honourable member must withdraw that remark.
Mr DAWKINS-The Minister has not denied that he has received misappropriated money.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member must withdraw that remark.
Mr DAWKINS-I withdraw. The Minister, of course, did not know of the conduct of Mr Webster at that time. If he did he was an accomplice to the continuing conduct of Mr Webster. What this matter is really all about and what the Liberal members in this House have to realise is that we have just seen prime ministerial, deputy prime ministerial and other ministerial contortions to get this Minister, in particular, off the hook. What the Liberals have to face up to is that double standards are operating in this area. When they finally chase the Prime Minister from office in their own party room or when he is chased from office by the people at the next election his epitaph will be that he failed to stand up to the National Country Party. When Senator Withers was accused of a minor impropriety he was off like a shot yet the Prime Minister will do anything to get a National Country Party Minister off the hook. I remind honourable members of the time when the present Minister for Administrative Services was made to say in the House that he had misheard a question. Theymade him tell a lie in this House in order to get Senator Webster in another place off the hook. There was a dispute about the question of drilling on the Barrier Reef. They would leave no stone unturned to save the neck of their colleague and to hell with the careers and reputations of Liberal Ministers. We have heard a frantic defence this afternoon of a couple of ministerial careers. Members of the National Country Party could not care less about propriety in government or about the good administration of the Departc ment of Primary Industry or any other department. All they are interested in doing, all the Prime Minister is interested in doing and all the National Country Party Ministers are interested in doing is saving a couple of the Prime Minister's favourite Cabinet pets.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) .(5.41)-We have heard this afternoon from the Opposition a lot of talk about a desire to raise honest issues, and to examine facts and much criticism of selective quotations. Perhaps the manner in which members of the Opposition go about their task is best exemplified by the individual who spoke last, that squalid nuisance, the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) whose tirade represents nothing else than an extravagant exercise in abuse. The issue which has centred the attack against the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) is the finding which was made on page

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1613

174 of the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations
which has already been referred to. What was said then was that it appears to the Committee on the balance of probabilities that Mr Sinclair was told of the terms of the compromise which necessarily involved a continuing breach of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. In reaching that finding the Committee did not say-as was suggested by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden)-that it found that the Minister was not a believable person. Specifically, it concluded that his recollection of events was not as reliable as Mr Webster's.
In order to come to that conclusion the Committee had to look at evidence because the only basis on which it could determine a question of fact such as that was from the evidence. Therefore, it is necessary to look at the evidence, as some of the honourable members on this side of t~~ House who have spoken have done. OpposItion members referred to selective quotations. That, of course, is the oldest defence of people who do not wish to refer to the evidence because once they do so it does not bear out the assertions that they seek to make. Let us see what the events were. On 2 April 1976 it appears that the full board was informed for the first time of the rebate arrangements. It was on that day that it made a decision that it agreed that the rebate arrangements would have to cease. Honourable members should bear in mind that that decision appears never fo have been reversed. On 9 November 1976-there is no contest about this-the Minister directed that the rebate arrangements would have to cease. I quote from the evidence given by Mr Norwood, the General Manager of Australian Dairy Corporation. He said:
. . . as the arrangement now breached GATT it must cease; the Government could not condone an arrangement which breached GATT.
That is a perfectly plain direction by the Minister to the Chairman as relayed by the Chairman to Mr Norwood, the General Manager. What then happened? A special trip was organised. It was accepted by the Committee that it was, in fact, a special trip. What was its purpose? The Chairman was to go to the Philippines to implement the direction given by the Minister. For those who mightsay, 'Oh well, it was only a request', I point out that when a Minister says that a breach cannot be condoned and must cease, a public servant, a person in Mr Webster's position, would understand plainly what that meant. There is only one meaning and that is, 'You must stop it and that is the direction I am giving you.'
What then happened in this rather extraordinary sequence of events-extraordinary when one

examines the evidence of Chairman Webster, as one must? Mr Webster went to the Philippines and, on 15 November 1976, he signed an agreement. That agreement clearly was a continuing breach of the arrangement which was the subject of the Minister's concern. He went there under directions to remedy the default, to cease breaching the arrangement. What did he do? He entered into an agreement which was quite contrary to the directions given to him by the Minister. As was put to him by Senator Evans, in the course of examination or cross-examination-call it what we will-this was a slightly more indirect way of doing things. What did he do then? He came back and, on 19 November 1976, wrote a letter to the Minister. This letter-to anyone who is willing to take a fairly dispassionate view of the evidence-is of critical importance because it constitutes the only written record, by the person who was at the centre of events, namely, Mr Webster, of what he did when he was in Manila. What did he say? It appears in the examination which was conducted of him. At page 146 of the report he said:
'{ am pleased to advise that it was possible for us to arrive at an amicable solution to our outstanding difficulties' . . .
That statement is referred to also at page 145 of the report where we find the further statement:
. . . some of which were contained in a letter from Mr Uytengsu dated 14 October, of which you have received a copy.
For reasons which I must confess escape me somewhat, the Committee went on to make this comment:
It should be noted that Mr Uytengsu's letter of 14 October referred to above contained no reference to the GATT breach.
That may be so. But what on earth would any sensible person, fairly reading the document think that it meant when this man had been sent to the Philippines for the purpose of giving effect to the Minister's direction? Any reasonable reader could have come to only one conclusion which is: We have arrived at an amicable solution to our outstanding difficulties. One of those difficulties was, of course, the difficulty posed by GATT. In fact, that was the difficulty which sent Mr Webster to Manila. It is ludicrous to suggest that somehow, a sensible, intelligent or reasonable person could write what he wrote and think that he was not saying to the Minister: 'Everything is all right. I have fixed up the problem that I was sent to Manila to fix up'.
That letter, of course, flatly contradicts any suggestion that he later told the Minister something else. Does anyone really think that, having written that letter, he then went to the Minister

1614 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

and said: 'True it is that I wrote that letter. True it is that you sent me to the Philippines to give effect to the direction that you had given to me. But I would like to tell you that, as the Chairman of the ADC, I have deliberately, wilfully and flagrantly disregarded the direction that you gave to me. What I said in my letter was not, in fact, the case. There was no amicable solution. We are still continuing our breach of GATT. Aren't you pleased?'. That statement only has to be examined to show what utter nonsense it is.
Let us then look at some of the evidence which was given to the Senate Committee. If honourable members on the other side of the House would listen, they might inform themselves and they might possibly learn something, although I think it is unlikely to the highest degree. What was Mr Webster's evidence? That is the linchpin. The man upon whom the Committee's report depends contradicts his own letter and his own office because that is what he was sent there to do. Moreover, he has contradicted a standing request, so it seems, of his board made in April of that year, that the rebate arrangement should cease.
Much seems to have been read into the evidence by the Committee. Much of the evidence has been read in this House. I will quote from one or two passages in the Committee report. I do not in any way challenge the integrity of members of the Committee, but I must say that I think they should have applied their minds more to testing and probing the evidence that was placed before them. Let us take Senator Evans's first question to Mr Webster. He asked:
What did you tell the Minister about the outcome of your Manila negotiations on 15 November?
Mr Webster-I told the Minister the basis on which we had negotiated.
Senator Evans should have realised-at least he would have if he had practised in the courts for very much time-that he should have elicited what was the man's recollection. One does not say: 'Very well. You told the Minister the basis on which you negotiated.' What does that mean? It means nothing at all unless we know what that basis is, unless the witness is kind enough to tell us at some time, or unless we have some foreknowledge of the basis on which the negotiations were conducted. But alas, Senator Evans did not persist with this line of questioning. He did not seek to find out precisely what was meant by this rather elliptical statement. He then went on to refer to the letter and, in anothc;r classic example of questioning that does not get an answer, he aid:
That is all that is said in the letter. Was anything more said orally?
Mr Webster~The details were given orally.

A sensible question to follow that would have been: 'What were the details? What did you say?' Of course, it emerged during the course of the questioning, with no thanks perhaps to those who were putting the questions, that Mr Webster could not recollect what was said in any event. Let us take Senator Evans's next question. He asked:
Were you aware that the nature of the arrangement that you settled upon in Manila was conspicuously just as much in continuing breach of the GATT minimum as the previous arrangement, once the Hoor price had been reached?
What was the answer to that question? Was it yes or no? It most certainly was not. The answer was:
Mr Webster-Obviously it was a question of degree.
Stopping there for a moment I must say that that is utter nonsense. It was not a question of degree and never could have been. Mr Webster went on to say:
I was aware of all the facts, yes. I had to make a commercial jUdgment.
That statement is also utter nonsense. He had one thing to do and that was to comply with a directive which had been given to him by the Minister which, plainly enough, he did not comply with.
Let us examine some of the other evidence. This counts against the acceptance of the evidence of Chairman Webster, on the critical point, that is, that in some way he informed the Minister of details which he could not recollect. Mr O'Bryan, the Department of Primary Industry representative on the ADC board, did not corroborate Mr Webster's recollection that somebody was probably there. We can forget about Mr Webster's recollection in that area. Mr Wallace, First Assistant Secretary of the dairy division in the Department of Primary Industry did not corroborate Mr Webster's evidence either. Much has been said of Mr Wallace's evidence. But he denied it in very direct terms. If we turn to Mr Webster's evidence-this is of critical importance-we find that he contradicts himself. In other evidence that he has given we find, on page 148 of the report, that he said again in answer to one of Senator Evans's questions when he was referring to the decision made in the Philippines:
I made that decision in consultation with my colleagues. I reported it back to the board; I reported it to the Minister;
I stress the words 'I reported it back to the board; I reported it to the Minister'. What is the evidence on that? Honourable members heard-the evidence which was read by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) which the Opposition sought to put in doubt. But it is perfectly plain what Mr Norwood's evidence was. Mr Norwood got in touch with three of the directors. They were directors at the time of these events. What did they say? They

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1615

confirmed that immediately prior to the meeting with the Minister and with Mr Uytengsu a discussion was held by the board of the Corporation to endorse the decision that the $25 arrangement must cease, as indeed had been the decision of the board back in April. They also confirmed that at the first board meeting after the return of the party from Manila-I do not remember the date-the board was advised that the arrangement had been terminated. No challenge was made on that evidence that I am aware of. It was allowed to go pass without any adverse comment from the Committee.
What does that amount to? It amounts to this: Three board members informed the General Manager of the time that, when they sat down at the board meeting which took place immediately after Mr Webster came back, they were told simply that the arrangements had been terminated. That is consistent with the Minister's understanding of .the matters; it is consistent with the instructions given to Mr Webster; and it is consistent also with a letter written by Mr Webster. Against this, somehow we are meant to abstract from his evidence sufficient weight to destroy all the adverse evidence and all the adverse criticism that can be brought against his own evidence.
Let me refer very briefly to some of the other things that he said. At page 875 of the transcript, Mr Webster said:
A group of main Board directors knew all the Facts.
This, as I read it, was with reference to the decision in the Philippines. Who were the main board directors? They certainly were not the three Norwood spoke to, and certainly not the person who was on the board as the nominee of the Department. What else did he do? These are all matters that seem to have passed the Committee by when it was examining whether it should accept his evidence. At page 877, the Chairman asked:
Was it not available to all members of the board, as Far as you know?
He was referring to the agreement of 15 November 1976. Mr Webster replied:
My recollection is that I read it at the board meeting rather than that I tabled it.
What stands in the way of that evidence? It is the recollection of the three people who spoke to Mr Norwood and the recollection of Mr O'Bryan. If we look at his evidence we will see that it is perfectly plain that he did not know that there was a continuation of the GATT breach until he heard about it in the course of evidence earlier this year.
If we are to assess the reliability of a witness's

evidence, we have to look to other evidence, evidence that contraverts it, reasons why he may not wish to give an accurate statement, how long ago it was and discrepancies within his own evidence. We have a man who gave evidence which is patently improbable. He is a man who is in conflict with O'Bryan and Wallace as to their attendance at the critical conversation, a conversation of which no record at all exists: He kept none. He is a man who is in conflict with three other board members because he said that he told the board what took place. They say he did not; and the documents are against him. He is a man who is directly in conflict with the only written record made by him at the time; and that is the record that states 'it was possible for us to arrive at an amicable solution to our outstanding difficulties' .
What on earth would anyone think he meant by 'outstanding difficulties'? He was not referring to the sale of sewing machines; he was referring to the reason why the Minister sent him there. On that basis and on the basis of the inherent improbabilities that despite the instructions given to him, despite the specific purpose of the trip, despite the fact that the Minister was the person who initiated his trip, effectively, kicking him along, despite the terms of his letter, despite the fact that he apparently, in fact clearly, stated to directors that the Minister's request had been given effect to and despite the fact that it was a board decision anyway, we are meant to believe that he came back and said to the Minister: 'I had an excellent trip over there. 1 liked the Philippines. Send me up there some other time. I have come to an arrangement which is directly contrary to the instruction you gave me. I hope you will send me away for another holiday'. That is absolute nonsense.
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-I wish to make a personal explanation. I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-The Minister seeks to make a personal explanation; he may do so.
Mr NEWMAN-Earlier in this debate, the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) alleged that in regard to an earlier incident I had been forced by the National Country Party to come into this House to tell a lie. That incident was debated on the occasion of that allegation. It was refuted then; and 1 refute it now. It is totally false.
. Sitting suspended from 6.1 to 8 p.m.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (8.0)-The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), in his electorate talk on 12 March 1978, said:

1616 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

Without integrity-without the appearance and reality or integrity-no government can hope to have the confidence or
the people, or the trust or the people.

Mr BARRY JONES-Mr Speaker, in the con-

text I would have thought that it was entirely ap-

pro;riate, as I will show.

.

We were determined to restore Australian's raith in their national government---'-and in the pro~ess or government.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman

From the beginning, the government desired to reestablIsh the will use the proper term or I will ask him to re-

absolute propriety and unquestioned integrity that were a hallmark or the Menzies years in Australia.

sume his seat.

Earlier on, in a paper which he gave to the Australian Institute of Political Science in January 1972, the Prime Minister, then Minister for Education and Science, said:

Mr BARRY JONES-The finding against the Minister by the Senate Committee is at least as serious as the finding against Senator Withers was in 1978. Ironically, of course, Senator Withers is one of the members of the Senate Committee.

I start rrom the proposition that a minister has a collective responsibility, as a part or a government, and an individual re-

Mr Kerin-He made a telephone call.

sponsibility ror the affairs or his department.

Mr BARRY JONES-He was eliminated from

the Cabinet because he had made a telephone call.

- . . It is the minister and the government who make the policy and who are responsible ror it.

In the case of the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair), there have b~en; I think, attempts to grossly mislead the ParlIament, yet no actIOn

has been taken by the Prime Minister. The Cabi-

- . . But ir a major blunder occurred in a department, or net is paralysed by its fear of the honourable real importance to Australia, and ir the minis.te.r were unmemberfor Kooyong (Mr Peacock) and the fear

aware or it that minister should accept responsibilIty ror the expressed by so many Government back benchers

mistakes or his department and offer to resign.

that they are doomed in the 1983 ge~eral e!e~tion

Again, he said:
- . . ultimately the minister must answer that responsibility by a preparedness to resign ir the circumstances so require it.

unless they get rid of the present PrIme MInIster. The reason that the Minister for Industrial Re-
lations (Mr Viner) was in. so muc.h trouble is t.hat he was given a Dorothy Dlx questIOn by the Pnme

Since 1978 ministerial propriety has gone out the window. Senator Withers was dismissed in 1978 following a royal commission chaired by Mr Justice McGregor which found that Senator Withers was guilty of impropriety in respect of an el~ctor.al redistribution. But now, in the case of Mr S1OclaIr,
the Minister for equivocation, the Cabinet has decided to tough it out. As Senator Withers said on PM on Friday last, the greatest strength of the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) in his party is that 'he always brings his wounded home'. If someone is hanging on the barbed wire in noman's-land, the Deputy Prime Minister will bring him back. The same cannot be said of the Liberal Party and its leader, with the possible exception of the relationship of the Prime Minister to the Minister for industrial coercion, the worst brownnoser in the Parliament.

Minister delivered oracularly through the mouth of the honourable member for Kingston (Mr Chapman), and he then tabled documents which disclosed confidential information. It was rather like the Dorothy Dixers which were used last week in this House as a perversion of Question Time in an attempt to destroy the credibility of the New South Wales Government. Just as that exercise was misconceived, so the Dorothy Dixer addressed to the Minister for Industrial Relations on 15 September will undo him. The National Country Party takes the view that a National Country Party Minister can never be sacked no matter how inept he is or how badly he has performed. The National Country Party calls the shots . over the Prime Minister so far as the Minister for Communications is concerned-one of the 'Gang of Four' in the bucolocracy which rules Australia. The terms of reference of the royal commission

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable into the beef scandal were deliberately framed to

gentleman will use appropriate terms.

exclude any findings as to impropriety by the

Mr BARRY JONES-Recently, the Deputy Prime Minister, in his reaction to the report of the
Senate Standing Committee of Finance and Government Operations, criticised Liberal senators as being prejudiced. The finding against the Minister of equivocation by the Senate--

present Minister or the former Minister for Pri" mary Industry or by senior public servants. The terms of reference are completely different in scope to those in the Builders Labourers federation inquiry and different to those 10 the
McGregor royal commission which bro~ght do~n Senator Withers. Apparently numbers 10 the Lib-

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable eral Party are such that in the latest head count

gentleman will use the appropriate term.

the Prime Minister is now trailing the honourable

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1617

member for Kooyong. With supporters like the Minister for Industrial Relations and the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown), the Prime Minister's numbers are unlikely to improve. The Prime Minister has a band of followers as loyal as those of the Leader of the Opposition in New South Wales, Mr Bruce McDonald. I note an observation in Hansard on 1 April 1980 by the honourable member for Diamond Valley, the present Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, when he said:
We have the principle of ministerial responsibility under the system of government that was elected in free and fair elections in Rhodesia. It is a pity it is not practised more often here.
We might say 'Amen' to that. In the discussion earlier this afternoon, in the defence by the Prime Minister of the Minister for Communications there was an attempt to skate over the exchange between the Senate Committee and the Minister for Communications. The impression was created that there had just been a casual misunderstanding; that there was no real difference of opinion and that it was possible for an honest mistake to be made on both sides. I point out that there were nine stages in the conflict between the evidence of Mr Tony Webster, the then Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation and the evidence of the Minister for Communications about his term as the Minister for Primary Industry. I just mention the nine stages briefly to make sure that the House is fully conversant with what is in the report. The first stage was the evidence on oath of Mr Webster given on 18 February 1981. The relevant part is found on page 148 of the report at which Mr Webster is reported as saying:
I reported it-
That is, the details about excess skim milk powder and the problem of violating the terms on which the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade arrangement was operating-
back to the board; I reported it to the Minister; I took it upon myself as chairman to carry the responsibility for making the decision and making that knowledge available. Something had to be done. I did it and reported what I had done. Of course it was on my mind.
He then said:
The Minister noted what I said:
At page 150 of the report there is a letter dated 27 February 1981 from Senator Peter Rae, the Chairman of the Committee, inviting the Minister to make a submission in response, either in writing or orally. The third stage is the response from the Minister to Senator Rae dated 16 March 1981. The relevant part is on page 154 of the report.

This third stage is the first major evasion. The Minister replied:
I do not recall any discussion with Mr Webster on the nature of the outcome of the negotiations with HOMPI on the rebate following his return from Manila. Certainly, no evidence was provided to me to indicate that the ADC share of the credit in the rebate account was being used to continue the rebate in breach of the GATT minimum price. Such an arrangement, if known about, would have been totally unacceptable to the Government.
In other words, there was no indication that oral evidence would be provided. The letter, of course, could be regarded as a submission. The fourth stage is a letter from Senator Peter Rae to the Minister for Communications dated 25 March 1981. It is found on page 157 of the report. It states:
There is a clear discrepancy between the sworn evidence given by Mr Webster on this matter and your recollections as expressed in your letter of 16 March. I am writing on behalf of the Committee to ask if you would be prepared to repeat your recollections in the form of a statutory declaration to give them the same evidentiary value as the statements. made by Mr Webster. The Committee considers that in the interests of justice the evidence which so clearly contradicts Mr Webster's evidence should be provided on the same formal, sworn basis.
The fifth stage is in the form of a response from the Minister and is a letter dated 22 April 1981 which is found on page 158 of the report. The Minister stated:
My response to your earlier correspondence of the 16th March, 1981, was written as a Minister in accordance with the several Oaths taken relating to that office.
That is the second evasion. The next responsethe sixth stage-is a letter from Senator Rae to the Minister for Communications dated 6 May and is found on page 159 of the report. It states:
From our examination of the oaths taken by Ministers we are unable to see any declaration that would place written evidence given by a Minister on the same basis as sworn evidence.
I am therefore instructed to repeat the request made in my letter to you dated 25 March 1981 that you reconsider placing your recollections in the form of a statutory declaration to give them the same evidentiary value as the statements made by Mr Webster.
What is the response? The response-the seventh stage-is a personal explanation on 7 May in this House by the minister. He stated:
I do not believe it appropriate that a Minister of this House should appear and give sworn evidence before a committee of the other house. Therefore, I make this statement with respect to the evidence that I have tendered to that Committee in the Parliament and, of course, in accordance with my responsibilities to this Parliament.
What is left out? What is left out is the response to the request to make a statutory declaration. At that stage the Committee had not said 'appear'. It said: 'All right, put it on oath but put it on paper'. We have a complete evasion from the Minister. He declines even to advert to the specific point that was raised in the letter by Senator Peter Rae.

1618 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

The next stage-the eighth stage-is a letter on 12 May from the Minister to Senator Peter Rae in which he simply says that he stated the facts of the matter in the house and that that should have the same weight as a statutory declaration. Again there is a reluctance to put anything on paper, to sign it and to put it on oath. That is the fourth evasion. The ninth step in this process is a statement by Senator Rae to the Senate which is found on pages 164 to 166 of the report in which he goes through the whole matter and also points out that, from the point of view of the Committee, the evidence given was not very satisfactory.
It was pointed out quite correctly in debate this afternoon that the cross-examination of Mr Webster was perhaps not as rigorous as it might have been. I think it is fair to say that if the cross examination of Mr Webster was not as rigorous, not as thorough, as it would be if it were done now, this surely is because at the time the Committee was unaware that the Minister would be telling a different story. The committee had no reason to believe at that stage that what the Chairman was saying would be the subject of contention. It had no reason to assume that the Minister was going to deny it. The Minister at that stage had not spoken about it. The other point that is raised, of course, is the suggestion that the evidence of the Minister is strongly supported by Mr Wallace, the then and current First Assistant Secretary of the Industry No. 2 (Dairy Products) Division. I think in order to dispel the idea that the evidence of Mr Wallace was of particular assistance to the Minister,-I should just quote this statement which is found on page 172 of the report. This is Senator Evans's cross-examination of Mr Wallace which reads:
Senator EVANS-Can you answer me yes or no? Were you present at any meeting between the Minister and Mr Webster, after 19 November 1976, in which the matter of the Manila agreement was discussed?
Mr Wallace-To the very best of my recollection, no.
Senator EVANS-Your recollection has not been all that bad on other matters, Mr Wallace. Can you tell me without prefacing it by that phrase, yes or no.
Mr Wallace-I would have to say no categorically because the Minister said he did not discuss it with Mr Webster.
CHAIRMAN-Mr Wallace, I think it would be fair for me, as Chairman, to say that the laughter that followed your last answer was at, not with you. I wonder whether we could try to keep this inquiry on some basis which one could expect out of a very senior public servant and not have it turned into some sort of farce.
Mr Nixon-Keep on reading.
Mr BARRY JONES-The report then went on to say:
Mr Wallace-My comments were not meant to be facetious, I can assure you of that.

CHAIRMAN. The questions are being directed to you, asking you to exercise your memory as to what happened.
Mr Nixon-Yes, keep on going.
Mr BARRY JONES-The Minister will have the opportunity to keep on reading if he wishes. He will see that what I have quoted is absolutely in context. I think the fact that there was a unanimous view in the Committee of the unreliability of Mr WalIace's evidence needs to be stressed. That is an important point.
This is a government which is notoriously unreliable so far as its word is concerned. We were assured that there would be no re-imposition of tertiary fees but the razor gang put an end to that. It is not very long since the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs was giving fulI encouragement for extending projects for the Community Youth Support Scheme and now it has been terminated. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) promised last March that there would be no increases in indirect taxes unless there were substantial reductions in income tax. Now we have massive increases in sales tax and income tax colIections that will rise by 22 per cent this year. The Prime Minister has promised lower interest rates; they are now at their highest level ever.
The method of toughing it out, which has been adopted by the Minister for Communications and also by the Minister for Industrial Relations is the only approach that the Government is trying. In the case of the Minister for Communications it has been a direct attack against members of the Committee. Senator Rae is attacked because he is known to be a Fraser opponent. Senator Withers is attacked because he is not exactly in the Fraser camp. However, the Committee was unanimous in the report. The report includes the support of one of the Prime Minister's strongest allies, Senator Austin Lewis. It is nonsense for the Minister for Communications to try to rely on his ministerial and Executive Council oaths to put his evidence on the same basis as Mr Webster. If the Minister does not want the evidence to be tested on an equal basis he should set up either a royal commission or a select committee of this House which will be able to hear his evidence on oath. As Senator Rae pointed out, either Mr Webster lied on oath or the Minister has lied in the House. Either possibility-they are the only possibilities-leads to serious consequences. If Mr Webster lied under oath then charges must be brought against him for perjury. If the Minist~r for Communications lied to the House then he IS unfit to remain as a Minister. The Government wishes to have it both ways. It is trying to tough it out in respect of the Minister but to take no action against Mr Webster. The Government tells us

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1619

that the Minister did not lie in the House. If that is the case the Government really has little other alternative but to charge Mr Webster.
This Government will do anything to try to stay in office. It proved itself to be disaster-prone. It is reeling down the corridors of power. It is a danger to itself, a threat to the democratic process and a menace to Australia. It is positively phosphorescent with corruption. It needs to be exposed. If the Government wants to bring on an early election there is nothing that would be welcomed more by the Opposition. In 1975 we heard much talk about reprehensible circumstances. A number of Ministers, then leading members of the Opposition, used every weapon they could against the then government. In the present circumstances, the least that the Government can do is to apply some consistency in the way in which it operates the Government. If Senator Withers had to go then it seems absolutely appropriate that the Deputy Leader of the National Country Party should also go. It is even more appropriate that the Minister for Industrial Relations should go. I think the way in which he used the forms of the House to prejudice the future of a distinguished member of the Liberal Party was contemptible. I think it has caused outrage within the back bench of the Liberal Party. I know that members of the National Country Party are not really sensitive on these moral issues and are more prone to tough it out, but I think some of the sensitive souls on the back bench of the Liberal Party are concerned about them. I think it is appalling. The Government should resign. I hope that the House will carry this censure motion.
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (8.20)-The previous speaker, the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones), made a number or errors during his speech, one of which was that either Mr Webster had perjured himself or the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) had misled the House. The fact is that the Government has not said that Mr Webster perjured himself. What we have said in this debate to this point is that the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations did not follow up his failure to answer questions specifically and categorically. That should be on the record. The Opposition simply launched this censure motion to try to make some political capital out of the report of that Committee on the Australian Dairy Corporation and its Asian subsidiaries. The trouble is that I doubt that the Opposition has really tried to analyse the report. It believes that abuse will beat truth and that if enough mud is thrown some of it

will stick. The fact is that the matters in this report dealing with my colleague the Minister for Communications are pretty thin. The Opposition thinks that there is mileage in it and by latching on to this aspect of the report the Opposition really is demonstrating how shallow it is.
The Committee has unequivocally supported evidence given by Mr Webster on the General Agreement on Tarriffs and Trade breach issue rather than that of Mr Sinclair, a Minister of the Crown, and two other people, Mr O'Bryan and Mr Wallace. On page 174 of its report the Committee states:
We have weighed up all the . . . evidence set out above . . . the Committee concludes that on the balance of probabilities, Mr Sinclair's recollection of the events was not as reliable as that of Mr Webster.
The Committee's main reasons for such findings are seemingly that Mr Sinclair refused to give sworn evidence and that the evidence given by Mr Wallace was guarded, qualified and evasive. On the first point, the Committee has rejected Mr Sinclair's argument that his evidence was given as a Minister in accordance with the several oaths related to his office. But it has accepted the significance of Mr Sinclair's stating his case in a personal explanation to the Parliament on 7 May. On page 168 of the report the Committee stated:
. . . he confirmed his recollections in clear and unequivocal terms in his statement to the House of Representatives. This was certainly a very serious step on his part because of the sanctions which can be imposed on a Minister, and a member, for misleading the House.
The Committee, therefore, recognised that Mr Sinclair's statement was of major significance. It even went on to spell out in some detail the sanctions which are available to the Parliament in dealing with someone who has misled the House. Having accepted the gravity and significance of what Mr Sinclair had done in making a statement to the Parliament, the Committee still chose to prefer Mr Webster's evidence because it had been made as sworn evidence before the Committee. Turning to the evidence as provided in the Committee's report, one is bound to make the observation that if, as the Committee finds, Mr Wallace's evidence was:
. . . so guarded and qualified, and his manner so evasive, that far from providing unqualified support for Mr Sinclair's versions of the events, Mr Wallace at best only offered luke-warm and tentative confirmation-
Then so too was the evidence given by Mr Webster. According to the evidence reproduced in the Committee's report, Mr Webster at no stage categorically stated that he had told Mr Sinclair that the GATT minimum was still being breacheq in spite of a request by Mr Sinclair that the Corporation should renegotiate the arrangements so as to

1620 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

observe the GATT minimum price. According to the transcript, Senator Evans asked:
What did you tell the Minister about the outcome of your Manila negotiations on November IS?
Mr Webster said:
I told the Minister the basis on which we had negotiated.
Throughout this interview with the Committee, Mr Webster answered specific questions with such responses as: 'The details were given orally'; 'I advised the Minister of the facts'; and 'I could not honestly recollect specifically what the conversation was'. Let me repeat that: 'I could not honestly recollect specifically what the conversation was'. Nowhere has Webster categorically confirmed that the Minister was told that the breach was continuing. If anything his answers were guarded, qualified and evasive. Also, it might well be asked: Why did the Committee not seek from Mr Webster during this interview two fundamental facts-when did his alleged meeting with Mr Sinclair take place and where did it take place? What sort of committee inquiry was this? Those questions seem to be fairly fundamental to the argument and yet they were not asked at the time.
The second aspect of this particular piece of evidence is the question of whether a departmental officer was present at a meeting with Mr Sinclair and Mr Webster. Again we find that Mr Webster is unable to be categoric. The transcript reads:
Senator EVANS- . . . I want to clarify whether any actual minute was taken by anyone present of the discussion with the Minister.
Mr Webster-l personally never took minutes of any of my discussions with the Minister.
Senator EVANS-Do you know if any officer of the Department of Primary Industry was present during that discussion?
Mr Webster-l think so, but I would not be categoric.
Mr Webster on two other occasions during that part of the evidence said that he could not be categoric or specific. Yet the Committee decided that a meeting had taken place, that a departmental officer was present and that Mr Sinclair was told of the continuing GATT breach. Let us see what Mr Wallace had to say on this. I noticed that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) heaped abuse on Mr Wallace while invoking references to the Senate Committee report but did not quote from the evidence. Senator Evans asked MrWallace:
Can you answer me yes or no? Were you present at any meeting between the Minister and Mr Webster after 19 November 1976, in which the matter of the Manila agreement was discussed?
Mr Wallace said:

To the very best of my recollection, no.
There is nothing very evasive or vague about that, but it did not satisfy the Committee. Even in answer to a question from Senator Lewis, Mr Wallace replied:
I did not attend any meeting.
The honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) was also very selective in his quotations this afternoon, but we cannot deny the firmness of Mr Wallace's reply:
I did not attend any meeting.
The Committee persisted. It is almost as though it was trying to force some other answer fromMr Wallace. Looking closely at the evidence, it is hard to justify why the Committee considered Mr Wallace's evidence to be guarded and qualified and yet not Mr Webster's. Furthermore, why did the Committee choose to prefer Mr Webster's evidence on this point rather than Mr Sinclair's when, in another section of the report, the Committee finds that Mr Webster's evidence is highly suspect? In.the section dealing with the provision of a motor car to Mr Pyle, the Committee states on page 346:
The opinions quoted by Mr Webster and Mr Pyle are riddled with inaccuracies.
The question must be asked: How can the Committee see credibility in one part of Mr Webster's evidence when it crucifies it in another part? Senator Rae, speaking on PM on 17 September, said of Mr Wallace's evidence, in relation to the question of whether or not there was a meeting between Mr Sinclair and Mr Webster:
That was probably the worst piece of evidence I have ever had the misfortune to hear given.
That is far stronger than the Committee's finding that Mr Wallace's evidence 'at best only offered luke-warm and tentative confirmation' and is nowhere near as strong as the finding that Mr Webster's evidence, in relation to Mr Pyle's car, was 'riddled with inaccuracies'. Again on Natiollwide on 17 September we findSerialor Rae referring to the 'unqualified way in which Mr Webster gave evidence'. As I have shown, there is nothing unqualified about that evidence. So much for that aspect of the report.
Let me now turn to the broader issues that are contained in it. Let me stress that I believe there are some valid recommendations in the report which I will refer to later. Nonetheless, there is little new in the report that the Government has not been aware of and that the Government has not been acting on for some considerable time. Of course, it ought to be remembered that this report was initiated only because leaked sections of the Auditor-General's reports were tabled in the Senate. Over past months I have maintained the view of the Auditor-General who, in a letter to the then Minister for Primary Industry dated 6 September 1979, wrote:

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1621

It is a convention for my reports on accounts and records to a Minister to be treated as 'confidential' and I cannot recall an occasion when such a report has been tabled in the Parliament.
An initial report was received from the Auditor General on 3 August 1979. A second report was received on 19 September 1979. The Auditor General had been requested by the previous Minister, Mr Sinclair, on 28 March 1979, to carry out such an audit-I ask honourable members to note that the Auditor-General was requested. by the previous Minister-on the grounds that it might be helpful to the Government's considerations in reviewing the future roles and functions of Asia

done. Fourthly, all future variations to the salary rates and conditions of service of Hong Kong staff
and expatriate staff employed by ADI should be
considered and determined by the full board of
ADI as opposed to the previous practice where these were determined by the chairman. This re-
quirement has been implemented. Fifthly, future borrowings by ADI are to be subject to guidelines
developed by me and the Treasurer (Mr
Howard). These are in the final stages of development. In the meantime, no borrowings are being
approved without the specific approval of both
myself and the Treasurer.

Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Limited. That is Sixthly, investments by ADI are to accord with

widely known which does make the Senate Comguidelines determined by me. These are being

mittee's statement on page 2 of its report somefinalised along with the borrowing guidelines. In

what strange to understand. The Committee said: the meantime, no investments are taking place

For reasons which have not been made entirely clear to the without my specific approval. Seventhly, proCommittee . . . the Minister for Primary Industry . cedures are to be clearly established governing the

instructed the Auditor-General on 28 March 1979 to underconditions of overseas travel and acquittal of

take an audit under section 63p of the Audit Act 1901.

travel expenses for the chairman, board members

The fact is the reasons were quite clear as I have and staff of AD!. New procedures have been

just explained. Following receipt of the final implemented. Eighthly, a clear policy is to be

Auditor-General's report on 19 September 1979, stipulated for the payment of dividends and

the Government and the Department of Primary retained earnings of AD!. A specific policy has

Industry have taken a great number of initiatives been introduced. Ninthly, the charging of expen-

to ensure that the matters raised by the Auditorditure and the allocation of costs between ADC,

General were thoroughly and properly invesADI and the joint venture companies are to be

tigated and that the appropriate action was taken delineated. This has been established by the

where necessary.

boards of ADC and AD!. Tenthly, annual fees

The reports dealt with two distinct aspects: paid to directors of ADI are to be approved by the Firstly, managerial control and accounting pracboard of the ADC and advised to me. This protices of ADI and, secondly, the appropriateness of cedure has been implemented. The eleventh point

certain expenditure by the former Chairman of is that guidelines for meeting and accounting for ADI, Mr Webster. With regard to the first point, entertainment expenses are to be determined by the ADC established a special management comthe board of AD!. This has been done.

mittee to examine all aspects of the Auditor-
General's reports dealing with managerial and accounting practices of ADI. The ADC reported to me on 26 October 1979 recommending courses of
action that could be taken to meet the Auditor General's requirements.

Some of the matters of management control or accountability to which the Auditor-General made reference have been the subject of a degree of public debate. In particular, the arrangements which ADI entered into with the ADC subsidiary in Thailand, Thai Dairy Industry Ltd, which

After close examination of the recommenresulted in the possible evasion of Thai taxation,

dations, I concluded that action along the followwas widely reported. I put on public record that

ing lines should overcome the deficiencies in the the Government is most concerned that agencies

management and financial control of AD!. or statutory authorities abide by the letter and in-

Firstly, there should be a clear definition of the tent of the laws of the countries in which they op-

powers, authorities and delegations of ADC and erate. While the validity of the particular arrange-

ADI boards and management. This has been ment, for taxation purposes, was not tested in law,

done. The position in respect of each body is now action nevertheless was put in hand to terminate

clearly defined. Secondly, there should be an the practice as soon as it was brought to the atten-

upgrading of systems documentation and aption of the Government and of the boards of the

proval processes. A revised system of budgetary ADC and ADI. After consultations between rep-

control and improved documentation standards resentatives of ADC and Thai Dairy Industries

has been introduced. Thirdly, procedures and with Thai government authorities, it was agreed

controls in the Hong Kong office should be that the tax as calculated by Thai tax authorities

streamlined and made efficient. This has been would be paid. This has been done.

1622 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

I have given the outlines of actions that the Government has taken as a result of the Auditor General's reports. I will go into greater specific detail in the statement that I will be making to the Parliament when my Department has received the police report into the appropriateness of certain expenditure by the former chairman of AD!. Only then will I be in a proper position to make a fully detailed statement. I will table all relevant documents, as I have said on past occasions. I believe the broad outline that I have given does, however, clearly demonstrate that many of the points raised by the Senate Committee have already been rectified. It also completely disproves the statement by the Committee on page 202 of its report which, in referring to the Auditor-General's report, states:
The report was referred to the ADC by the Minister for Primary Industry for appropriate action. However, so far as the Committee is aware, The ADC has not yet completed any necessary action nor reported to the Minister on its progress.
It says: 'So far as the Committee is aware'. How could the Committee be aware when it did not ask any questions about the issues. The fact is that the Committee made no effort to find out what changes in procedures had been made. It asked a few general questions but made no effort to find out specifically what changes had been made to the relationship between the ADC and the ADI and their relationship to the Department of Primary Industry. I think the Leader of the Opposition demonstrated, in his speech, that he is too lazy or too incompetent to check. He simply attacked me and stupidly and offensively attacked officers of my Department who cannot reply. The fact is that actions have been taken. The Corporation has been consistently reporting to me. It has been working in close co-operation with me and with my Department to ensure that appropriate actions are taken to overcome the deficiencies noted by the Auditor-General.
Honourable members will recall that, acting on , legal advice, I requested my Department to report certain matters relating to the appropriateness of certain expenditure of the former chairman of ADI to the Australian Federal Police. That was done on 13 August 1980. The police provided my Department with a report on 24 October 1980. This was referred to the Crown Solicitor for advice. The Crown Solicitor advised that there were some aspects which required further police investigations. These matters were referred to the police on 21 November 1980. Since then, further investigations have been carried out. There have
been consultations between the police, my Department and the Crown Solicitors' office. I

expect that the police will be reporting to my Department in the near future.
I turn now to the attack that has been made on the credibility of the Department of Primary Industry and particularly on its senior officers. I think the Senate Committee has been unduly harsh and, indeed, totally unfair, in its findings on Mr Wallace who is a fine public servant and who has given great service to primary industry of this country. He has the respect of the farming industries. He is certainly not deserving of the grubby criticisms that have come from the Committee or from members of the Opposition, particularly in the way the Committee has supported Mr Webster's evidence and condemned Mr Wallace's. It is also clear from what I have stated, that many initiatives have already been taken in regard to the ADC and ADI of which the Committee was obviously not aware. It is a fact that Mr Wallace has devoted a great deal of his time over the past three years to this subject. It has been of tremendous concern to him, the Secretary of my Department and to me as Minister.
The Opposition has now found it opportune to try to link so-called bureaucratic inefficiencies over Asia Dairy Industries with the problems we faced over the recent meat substitution issue. Of course, it is easy to accuse when sitting on the Opposition benches. But the truth is that the facts do not substantiate the claims. In fact, as the honourable member for Calare (Mr MacKenzie) pointed out last week, within 19 days of Australia being advised of the original substantiated notification of horsemeat substitution, the issue had been wrapped up. We had instigated a top priority police investigation and charges have already been made against one man. We have secured the release of the bulk of Australian meat that was being withheld from the market in the United States. We set up a royal commission into the meat industry. Our meat export trade to the United States is back to a normal footing. All of our actions have been taken in close co-operation with the United States authorities. They have expressed satisfaction with the way we have moved properly, promptly and decisively on the issue.
The real test of our actions is reflected in the price in the United States for Australian beef. It is fact that it is now dearer than it was prior to the discovery of horsemeat. Given all the actions that we have taken on this issue in a very short space of time, for anyone toclaim bureaucratic inefficiency is just plain stupidity and shows a gross ignorance of the facts. The whole approach taken by the Opposition on the meat issue, as with the Senate Committee report, is purely political. I

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1623

believe that it is the Opposition that should be censured.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-I understand that the honourable member for Fremantle wishes to make a personal explanation. Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-Mr Deputy Speaker; while you were in the chair, and I was speaking earlier in this debate, I was called on to withdraw an allegation. I said that the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) had been in receipt of stolen money. He called on me to withdraw that. At the time. I said to him that he had admitted that. I want to read from Hansard of 7 June 1979--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member is debating a ruling of the Chair. The Chair called on the honourable member to withdraw the statement as it was in contr,avention of the Standing Orders. The honourable member now seeks to make a personal explanation on the score of having been misrepresented. The Chair is not persuaded that the honourable member has an entitlement under the circumstances.
Mr Spender-Mr Deputy Speaker, that is not and cannot be a point of order. It is simply an attempt to canvass the ruling and to go back over--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER~Order! The honourable members for North Sydney and Fremantle will resume their seats. The honourable member for North Sydney had no need to take a point of order. He virtually echoed the Chair's remarks in relation to a request of a member to make a personal explanation on the score of being misrepresented. The Chair rules that there is no application of that provision in the circumstances indicated by the honourable member for Fremantle. The Chair does not extend indulgence to the honourable member to make the explanation.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (8.42)-We have just heard another tedious speech from another senior Minister, this time the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon). We have heard a few of them in this deba.te. The speeches, which were written over the weekend and read in this Parliament, do not apply themselves to the arguments of this debate. They simply seek to save the collective skins of the Ministers of this discredited Government. Like other written speeches, including that of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), the speech of the Minister for Primary Industry not only did not properly apply itself to

the Opposition's censure motion but also was a waste of time for this Parliament. There was a lit-
any of what the Auditor-General reported and what is now, belatedly, being done. We on this side of the Parliament, and I believe the majority of people in this country, are now interested not so much in what is being done after the horse has bolted as in what will be done to improve the administration of ministries such as the one of the Minister for Primary Industry to make sure that these sorts of incompetent blunders do not occur in future.
The essence of the Opposition's censure motion is the failure to ensure proper and adequate standards by senior Ministers, such as the Minister for Primary Industry, before the problem is upon us. It is their duty to see that the administration of their departments prevents these things from happening. We do not want a whole day of this Parliament to be taken up by Ministers coming here with speeches prepared hours ago in their offices by someone and trying to whitewash the situation. We want to hear what they will do about improving their administration. The case put forward today by the Opposition has been overwhelmingly that their administration needs vastly greater attention than it has been getting.-
So far we have concentrated on the performance of the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) in the role of Minister for Primary Industry and of the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner). But we may well have focused our attention on the Minister for Primary Industry to a far greater extent. There ought to be other opportunities in this Parliament for us to do just that, as was promised last week. As far as I know the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations has not yet been tabled in this Parliament. We expect to get another opportunity to debate the shocking events that have unfolded in that report and to get a further whitewashing effort from the Minister as he seeks to explain away something that is inexplicable.
In passing, let us look at the Minister's administration. He administers the Australian Wheat Board. There have been scandals there. He administers the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation. At least he had the decency to remind us in the course of his remarks of last week's scandal there. Now we have the scandal about the Australian Dairy Corporation. I repeat, we will hold our fire on him. Other opportunities will be available to us and I trust that they will be available to us very soon. Most importantly, to get the censure motion into perspective, it is vital to recognise the sinister role of the Prime Minister in the lousy

1624 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

administration of this country. I will return to the details of that a little later. To set the scene, let me suggest to the House four valid grounds for a censure motion of this sort. There may be many others, but I will suggest just four. The first one is incompetence. If ever we have seen a story of incompetence unfolded we have seen it today in the case put forward by Opposition speakers in this censure debate. We have seen it in relation to the performance of the Minister for Industrial Relations and of the Minister for Primary Industry. I will come back later to those details.
The second valid reason for a censure motion is the misleading of this Parliament. We do not want people who peddle untruths to govern us. We have standards and traditions to maintain in this Parliament and we have conventions to help us to maintain those standards and traditions. I believe the vast majority of the people in this country will
agree with the assertion that those standards have been sorely tried by the Administration that this country of ours is suffering under at the present time. A third criterion for a censure motion is major blunders of the Administration. Could there be any questioning of this as a ground for censuring a government? We are all about good administration in a parliament and seeking to improve the lives of those we represent. Poor administration and the sorts of blunders that have been highlighted today will not achieve anything in the way of improving the standard of living of those we represent. The fourth criterion I want to draw to the attention of this House is, of course, another valid ground for a censure motion. It is the plotting to cover up the blunders. If we ever have had evidence of plotting to cover up blunders, we have it in what has unfolded today in this debate. This smacks legitimately of sinister plots and conspiracies to cover up the truth. It is an enemy of good government. We should not allow any Administration to get away with this sort of thing.
I will now examine in greater detail the evidence that has been exposed today in the light of those standards which I have laid down as being proper criteria to judge whether a government should be censured. I will start with the actions of the present-I hope temporary-Minister for Industrial Relations. The incontrovertible facts of this miserable episode that has unfolded around him are as follows: He told a House of Representatives Estimates committee within the last fortnight that when he took over the Ministry in April he was not pleased with the progress that had been made by his predecessor in relation to the deregistration of the Builders Labourers Federation. That case was put forward at the meeting of

that committee by the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) and the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke). In short, they mauled him at the committee meeting and he came away so chagrined that he wanted to do something to try to re-establish his reputation. Consequently, he set up a question without notice which, incidentally abused the forms of the House.
The question was put by the honourable member for Kingston (Mr Chapman) on Tuesday 15 September. The express purpose of the question was to enable an answer to be given denigrating the honourable member for Kooyong. The fight for leadership in the Liberal Party takes its toll. I think it is a proper role of an Opposition to seek, in the best way possible, to minimise the toll for the ordinary people in this country and to try to bring matters to a head so that we can get some resolution of the fight quickly and get on with good government. The happiest resolution would be to call an election. We would very much challenge the Government to do just this following one scandal after another. The gist of the answer to the honourable member for Kingston by the Minister for Industrial Relations was:
. . . I think it is appropriate that J place some facts on the record so as to show the circumstances surrounding preparation of the case and the state of unpreparedness when I assumed responsibility for the portfolio.
If ever there was a charge of incompetence on his predecessor, it was in those words. The state of unpreparedness is nothing more nor less than an attack on his Liberal colleague and part of that faction fight that I have already made reference to. Let me place on record that I hold no brief for the honourable member for Kooyong. He is a personable fellow, but I believe he is a political lightweight trying to be all things to all men. I have said it and I mean just that. The sooner he gets the job and the people learn what the pros know, the better. Having said that, I do not condone in any way the actions of the Minister for Industrial Relations. These faction fights lead to bad government. I repeat that it is the job of the Opposition to try to do something about bringing this to a head so we have some resolution and can get on with the good administration of this country.
So far the faction fight in this context has led to two blunders. We have the document which has been incorporated in Hansard. It has done enormous damage to Costain Australia Ltd, the company named in it. It was a shocking blunder and, indeed, it has cost not only that company dearly but also the building trade enormously. That is just one fall-out from this episode in this faction fight. But there is another blunder. Earlier

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1625

in this debate today we learned from the honourable member for Wills that the unpreparedness charge was just not true. He is expecting a document to be published tomorrow, I believe it is in tomorrow's Bulletin-we hope it has got the document in detail-stating that there was a report to Cabinet early in May which disclosed a situation quite contrary to the one which has been suggested by the Minister for Industrial Relations in the answer to the question from the honourable member for Kingston. It is quite contrary not only to that answer but also to what the Minister was seeking to persuade on his colleagues in the House of Representatives Estimates committee, namely, that this report to the Cabinet, allegedly early in May, states that the Minister was satisfied that progress was being properly achieved in the Builders Labourers Federation case and indeed, that the Cabinet should rest assured that all had been done that should have been done. That is a completely opposite point of view from the one put to this House by the Minister. We assert that there is this conflict. No doubt there will be more details of the document in the publication tomorrow. But, indeed, the evidence is there already of misleading this chamber.
Let me examine this whole episode concerning the Minister for Industrial Relations in the light of the criteria I have laid down. Of course there was incompetence in the tabling of that document. There was a betraying of Costain's trust. There must have been some misleading of the Parliament. Either the Minister misled his colleagues in this Parliament when he issued that memorandum to the Cabinet early in May, or, indeed, as part of the campaign against the honourable member for Kooyong he misled this Parliament in the answer to the question from the honourable member for Kingston and in the Estimates committee. That is the second criterion fulfilled as to why this censure motion should be agreed to.
This is a major blunder. What confidence will Costain or anyone else in the building industry have after the sorts of blunders and cover-ups that have been perpetrated by this Minister? What pathetic responses we have received today from him and the Prime Minister in relation to this affair.
More importantly, I suppose we should focus on the Prime Minister's response because, indeed, the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) had originally asked for that document to be tabled. In his reply today the Prime Minister sought to persuade this Parliament that, indeed, it was the fault of the Opposition, the fault of the honourable member for Melbourne Ports, that Costain had suffered an adversity. What rot that

was. Words fail me to sum up properly one's feelings at being treated like a child. Every member in this House was treated like a child by the response which the Prime Minister of this nation gave earlier today. If it were not so serious one would have to split one's sides laughing.
The Minister himself was little better. Apparently there is some significance, he believes, in the document incorporated being prepared by an independent source and not by him, his office or his Department. I suppose it was prepared in the Industrial Relations Bureau or somewhere like that. So what! The significance of the independence of the author of the document escapes me completely. I am sure it would escape any objective observer of this situation in this House today. It contained confidential material, and whether it had 'confidential' written on the top of it or not of course it was confidential and it was damaging to have it not only tabled in this House but also incorporated in Hansard. That information was damaging not only to Costainbut also, as I said earlier, to the whole building industry. I believe that for this reason alone the Minister should resign or should be sacked.
The other criterion is the cover-up. Like the Prime Minister's cover-up, it was based on seeking to achieve defence by the best form of attack. It was stated that because the Builders Labourers Federation was advantaged by the blunders, somehow this was the fault of the Opposition. That is the simplistic line put forward by this Government in seeking to defend itself from its incompetence. Let it be warned that the people will not stomach these sorts of responses. I believe that tomorrow's newspapers will tell the story as to what objective observers in this building think of the sort ofresponse from Ministers on this issue.
Mr Scott-They will be exposed.
Mr HURFORD-They will be exposed. I move from that blunder to the blunder by the Minister for Communications. Here we have the words, the attitudes and the months of consider~ ation of a hard working, competent group of senators pitted against a group of Government Ministers kicking wildly with their backs to the wall not minding whom they hurt unjustly as they lash out seeking to defend themselves. Let us focus on this for a little longer. This was not a new committee; it was a highly thought of committee made up of senators from both sides of this Parliament. There was Senator Peter Rae, the Chairman of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations. His name has become well known among politically aware

1626 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

people for his work on the Senate Select Committe on Securities and Exchange. There was Senator Reg Withers, another Liberal, formerly a senior Liberal Minister, and Senator Austin Lewis, a Liberal from Wannon itself: He is not somebody known to be a critic of this Government or this Prime Minister; he is identified, indeed, with the Prime Minister. He has had to agonise over these decisions. There were senators Gareth Evans, Doug McClelland and Ron McAuliffe from my-own side of the Parliament. They were all senior Labor senatorii..
The result of their work has not been a hasty report. They found a bad state of affairs in the Australian Dairy Corporation. They found evidence of corruption. An amount of $675,000 has been mentioned as being stacked away into private bank accounts. Who has been the beneficiary of these illegal funds? They found that rebates had been paid illegally in contravention of our Australian obligations under international trade agreements. They found, having weighed up the evidence very carefully and having agonised over it, that the then Minister for Primary Industry, now the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair), on the balance of probability knew that these rebates were being paid illegally. What do we get in response to this carefully thought through report of senior members of the Senate? The Prime Minister and senior Ministers of his Government follow the principle that attack is the best form of defence. They vilify anybody who comes in their way and those who have conscientiously and painstakingly come to very wellconsidered conclusions.
One can see no benefit for Senator Lewis, for instance, in coming to the conclusion to which he came. I repeat that he came to it on the balance of the evidence. I believe that that episode also shows how the criteria of incompetence, misleading the Parliament, a major blunder and a cover-up all make this an occasion when the Government should be censured. I hope the House will now take very carefully into consideration the considered views of the Senate report and what will be published very shortly in relation to the attempts of the Minister for Industrial Relations to mislead the Parliament. I hope that if the censure motion is not successful on this occastion it will not be long before this Government falls.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has
,expired.
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence) (9.2)-My friend the honourable member

for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) began his speech with a gentle rebuke contending that a number of speeches had been compiled over the weekend and read in the House. I am not in a position to offer any view on that but I am bound to say to my honourable friend that I was left the distinct impression that his speech had been put together on the spur of the last 72 hours. At least his speech was refreshing.
Mr Scott-Yours is an old one. We have heard it before.
Mr KILLEN-The honourable member for Hindmarsh would put himself to better advantage if he were to bring an interpreter into the House. The honourable member for Adelaide at least was refreshing. He eschewed what I can describe only as the thoroughly unwelcome and jarring vulgarity of a number of speakers who have spoken for the Opposition in this debate. I think I am at liberty to say that after nearly 26 years in this place with you, Mr Speaker, I can understand the spirit and motive of those who seek to make political capital out of issues. I can understand tremendously the debate today. I have sat in this chamber, save for the dinner break, since a quarter to two and I have listened to every speech. I can understand my friends opposite seeking to make political capital out of this debate but if this is a political occasion, nonetheless is it a great parliamentary occasion. In the views I have to offer to this House this evening, if I speak on behalf of the Government, I want to say, with all the earnestness at my command, that if I had the opportunity and found any of my friends opposite in the same predicament in which I find my distinguished and right honourable friend the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) this evening, I would seek to speak on his or her behalf.
The fountain of origin of this debate is to be found in a report produced by the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations on the Australian Dairy Corporation and its Asian subsidiaries. There has been conferred on this report all those insinuating qualities of secular infallibility. Honourable members have implied: 'Here is the report. That is all you have to worry about'. I have been reminded as I have sat in the chamber throughout the day that four lawyers sat on the Committee and that a fortiori that adds to the substance and the value of the report. For myself, the fact that four lawyers sat on that Committee adds to what I can describe only as their answerability to the Parliament and to the country for one of the most atrociously prepared reports I have seen in my time in the Parliament. The principal finding of this report is that on the

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1627

balance of probabilities the evidence of a gentleman rejoicing in the name of Mr Webster-I do not know him from Adam-is to be preferred to the word of the Minister for Communications.
Mr Campbell-That is right.
Mr KILLEN-I am indebted to have the honourable member's support in this. He is bringing in the profound knowledge of Western Australia. I am grateful to him for that. This Committee did not set out to make a recommendation to the government of the day as to whether something should or should not be done. It came to the Senate with a finding which seeks to disturb the status, honour and reputation of a member of the Parliament. This is no ordinary committee. By its very nature it set out as a quasi-judicial committee. Witnesses were sworn. The whole of its proceedings were thoroughly legalistic. Although I am bound to join with my honourable and learned friend, the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender) who spoke earlier this afternoon, I have the greatest of difficulty in distinguishing whether the legalism which has intruded into this report does much credit to the legal profession. It saddens me to say that, in this instance, this body with four lawyers on it had an infinitely greater responsibility to observe what I can describe only as a judicial approach to its problems. Was there a judicial approach? I have never seen the principles of judicial inquiry outraged in so precise a fashion as this. This inquisitorial body, which is the proper description of it, outraged what I regard as fundamental legal principles.
If the Parliament takes the view that a body of this nature can proceed in this fashion without challenge we have lost our nerve, verve and character to be indignant. Members of the Commfttee failed to observe the fundamental principles of justice, in particular the two principles of natural justice. Beyond that they made a finding which was contrary to the evidence and against the weight of the evidence. It is not an appelate body. It is a body of first instance that has made a very serious finding against my right honourable friend. According to the report seven members of the Committee were associated with this inquiry. In point of fact there were eight. The Committee could not even get that fact right. My honourable friend the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) said this evening that some members were present on more occasions than others. I refer to two witnesses. I take Mr Webster. He was before the Committee for one day. Three members of the Committee did not see Mr Webster. They did not hear him utter one word. I have practised in some

very strange courts. If the manner and the demeanour--
Mr Holding-You have a very strange brief now.
Mr KILLEN-At least I have got off people with a greater command of integrity than some of the people who seek to pretend that this is a respectable report. What would my honourable friends opposite say if they were in this position where their honour and character were being assailed on the basis that three Committee members had not seen or heard a witness? Would the honourable member for Kalgoorlie (Mr Campbell) who is trying to interject like to have his reputation assailed on the basis of a witness not being seen or heard by three members of a committee? I come now to the evidence Of Mr Wallace.
Mr Hurford-You are coming to a conclusion?
Mr KILLEN-I listened to the honourable gentleman in silence. I wish that he could find that sense of courage to listen to what I have to say. Mr Wallace appeared before the Committee on four days. On three days, three members did not hear one word he had to say and did not see him. On the fourth day two members did not see him and did not hear him. What sort of a tribunal outside the Parliament would proceed in this fashion? If this Committee, acting as a tribunal, was not protected by Parliament and proceeded in this fashion, it would be stopped dead in its tracks by a superior court. I go further--
Mr Dawkins-Why didn't you go before it?
Mr KILLEN-This was the point of these inquiries. As I said, this inquiry outraged natural justice. During the debate this afternoon I heard various honourable members chiming in: 'The Minister for Communications did not give evidence on oath'. I have never listened to a more superficial, atrocious or, if I may say so, demeaning argument as far as this House is concerned. My right honourable friend was in no position to give evidence on oath before this Committee. Such is the quality of professionalism of this Committee that it made not one reference to the great dilemma in which he was placed. I remember when the former Leader of the Opposition, whose memory I revere, the late Right Honourable Arthur Calwell, said: 'You will rue the day when these committees are set up in the Senate'. He criticised in a very trenchant fashion the then Senator Murphy for what had been done: My right honourable friend was inno position to give evidence on oath before this Committee. He cannot waive his privilege of his own volition. It is not his privilege to waive; it is the privilege of this

1628 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Fraser Government

House and this Parliament. 1 do not remember one person inside or outside this House suggesting that the right honourable gentleman should waive his privilege.
Beyond that 1 want to ask: Has this House of Representatives brought itself to the stage where it will respond like a sheepdog to any call by the Senate for honourable members to appear before it? A Senate committee is a part of the Senate. That must be identified. 1 believe it is high time that it was said that as far as this House is concerned it is not to nourish its traditions but to diminish its traditions and to seek to destroy its character and its fibre by saying to the Senate: 'Yes, we will respond whenever you want us to'. Similarly, 1 would say of the Senate that 1 would regard it as an impertinence if a committee of ~his House were to ask a senator to come before it. It is in this chamber that my right honourable friend and all of my colleagues on the front bench answer to this Parliament and, through this Parliament, to the people of Australia.
This was the dreadful dilemma in which the right honourable member found himself. The principle of natural justice that was outraged was the observance of 'hear the other side'. The Committee could not hear him.
Mr Armitage-You would be a good royal jester.
Mr KILLEN-Great principles have always been regarded by the honourable gentleman as trivia and trivia has always been regarded by the honourable gentleman as great principles. This rule of 'hear the other side' is a rule of great antiquity. This Parliament would be well-minded to address itself to the difficulty. It may be my right honourable friend, the honourable member for New England today or it could be the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) in five years' time; 1 do not know. This is a dilemma to which no person in the Parliament has directed himself or herself, let alone any member of a Committee.
The other principle of natural justice which has been outraged can be found by looking at the evidence given by Mr Wallace. A great principle of natural justice is that a person sitting on a committee should not show bias. 1 defy any person to read the evidence given by Mr Wallace, and the so-called cross-examination by members of the Committee, and not reach the conclusion on the basis that 'there was indeed bias. Take, for example, the following question asked by Senator Evans:
Can you answer me yes or no? Were you present at any meeting . . .
Mr Wallace-To the veQ' best of my recollection, no.

Senator EVANSYour recollection has not been all that bad on other matters . . .
The record continues:
CHAIRMAN-Mr Wallace, I think it would be fair for me, as Chairman, to say that the laughter that followed your last answer was at, not with you.
Would any honourable gentleman charged with any offence, however serious or trivial, appreciate a judge turning around and saying that?
Mr West-Read out what he said.
Mr KILLEN-I am dealing with great principles. 1 know they have deserted the honourable member all of his life. If honourable members opposite are to take the view that this is a mean point, all I can say is that there is a great deal of difficulty ahead for future generations of this country. Our people have not travelled through the centuries to arrive at the stage where a person sitting in judgment predetermines an issue. This is what these members of the Committee were doing. They were sitting in judgment and made a determination. There was no sense of fairness in their examination. As the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender) said, 'examination or cross-examination'. He said that he did not know what it was.
Senator Evans asked one question of 201 words. The Chairman asked a question of 302 words. I have never been before a judge in my life who would allow cross-examination of that description.
1 go further to cite another great principle involved. Those who sit in judgment should not have their vision clouded by the dust of conflict. If that phrase is lost upon Senator Evans, 1 think it is about high time that he went back to the law books. 1 have known any number of lawyers to make mistakes. I see nothing wrong with attacking an argument that I believe to be ill-founded and 1 am doing precisely that. But the principal basis of the Committee's finding was on the evidence given by Mr Webster. Principally, my honourable friend, the Minister for Primary Industry, has dealt with this matter today. It is impossible to go through the evidence given by Mr Webster and then to say of him that he was an unequivocal witness, reliable witness, a substantial witness, or a believable witness; one could use what adjectives one liked. All the way through his evidence he was saying: 'I am not too sure'; 'I cannot be categoric about this'. But what really lines up against Mr Webster in terms of accepting his credibility is simply this. A memorandum m writing was sent to Mr Webster by Mr Norwood relating to the purchase--
Mr Scott-A letter in writing?

Fraser Government

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1629

Mr KILLEN-I am sorry, I accept the solecism. Yes, it was a memorandum. In the case of the honourable member who has just interjected we would need to carve it in granite. We could start with his magnificent head. This case involved the purchase of a car which would have represented a grave breach of government rules. But Mr Webster said: 'I have no recollection of the memorandum'. How strange it is that the principal witness, accepted by the Committee when it refers to the conduct of business orally, has a splendid reputation but as far as the memorandum is concerned the Committee found that he said: '1 have no recollection of it'. The Committee report went on to state that Mr Webster's evidence was riddled with inaccuracy. I ask my honourable friends opposite: Would they like any tribunal to accept that and, on that basis, to make a finding which affects their reputation, their honour and their character? I doubt it very much. If they take a contrary point of view, 1 would be very sad indeed.

Finally, I say this about committees that proc ceed in this quasi judicial fashion: 1 think the Parliament owes it to its own integrity and to the
nation to ensure that these committees are conducted in a fashion in which the integrity and the reputation of people can be and is protected. I have made this suggestion before. 1 have slender respect for committees that proceed in this fashion. 1 have no admiration for those who walk in the tradition of the star chamber. I believe that those people who want to make a case can make it with all the vigour in the world, but certain prin-
ciples are to be observed. I believe the Parliament would serve itself and future generations well by ensuring that precisely that was done.

Dr BleweU-Mr Speaker-

Motion (by Mr Hodges) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

64

Noes

44

Majority

20

AYES
Cameron, Ewan Cameron, Jan Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Fire, w.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Fraser. Malcolm Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom, R.J. Hall, Steele Harris,G. MeD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. e. Hodgman, W. M. HUnt, R. J. D.

McVeigh, D. T.
Macphee, I. M. Millar, P. e. Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keere, F. L. Peacock, A. S. POrLer,J. R. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender,J. M. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,e. W. Viner, R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. e. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) HUrrord, C. J.

Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R.
Jenkins, H. A. Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R.J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.e. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les (Teller) Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountrord, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. e. Uren,T. West,S.J. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Falconer, P. D. Street, A. A.
Edwards, H. R. Bourchier, J. W. Robinson, Ian MacKellar, M. J. R.

Young,M.J. Cohen, B. McLeay, Leo Johnson, Tes Wallis, L.G. Cass,M.H.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Original question put.

The House divided,

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ay~

4S

Noes

64

Adermann, A: E.
Anthony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite. R. A. Brown" N. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald

AYES

Hyde.J. M. Jarman,A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William

Majority

19

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charles, D. E. Child,J.

AYES

Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent, L. Kerin, J. e.

1630 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

General

AYES
Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins,l.S. Duffy. M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford, e. J.

Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les (Teller) Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J. L. Theophanous, A. e. Uren, T. West,S.J. Willis,R.

together with the Audifor-General'S report thereon for the year ended 30 June 1981.
COMMONWEALTH TERTIARY EDUCATION COMMISSION
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)- For the information of honourable members, I present the report by the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission Evaluating Studies Program entitled 'An Evaluation of a CollegeBased Basic <:;ourse in Nursing'.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony,J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney,R.J. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr. M. A. Cadman, A. O. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron. fan Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean.A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Fife, W.e. Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Fraser. Malcolm Giles, G. O-H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall, Steele Harris. G. McD. Hicks, N. J. Hodges, J. e. Hodgman. W. M. Hunt, R. J. D.

Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W. Jull, D. F.
Katter,R.e. Killen, D.J. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKenzie,A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar, P. e. Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair,l. McC. Spender,J. M. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. Viner, R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

PAIRS

Young, M.J. Cohen, B. McLeay. Leo Johnson, Les Wallis, L.G. Cass,M. H.

Falconer, P. D. Street, A. A. Edwards, H. R. Bourchier. J. W. Robinson. Jan MacKelior. M. J. R.

Question so resolved in the negative.

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
Mr SPEAKER-Are there any questions without notice?
Mr Sinclair-Mr Speaker, I ask that questions, if there are any, be placed on the Notice Paper.

COMMONWEALTH BANKS
Mr SPEAKER-Pursuant to statute, I present the annual reports and financial statements of the Commonwealth Banking Corporation, the Commonwealth Trading Bank of Australia, the Commonwealth Savings Bank of Australia and the Commonwealth Development Bank of Australia,

AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT AT SYDNEY (KINGSFORD-SMITH) AIRPORT
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport)-For the information of honourable members, I present an advance copy of a report of an aircraft accident at Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport, 21 February 1980. Limited copies are available through the Parliamentary Library and the Table Office. When the printed report is received, I shall make arrangements for copies to be provided to all honourable members.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed.
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.

AUSTRALIAN ELECTORAL OFFIClj:
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-:-Minister for Administrative Services)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Australian Electoral Office annual report 1980-81.

AIR NAVIGATION (CHARGES) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill returned from the Senate without amendment or requests.

ESTIMATES COMMITTEES

Membership

Mr SPEAKER-I have received advice from the Acting Government Whip and the Acting Opposition Whip of alterations in the nomination of members to Estimates Committees B, C and F as follows:

Estimates Committee Ii-Membership: Members of Esti:

mates Committee B to consider the proposed expenditure

for-

Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Campb~1I in sub-

stitution for Mr Wallis, discharged.

.

Estimates Committee C-Membership: Members of Estimates Committee C to consider the proposed expenditure for-
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Milton in substitution for Mr Uren, discharged.
Attorney-General's Department-Mr Dean in substitution for M r Carlton, discharged. Mr Duffy in substitution for Mr Scholes, discharged.

Estimates Committees

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1631

Estimates Committee F-Membership: Members of Estimates Committee F to consider the proposed expenditure for-
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Cunningham in substitution for Mr Hurford, discharged.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D
Report
Mr ARMITAGE (Chifley)-I have to report that Estimates Committee D has considered the following expenditures:
Department of the Treasury Department of Primary Industry Department of Finance Advance to the Minister for Finance Department of Transport
The following resolution was agreed to in relation to the proposed expenditure for the Department of Transport:
That this Committee, recognising the disruption being caused to air services and the tourist industry in Australia and the substantial costs being incurred by air service operators because of the shoitage of air traffic controllers commends the Government in its immediate efforts to overcome the shortage of air traffic controllers and calls upon the Government not to relent in those efforts.
The honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) was too honest.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
That consideration of the report be made an order of the day for the next day of sitting.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE E
Report
Dr JENKINS (ScuIlin)-1 have to report that Estimates Committee E has considered the following proposed expenditures:
Department of Industrial Relations Department of Education Department of Employment and Youth Affairs Department of Housing and Construction
The following expression of opinion was agreed to in relation to the proposed expenditure for the Department of Education:
That the Committee is of the opinion that-
(I) the change from cost supplementation to the out turn basis in relation to determining the level of programs administered by the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission and the Commonwealth Schools Commission, and the reluctance of the Minister for Education to provide details of the prospective calculations, should be reconsidered as the change could result in over or under payments to non-government schools, and
(2) in determining capital grants for schools, universities and colleges of advanced education it is apparent that no account has been made for the impact of sales tax on building costs in setting capital grants for 1982.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
That consideration of the report be made an order of the day for the next day of sitting.

FOREIGN CONTROL OF HIGH TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRIES
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The threat to Australia's independence by foreign control of high technology industries.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number of members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr BARRY JONES-(Lalor) (9.42)-Mr Speaker--
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
That business of the day be called on.
COMPANIES AND SECURITIES LEGISLATION (MISCELLANEOUS
AMENDMENTS) BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 10 September, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (9.44) - The legislation which we are about to debate is entitled the Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 1981. As this' deals with the very important matter of the regulation and, perhaps, clarification of company law in Australia it seems quite disturbing that the Government has not listed one honourable member to speak on this matter. Unless a couple jump out of the ground in the near future it seems that the Government is not prepared to offer any sort of debate in the area of the reform of company law. I do not suppose that is all that surprising in view of the fact that the Government has made no effort in the past and it does not appear to want to make much effort to see that corporate crime in Australia is removed. In fact, today we have probably seen a fairly good example in this House of corporate criminals being defended.
The legislation which we are now debating amends in a large number of relatively minor ways the various codes of the co-operative companies and securities scheme. The Opposition does not oppose any of the clauses of the Bill. We, however, continue to regard the co-operative scheme as deficient in a great number of respects. Accordingly I move:

1632 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981 Companies and Securities Legislation Bill

That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing this bill, the House-
(I) expresses its concern-
(a) at the Government's abdication of its responsibility to make national laws for companies and securities pursuant to the Commonwealth's own constitutional powers, and in accordance with the recommendations of the Senate Select Committee on Securities and Exchange in 1974 (the Rae Report);
(b) at the lack of effective accountability of the National Companies and Securities Commission to either the Government or Parliament of the Commonwealth, or to any other single elected Government or Parliament; and
(c) that the Parliament of the Commonwealth is not given an opportunity to effectively scrutinise Bills introduced under the Cooperative Companies and Securities Scheme and will not be able effectively to determine company law in the future under this scheme;
(2) calls upon the Government in the event of the breakdown for any reason of the scheme, of which this Bill is a part, immediately to proceed to the introduction of Commonwealth legislation for the national regulation of companies;
(3) calls upon the Government to expedite the establishment of an Accounting Standards Review Board, and
(4) calls upon the Government immediately to pursue a fundamental reform of company law and, as the first stage in such reform, to institute the Companies and Securities Law Revision Committee without delay'.
That amendment will be seconded by the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi). Before making some comments about the matter raised in the amendment to the motion for the second reading I mention where this amendingBill takes us. It was found that it will be necessary for two main reasons: Firstly, the process of drafting with the need for approval from seven governments is so tedious and inefficient that many corrections and clarifications are needed even before the companies code has come into effect; and secondly, a number of improvements are found necessary following criticisms from the Opposition, particularly from the honourable member for Hawker, who has contributed so much to debates on companies and securities matters. The Opposition welcomes these improvements in relation, for example, to professional legal privilege for the definition of officers in certain clauses. We wish only that the Government were as responsible and responsive on matters of principle raised by the Opposition as it has proved to be on matters of detail. That is a continuing criticism that we made of the Government in the various debates that we have had in this House. Unfortunately, these criticisms seem to fall on deaf ears and unresponsive and perhaps unthinking heads.

It is the fundamental nature of the companies and securities schemes which is most at fault in this situation. We have essentially national markets for securities in Australia. I am sure that no one will seriously argue that, for instance, Industrial Equity Ltd, controlled by Mr Ron Brierley, or Endeavour Resources Ltd, an affiliate of Bond Corporation Holdings Ltd, operate only in New South Wales and Victoria. Yet we have in the case of each of these companies, which have engaged in takeover bids which may be in breach of the ac~ quisition of shares code or other codes, the nonsensical situation of a Federal body using State agencies to investigate activities conducted nationally under the auspices of the. laws which effectively reside within State jurisdictions.
There can be no doubt that these takeovers represent a major test of the National Companies and Securities Commission because it is clear .that the corporate operators who have work~d virtually free of regulation in this country throughout the era of renewed share market interest, which began in about 1977, have none of the respeyt for the Commission that similar agencies command in the United States of America or the United Kingdom. The National Companies and Securities Commission, after years of delay and procrastination by this Government under the guise of the new federalism policy-that awful term-has no reserve of trust and respect. It will have to test its arm in Australia's courts which are notorious for their literal interpretation of the law. Moreover, under a co-operative scheme we must remember that different courts will have jurisdiction in different States. Who knows what manner of rival and inconsistent interpretation will appear over time when the different cases are dealt with?
I mention the situation in these Cases in respect of the takeover law because I believe that they deserve the attention of this Parliament. They certainly deserve the attention of the Government. As I said at the outset, they deserve some members of the Government taking sufficient interest in this very important area at least to participate in the debate. I am very concerned that the National Companies and Securities Commission has been put in this situation as a result of the way in which the co-operative scheme has evolved and been implemented. We in the Opposition believe that the Parliament of the Commonwealth should have the exclusive responsibility for this body of law. We do not have that situation now. Rather, we have seven parliaments, which in effect means none. It is very difficult to establish real responsibility in a parliament when six others can .always be blamed. In this respect, I note with concern the second reading speech of the Minister

Companies and Securities Legislation Bill 22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1633

for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore). He said:
At the last meeting of the Ministerial Council, it was agreed that during 1982 there would be no substantive amendments to the initial legislation.
Mr Jacobi-A moratorium.
Mr JOHN BROWN-As the honourable member for Hawker says, it is a moratorium on law breakers. The reasons givenfor this are, firstly, that it gives time for everybody to get used to things and, secondly, that it gives time to look at hew reform proposals. How very cosy. Let us all relax. Let us all sink into a torpor of corporate insensibility. What this superficially reasonable proposition fails to mention is that we have been reviewing company law in Australia at the national level since 1959. I think Sir Garfield Barwick probably left this Parliament in frustration at not being able to get any of that legislation which he tried to implement off the deck. Then we had the sad situation between 1972 and 1975 of Mr Enderby from the Labor Party finding the same frustration. Whatever reform he tried to introduce was frustrated in the Senate.
We have had numerous inquiries and reports by the Law Reform Commission, by Senate committees, by the Eggleston Committee, by the R~e Committee and so on over two decades. The legIslative codes to which the Minister referred, at least in the case of company law are little changed from the Interstate Corporate Affairs Commission versions and the takeover code has been waiting for government action for several. ye~rs. All this past pressure for reforms and all thiS pnor experience and awareness of the bodies of.law ~o which we refer. hardly need a settlmg m period-in effect of about two years. The Minister has signalled to the takeover merchants and the manipulators: 'Hang in there and find loopholes because once you find them you have two years to play with them'. Some of the very smart manipulators in Australia are playing with those loopholes very effectively right now. This puts extraordinary pressure on the NCSC which does not even know which jurisdiction to turn to for help. I venture to suggest that if a problem of a similar nature arises in Queensland the Commission might as well forget about it and not bother to get involved because the record of abdication of responsibility by the Queensland Government gives no cause for joy here in-Canberra. How extraordinary it is that no parliament can really be held to account for failures and weaknesses in this body of law which is so vital to the development of the Australian economy, the assembly of capital resources and the management of our corporate enterprises.

We in the Labor Party want the national Parliament to undertake this role, and that is why I have moved the amendment on behalf of the Opposition. We are hoping for the e.stablishment .o~ a standing committee on compames and secuntles to look at this law continually and to consider the much needed reforms. At the same time, I have reiterated the Opposition's call for an accounting standards review board to ensure that the vital units measures and principles of accounting are give; statutory force. Prese.ntly there is no. real body of law which covers thiS and we ha~e dlff~r ing accounting standards all over AustralIa which make problems for people of inexpert ability who try to read company reports or financial statements. It all leads to a weakness in the system which, of course, eventually leads to the smart manipulators being able to operate outside whatever law there is.
The Opposition has moved an amendment in respect of the entire scheme. We set out many more when the Companies Bill proceeded through the Parliament in the last ~ession, but obviously the Government saw fit to Ignore many of these if the amendments in the present Bill are representative of its thinking. I would like to mentionone of these in particular. In that debate we moved for a reform of company law that required that. companies disclose all donations for political purposes. This issue has .been discu.ssed by the Ministerial Council, but In the environment of minimum change it was deferred. Mr Deputy Speaker, I think you would probably have noted, even from the cosy atmosphere in Queensland on Saturday, that the people of New South Wal.es have just voted overwhelmingly in favour of diSclosure by politicians of their pecuniary interests. This is one measure of the attitude of people to disclosure in the field of politics. I hope that the Government will take some sort of message from that vote because it seems to us very odd that large donations made to political pa~ties in Australia are now not a matter for publIc scrutiny. The new legislation in New South Wal~s allows public funding of elections. Of course, It has been ignored by the Liberal Party. I dare say that in the next week or two the Liberal Party will be bemoaning and bewailing the fact that it did not take advantage of the legislation when it misses out on the couple of million dollars it might have got.
That legislation points out the weakness in this particular case-there is .no proper. ~eason w~y disclosure of large donatIOns to polItICal parties should not be made. Major corporations are formed principally in the interests of their shareholders, and the shareholders have a right to know

1634 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981 Companies and Securities Legislation Bill

where their money is going. Creditors a,lso have a right to know. If I were a shareholder of some of the major companies which I know and which you, Mr Deputy Speaker, know contribute very heavily to the Government parties, I would like to know that my money was going to such an inefficient and, dare I say, dishonest Government. The Minister sent to me a report on the Opposition's view on 5 June this year. Of this proposal he said:
. . . it can be argued that this issue should be determined outside the parameters of company law and applied to companies only to the same extent as it applies to individuals.
I refute that view. It reveals a failure to comprehend what company law and the rules of disclosure are all about. The boards of companies, unlike individuals, are not using their own money. They have access to vast sums of other people's money and they are protected by the corporate form from full liability for the actions of the company. Responsibility and disclosure are what company law is all about. I hope that the comments made by the Department in this case are not indicative of a loss of direction with company law. I hope that the Minister will take the need for law reform more seriously in this and in the other areas which have been raised by the Opposition in various other debates and which will be raised, particularly by the honourable member for Hawker, in the course of this debate.
In the last few months there has been little done to inspire one with confidence that the new companies and securities legislation will stand the test of time. I noted that the Chanticleer column in the Australian Financial Review of 9 September stated:
The Endeavour-Northern Mining takeover is in danger of symbolising the current state of corporate law in Australiacomprehensively confused.
I think that is a rather profound statement of the exact situation with regard to company law in Australia. The practitioners in the area do not quite understand it, let alone the laymen of Australia who are investing their few hard earned dollars in public companies. There is no doubt that company law is comprehensively confused. After a few short months of operation by the NCSC it has become increasingly obvious that this assessment of the law-that it is comprehensively confused-is devastingly accurate. Throughout both the Endeavour-Northern Mining and the IEL-Huttons sagas, neither of which is yet fully played out, it became clear that the credibility and the effectiveness of both the National Companies and Securities Commission and the new takeovers code would be put to the test very stringently by the smart operators who

are now moving in with these sleazy takeover bids

covered by the corporate veil that the Opposition

seeks to have lifted in the area of company law

but which the Government is very tardy to do

anything about.

.

It is perhaps riot inappropriate that I spend just a little time examining the course of those takeovers to see just where we are not at in this
area of corporate law. I note in passing that the area of corporate law relating to takeovers covered by the monopolisation and mergers provisions of the Trade Practices Act is itself deficient and in need of overhaul. Indeed, during the Endeavour-Northern Mining battle-Mr Bond was seeking to make use of a loophole in the Trade Practices Act to gain control of the Swan brewery.

Debate interrupted.

ADJOURNMENT
New South Wales Parliament: Mr Bruce McDonald-Tasmanian Apple Industry-Liquefied Petroleum , Gas-Tasmanian
Referendum-Trans-continental Railway: Radioactive Ballast-Canberra-Sydney Airline
Services-The Economy-Sydney (Kingsford -Smi th)
Airport-AustraliilD-Lebanese Community: Centenary Celebrations
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr ARMITAGE (Chifiey) (10.0)-1 draw the attention of honourable members tonight to the most disgraceful use of the forms of Parliament by the Government last week when it kept up a barrage of Dorothy Dix questions on the New South Wales elections believing as it quite obviously did that this would have a tremendous impact upon that election, resulting in the return of a Liberal National Country Party Government led by the hapless Mr McDonald. But, of course, that was not to be. Instead, the Government, led by Neville Wran, has been returned with a record majority for any Government in the history of New South Wales. We stated throughout the asking of those questions by interjection, time and time again, that it's got to be Wran. As it happened, it had to beWran.
Mr John Brown-It was Wran.
Mr ARMITAGE-I agree with the honourable member for Parramatta that it was Wran: Of course, that was, undoubtedly, a disgraceful use of the forms of the Parliament. Let us face reality. The Government, by doing this, hitched its own

Adjournment

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1635

band-wagon to that of Mr McDonald, the Leader of the Opposition in New South Wales and to the band-wagon of the Liberal and National Country parties.
Mr Les McMahon-How is Mr McDonald going?
Mr ARMITAGE-The honourable member for Sydney asked me how Mr McDonald is going. The tips are on. The bookmakers are out. They reckon it is six to one against him winning his seat. Those are the latest tips we get from the bookies in New South Wales. The facts are, as I said, that there is an extraordinary situation where this Government has hitched itself to this bandwagon. It~ therefore, has to account for and accept a very great deal of responsibility for the defeat. It shows simply that it has lost its credibility for the people of New South Wales and, for that matter, for the people of Australia. In order words, the Government stands condemned by its own actions throughout last week and the week before in supporting Mr McDonald and the Liberal and National Country parties in New South Wales. This Government can expect similar results when it finally faces up to the fact that it will be dragged to the polls in 1983.
I am greatly perturbed about information which I have received. I have heard that, in order for Mr McDonald to follow in the footsteps of the honourable member for Wentworth (Mr Coleman), there are now moves within the Liberal party hierarchy to find a seat in Canberra for Mr McDonald. Whatever happens, I do not want to see this Parliament become a graveyard for defeated leaders of the Opposition in New South Wales. After all, the honourable member for Wentworth has not exactly distinguished himself in this Parliament. But when he is compared with the aspirant for a north shore seat in this Parliament the honourable member is a world beater. It looks as though we will have to cop Mr McDonald here in Canberra. I have been making a few subtle inquiries-I am always very subtleabout which seat the Federal Liberal Party is looking at for Mr McDonald. I have heard two propositions put up. The first proposition is, of course, that the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly) will retire and hand his seat over to Mr McDonald. The honourable member for Bradfield will get a diplomatic appointment having come from the Department of Foreign Affairs originally. The other proposition is even more intriguing when one looks at the list of speakers who spoke here today. Remembering the connotation between the Federal seat of North Sydney and the State seat of North Shore, I heard that the honourable member for North Sydney

(Mr Spender) will resign and be given a judgeship. He will become a judge appointed by the Federal Government.
Mr Charles Jones-Not another Liberal judge.
Mr ARMITAGE-Yes, another Liberal appointment. All this is to be done simply to find a little spot for the poor hapless Mr McDonald who is about to go into oblivion. I think this is a disgraceful state of affairs. It would be natural for the honourable member for North Sydney to get the job. He is a boring speaker in this Parliament. He might look better on the bench; one never knows. Accordingly, we are very worried about this. We do not want this to happen. In case honourable members do not know, I wanted to deal with the Treasurer (Mr Howard) while I was at it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (10.5)-It is good to see the Minister for the Capital Territory, the honourable member for Denison (Mr Hodgman), sitting at the table because I wish to talk briefly about the apple industry. The Minister will be aware of an article that appeared in the Hobart Mercury on Saturday night about the decline in the apple industry in Tasmania. I have checked that report. I fj.nd that some of the facts are not there. In fact, the apples that left Tasmania last year were of the best quality and were shipped in the correct way. The marketing authority-the Minister and I have been critical of that marketing authority in Tasmania-has done a very good job. But I am afraid that the decline was caused by additional apples being placed on the United Kingdom market. Also the re-evaluation has had an effect on that industry. There has been a shortfall, but not to the extent of $ 10m that was mentioned in that article. I believe that there has been a shortfall. I will have to have a careful look at that. I am sure that the Minister for the Capital Territory will support me in a submission that I may make to Cabinet to try to get the additional assistance for the apple industry in Tasmania. He and I know that it is an extremely important industry.
Very rarely do I praise oil companies. I still think that in certain parts of Australia at the moment they are discriminating against dealers. I believe that they are using the variations in price to place some dealers in a very difficult situation, particularly in New South Wales, where they are varying the price to suit certain volumed areas to the detriment of some of the dealers. They have

1636 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Adjournment

now taken a step which, I believe, is in the right direction by making liquefied petroleum gas available beside the petrol pumps. I think, if honourable members remember, I said several years ago that, in certain European countries, LPG can be purchased from beside the petrol pumps. It is a vi-
able alternative to petrol. Cars will, can and do run economically and efficiently on LPG. But there is a sort of stigma attached to it in Australia. It has not been given the right publicity. I know that the Nissan Motor Co. (Aus) Pty Ltd, the maker of Datsun, manufactured a car to run specifically on LPG. But it did not get a market response because it was not supported. Unfortunately, it has been taken off the manufacturing list and we find that there is not a new car running specifically on LPG.

Taxi owners and fleet owners are running cars on LPG in Australia at the moment. It is a viable alternative to petrol. It is roughly about 50 per cent of the price of super petrol. When one transfers to LPG in the normal way, one finds that after about 20,000 kilometres one can recoup the costs. Let us hope that the oil companies will heed the warnings about shortages of petrol and look at the market very carefully, develop LPG and make it available beside petrol pumps in Australia.

Mr Hodgman-You fought very hard to have

it used.

.

Mr GOODLUCK-I am a great--

Mr Charles Jones-Fighter.

Mr GOODLUCK-I am a good fighter. But I believe LPG is good and should be supported. I wish also to touch very briefly on the referendum
in Tasmania.

Mr Hodgman-The Premier should resign.

Mr GOODLUCK-No, not really. I think that time will reveal that those who procrastinate and
those who do not make definite decisions will be found out. The Premier is a nice fellow personally. He gained a very good vote in Tasmania. He
comes from the same electorate that I come from. He gained a big vote. But I am afraid that because of his procrastination and because of the fact that he will not make definite decisions he finds himself in that invidious position of losing popularity. I feel sorry for the man. He has aged. Somebody said he looks nearly as old as I look. He is about 20 years younger than I am. He is not a bad fellow. Let us hope that he can make a few decisions and hopefully we can get Tasmania back on its feet again.

Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (lOJO)-If I may drag the House away from the dialogue between the two consenting adults from Tasmania who are talking about their home State~-
Mr Hodgman-I raise a point of order. Why does the honourable member pervert the fact that the honourable member for Franklin and I share a flat? Secondly, why does he hate Tasmania?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- There is no point of order.
Mr Good luck----] raise a point of order. I find that remark nearly offensive. I ask the honourable member to withdraw that remark or imputation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the honourable member for Franklin wish the Chair to ask the honourable member for Lalor to withdraw partially?
Mr Good luck-Very quickly, sir.
Mr BARRY JONES-If the honourable member is prepared to withdraw, I will. I draw the attention of the House to an answer provided today by the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) to a question which I placed on notice on 26 August. I asked the question after seeing an Australian documentary, Backs to the Blast about the development of the uranium industry in South Australia. I will read the questions and answers together. Firstly, I asked:
Was radioactive ballast, taken from uranium mines in South Australia, used on the up-graded Transcontinental railway; if so, what quantity;
The answer to that question was:
Yes, 254,000 cubic yards of tailings were used from the Radium Hill Mine heavy media section of the concentration plant.
Secondly, I asked:
What type ofradioactive rocks were used?
The answer reads:
The types of rocks used were non-mineralised rock (country rock) plus small quantities of Davidite (IronTitanium Mineral with small amounts of Uranium).
Thirdly, I asked:
When were these rocks laid as ballast;
The answer reads:
The rocks were laid as ballast between 1964 and 1967.
Fourthly, I asked:
Who were the contractors who laid the ballast;
The answer reads:
The ballast was laid by South Australian Railways Day Labour Force.
The fifth part of the question I asked reads:
How much was paid for it.
The answer reads:

Adjournment

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1637

The cost and delivery of the ballast totalled $296,114.
The sixth part of the question reads:
Between what locations on the line was the radioactive ballast used;
The answer reads:
The ballast was used between Winnininnie and Cockburn.
The seventh part of the question reads:
What is the current level of. radioactivity in the relevant area;
The answer reads:
Tests conducted by the Health Commission of South Australia show that results are typical of a background for a granite area which does not constitute a health hazard.
The eighth part of the question reads:
How often is the level of radioactivity monitored:
Compare that with the previous answer. The answer is:
The level of radioactivity over this section is not monitored.
The final part of the question reads:
When was it last monitored.
The answer reads:
The tests conducted by the Health Commission were carried out early in 1981.
There is a complete inconsistency between the answers given to the seventh, eighth and ninth parts of the question. The question that needs to be taken up now is: What happened to the people who handled the ballast? It is one thing for the Australian National Railways to speed over the rail track at a comparatively high speed but it is a quite different thing if we think of what happened to the people whose job it was day in and day out actually to handle and lay the ballast. The explosion of the nine atomic tests in Australia in the 1950s was conducted in a period of total ignorance about the impact of fallout. There was no real understanding about safety precautions or about how necessary it was to protect people from' genetic and other physical damage. I ask the House to consider whether it ought to find out what happened to the workers who were involved in work on the railway. What has been the mortality rate? How does it compare with the mortality rate for other people in the community? What is the incidence of cancer in that group compared with that for random samples taken in the community at large? I think this is a very serious matter. It is scandalous that action was not taken years ago to replace the radioactive ballast or to provide some means of protection for the people who worked with it. I think that Backs to the Blast is an excellent film which all honourable

members ought to see. It provides a valuable insight into our very naivety over the whole question of radioactivity in what seems like generations ago, but in fact dates from the 1950s. One very valuable effect of the film has been to reveal that these radioactive tailings were used on the railway line. It is a matter that ought to arouse some concern in the community at large about our extreme carelessness with products that are potentially very dangerous. 1 would like to see much more information provided to the House about monitoring to ensure that no future action is taken which could prejudice the health of people who are working with such dangerous materials.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (10.15)-1 am glad that the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) is in the chamber because tonight 1 wish to draw the House's attention to a serious change that has taken place in the scheduling of airline flights from Sydney to the nation's capital. The service to Canberra during the middle of the day is now worse than it has been for many years following a decision by both Trans Australia Airlines and Ansett Airlines of Australia, allegedly coincidentally, to cancel their services around lunchtime. 1 am not prepared to make a judgment on whether it is a coincidence or whether there have been discussions between the two airlines, although I have been assured that this did not take place and that it is simply coincidental that both airlines have withdrawn their 1.45 p.m. or 1.50 p.m. service. The consequence of this decision is that there is no airline flight from Sydney to Canberra between 11.35 a.m. and about 4 o'clock in the afternoon. I understand that has resulted from a decision taken by the airlines following a 33 per cent fall in passenger loadings after the large rise in air fares.
If the airlines found it uneconomic to send two aircraft off within five minutes of each other, it seems a curious decision to decide then that it is not economic for even one aircraft to go at this time. It seems to me that this is another instance of the pursuit of a two-airline policy, which in general 1 totally support, leading to a situation which is, frankly, intolerable. At a time when East-West Airlines Ltd is now seeking approval to provide an airline coach service into Canberra at very cheap rates, it seem to be utter madness on the part of the major airline companies to leave such an enormous gap in departure times in the middle of the day. Surely there is a need for the nation's capital to have a flight from Sydney at some time in that 4t-hour gap. Surely the increase in the number of tourists coming to Australia as a result of the initiatives of this Government needs

1638 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Adjournment

to be catered for by the provision of some flights during this part of the day. I recognise that on all trunk routes there is a degree of reduced activity in the middle of the day, but it seems to me that by withdrawing those flights the major airlines are striking at the tourist potential of the nation's capital.
I am now a strong supporter of the application of East-West to provide a service to the national capital that the major airlines have turned their backs on. I hope that the Minister for the Capital Territory will take this matter into consideration and approach the airlines about whether they will be prepared, to consider restoring this service. I must admit that I do not know what the load factors were. Maybe the Minister will be able to establish what they were and the extent to which something could be done about it.
Mr Hodgman-It is the quality of the passengers, such as yourself, that I am interested in.
Mr BAUME-The Minister is quite right. The quality of the passengers is significant. They are not only tourists to this place but also the people who provide what could loosely be described as the entertainment for the tourists to this place in particular.
I also wanted to raise very briefly a matter relating to the economy. This is raised in the ANZ Bank's business indicators. We have heard a lot in this House about how a dangerous credit situation is developing because of a failure of capital inflow to reach its target. I draw the attention of the House to a very sensible discussion of this matter in the ANZ Bank's business indicators which was recently published. I~ clearly demonstrates that the scope for manoeuvrability that the Government has in this area is so large as to ensure that the Government has the capacity to prevent a tight pressure on liquidity. There is no doubt, as the ANZ said, that the Budget could prove more deflationary than is currently anticipated if the Government does not use these other measures that are available to it and if there is a decline in the anticipated level of capital inflow. It points out that there is the capacity to relieve pressure if liquidity is unseasonably tough.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr LES McMAHON (Sydney) (10.20)-I rise tonight to speak in this adjournment debate on a matter which greatly concerns many thousands of constituents in my electorate of Sydney. I refer to the Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport. There are a number of vital questions regarding the airport which this Government has yet to answer in a

satisfactory manner. These questions are: Will Kingsford-Smith be expanded? Will a parallel runway be constructed? Will Kingsford-Smith be supplemented by a second major airport in the Sydney region? If so, where? These are the questions which are being asked and have been asked for many years by the Sydney councils of Ashfield, Botany, Canterbury, Drummoyne, Leichhardt, Marrickville, Hurstville, South Sydney, Randwick, Sutherland, Waverley and Rockdale, all of which are not Labor-controlled councils, by the State members whose areas are affected by the airport and by the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen), the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay), the honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison), myself and many honourable members on the Government side.
Recently another question was asked by many individual constituents and constituent bodies in my electorate. The question was: Will the present curfew on jet aircraft between the hours of 11 p.m. and 6 a.m. be lifted or altered? Earlier this year the Motor Inn and Motel Association put pressure on the Government to have the curfew lifted. More recently with the introduction of Trans Australia Airlines new, allegedly quieter A300 Airbus and the introduction of the new Boeing 767s by Ansett Airlines of Australia which are to be fitted with the same noise abatement equipment as the A300 Airbus, the push is on again to have the curfew lifted. I and many thousands of my constituents are opposed to any alteration to the present curfew. I have received correspondence from the Leichhardt Municipal Council, the Marrickville Municipal Council and the South Sydney Council and many indiviqual constituents all protesting against any change to the present curfew arrangements.
Leichhardt Municipal Council recently placed a full page advertisement in a local paper, the Glebe, protesting against the proposed alteration to the present curfew. The advertisement which was 'published in the interests of 7 hours sleep' contained six addressed coupons for residents to cut out and post to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar), the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt), the New South Wales Minister for Health, the New South Wales Premier and myself. The coupons all carried the same basic message that residents who live in the areas affected by the aircraft noise do not want the present curfew altered in any way, not even for any so-called trial period. In the last couple of weeks I have received these protests from many people, including a number of constituents of the Treasurer (Mr

Adjournment

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1639

Howard) and the honourable member for Lowe

(Sir William McMahon). When I reply to thos.e

people with my views on the matter, and that IS

complete opposition to any proposed alteration to

the present curfew, I will be advising them to

write to their respective federal members seeking

their views on the subject. I have received corre-

spondence from the Marrickville Council dated

22 July 1981 protesting against TAA opposing the

current curfew. Accordingly, I forwarded this cor-

respondence to the Minister for Transport seeking

the Government's views on the matter. On 27

August the Minister replied enclosing a copy of

his news release of 5 June 1981. I seek leave of the

House to have these documents incorporated in

llansard.

.

Leave granted.

The documents read as follows-

Minister for Transport
Parliament House, Canberra, ACT 2600
27 Aug. 1981 Dear Mr McMahon, I refer to your personal representations
of 29 July 1981 on behalf of the Marrickville Municipal Council concerning the proposed operation of the A300 'Airbus'
during the curfew.

As I indicated in my News Release of 5 June 1981, a copy of which is enclosed, I intend to take into account the views of all
concerned before reaching a decision on the T AA proposal. 1 would add that none of the proposals being considered envis-
ages the overflight of urban areas by the A300 or similar types ofjet aircraft during the curfew.

Your constituents may be assured that 1 am aware of the
concern of residents and that their interests will not be overlooked.

Mr J. L. McMahon, M.P., Parliament House,
Canberra, ACT 2600

Kind regards,
Yours sincerely, RALPH J. HUNT

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT
Australia News Release
81/1634 5-6-1981 No Decision Yet on A300 Cu rfew Dispensation
(Statement by the Hon. Ralph J. Hunt, M.P., Minister for Transport)
No decision had yet been made on whether or not operations of the A300 'Airbus' aircraft would be permitted during curfew hours, the Minister for Transport, Mr Ralph Hunt, said today.
'While 1 recognise that the A300 is one of the quietest airline aircraft currently available, reflecting the most up-to-date noise reduction technology, 1 am conscious of the noise sensitivity of the communities around Australian airports,' Mr Hunt said.
'I intend to take the views of those communities into account. With the introduction of the Airbus in July, communities will soon have the opportunity to fully appreciate the characteristics of the Airbus in operation,' he said.
'Discussions will also be held with the airlines and with the Aviation Industry Advisory Council.'

At present, curfews operate between the hours of II p.m. and 6 a.m. (local time) at Sydney, Brisbane, Adelaide, Essendon and Avalon Airports.

Mr Hunt said that he would not contemplate changing curfew arrangements, particularly for the A300, until all issues
had been taken into account.

Canberra

5 June 1981

Mr LES McMAHON-I thank the House. I will quote briefly from the Minister's reply and his Press statement. He stated:

. . . none of the proposals being considered envisages the overflight of urban areas by the A300 or similar types of jet aircraft during the curfew.

On the surface this would appear to a reasonable person that the Minister will not be changing the curfew, and that is the end of that. However, the Minister's news release of 5 June 1981 seemed to
present a conflicting picture. In the news release the Minister stated:

While I recognise that the A300 is one of the quietest airline
aircraft currently available, reflecting the most up-to-date noise reduction technology, Tam conscious of the noise sensitivity of the communities around Australian airports.

It continues:

1 intend to take the views of these communities into account.

If none of the proposals envisage the overflight of urban areas by the A300, why does the Minister
need to take into account the noise sensitivity of the communities around Australian airports? I seek leave to incorporate in llansard a document from the Marrickville Council dated 2 September
1981.

Leave granted.

The document read as follows-

Admillistrative CellIre Fisher Street, Petersham 2049
2 September 1981 MrJ. L. McMahon, M.P. Member for Sydney Commonwealth Government Centre Chifley Square Sydney, 2000
Dear Sir, Re: Use of Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport
At the last meeting of Council, consideration was given to a report of a recent meeting of the Noise Abatement Committee, which was held on II th August, 1981.
The meeting itself was mostly concerned with the discussion of the curfew for Sydney Airport, and of the fact that rather than a blanket curfew for jet aircraft being imposed between 11.00 p.m. and 6.30 a.m., recent developments in size and noise abatement factors in aircraft design, have led to the distinct possibility of certain aircraft powered by jet engines to be able to use the airport within curfew hours.
The Council resolved to write to you and seek your continuing support in its firm rejection of any proposal to relax the existing curfew hours at Sydney (Kings~ord-Sm!th) Airpo~t. Council remains of the view that, notwlthstandmg the nOIse level of new jet aircraft which may be equal to or less than

1640 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Adjournment

some propellor-driven aircraft, any increase in the rate of frequency of aircraft landing and departing over this Munici-
pality during the hours of curfew could only lead to an in-
crease in the level of noise annoyance to its residents.

I would once again be very grateful for your continuing as-
sistance in this matter by drawing the Council's views to the appropriate Minister.

Yours faithfully,

(B. S. GARDNER)

Town Clerk

Ref: Item 7, T.P.15/S1 (A2430032,15)

cE.ncq.uiHrioens:.

Planning Dept. L. F. Bowen, M.P.,

Mr

L.

B.

McLeay,

M.P.

Mr LES McMAHON-I thank the House. Once again, as with answers to questions and representations regarding the expansion of the Kingsford-Smith Airport, this Government and its Ministers cannot provide a satisfactory answer. As many honourable members may be aware, the north-south runway at the Kingsford-Smith Airport caters for the greatest numbers of landings. Over 46 per cent of all aircraft traffic landings at Kingsford-Smith in 1980 used the north-south runway: that is, 42,414 aircraft flew over the suburbs of Balmain, Rozelle, Leichhardt, Annandale, Petersham, Stanmore, Enmore, Newtown and Marrickville.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-
Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (10.25)-Tonight I would like to draw the attention of the House to a very important celebration by the AustralianLebanese community that has taken place over the last week. The Australian-Lebanese community has been a most successful migrant group in Australia, a group of people who have contributed significantly to our community and our development over some 100 years. I and numbers of other members in this House had the opportunity over this last weekend of joining these people in this very important celebration. The Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman), who is at the table, had the opportunity as the guest of honour at their most magnificent formal dinner last Sunday nighno savour some of this hospitality. I know the honourable member for Sydney (Mr Les McMahon) had the opportunity, as I did, to be a guest of members of the Australian-Lebanese community in their celebrations of 100 years migration to Australia when they had their opening luncheon in Sydney last Friday.

I want to make it very clear to this House that the Australian-Lebanese community has provided a great deal of initiative and has stimulated the development of this country in so many ways. Over the 100 years we appreciate the contribution that

it has made to Australia's development. I think we do so with a great deal of sorrow because the Lebanese people have more recently experienced a great deal of anguish and concern with the most regrettable events that have taken place in their homeland. I think it is a moment for reflection of what the Lebanese people have been suffering. They have shown their great character in a time of tremendous turmoil and difficulty for their forebears, their families and relatives at home. They have taken this opportunity to celebrate this magnificent achievement of having over 100 years of settlement in this country.
It was very much a bipartisan occasion for the opening was performed by the Premier of New South Wales, Mr Wran, and the Leader of the Opposition, Mr McDonald, was also present. We had a magnificent program of education in a sense on Saturday when numbers of people, including the parliamentary secretary to the Prime Minister, the honourable member for Mitchell, Mr Cadman, spoke as did the guests of the organisation. There were a number of official guests of the Lebanese community from the Lebanon. We saw Mr Samir Khoury, who is the Director of Lebanese Emigrants, participate in that program. We also saw Mr Rachad Salameh, who is the Assistant Secretary of the World Lebanese Cultural Union, participate in the program. We also saw Mr Victor Bechara who is a representative of Middle East Airlines. He was there participating in this important event.
The visitors who represented Lebanori here in Australia will be visiting Canberra this week. I hope that honourable members will take the opportunity of meeting these distinguished representatives from the Lebanon whilst here in Canberra. I know the Minister is proposing, if he can, to make time available for that purpose, and numbers of other members hope to meet with them here in the House or at a celebration that His Excellency, the Lebanese Ambassador, Mr Heniene will be giving at his home. The magnificent grand concert which was hosted by Joe Hasham--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m. the debate is interrupted.
Mr Hodgman-I require the debate to be extended.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The debate may continue until 10.40 p.m.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (1O.30)-As is my custom when I am on duty in the chamber during the adjournment debate I place on record that I will

Adjournment

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1641

draw the attention of the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) to the remarks of the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck) in relation to the export fruit situation. I will also bring to the attention of the Minister for National Development (Senator Carrick) the remarks of the honourable member for Franklin with respect to liquefied petroleum gas and the greater use thereof. I noted carefully the remarks of the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones). They too will be drawn to the attention of Senator
Carrick in his ministerial capacity.
The honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) raised a matter which is very dear to my heart. I have publicly announced a target of doubling the number of tourists into the Australian Capital Territory by December 1983. A number of initiatives have already been implemented. One which gives me particular pleasure is the approval by the Government for East-West Airlines (Operations) Ltd to operate flights in and out of Canberra. These will be basically designed to complement the access of tourists to Canberra. It will be a no-frills service and one which I think has a substantial potential. At the time the announcement was made that East-West would be given permission by the Government to fly in and out of Canberra I made a public statement to the effect that if there were any cutback in services by the domestic airline operators, Trans Australia Airlines and Ansett Airlines of Australia, I would retaliate. I did not make that statement lightly. It was made at a Press conference and reported in several newspapers, including national newspapers. I stand by it.
I am therefore both shocked and horrified to hear from the honourable member for Macarthur that within barely three weeks of the decision that East-West is to be permitted to operate in and out of Canberra flights have been cancelled. I make the point-the honourable member for Macarthur made this point very significantlythat flights have not been taken off the schedules, they have simply been cancelled. If it is true and correct, it is a very sneaky way of going about things. In view of the remarks of the honourable
member for Macarthur I intend, as a result of his bringing this matter to the attention of the House, to contact tomorrow both Ansett Airlines of Australia and TAA. I will make it very clear to them, as I have said publicly, that if they are prepared to join with me, the private sector, the Department of the Capital Teritory,the Australian Capital Territory Tourist Bureau and East-West Airlines in promoting the tourist attractions of the national capital there will be enough work for all three airlines. They will all do very nicely. But if

they are to retaliate because their noses are out of joint as East-West has been given permission to operate a no-frills service into Canberra, which has been described as one of the greatest ever breakthroughs for tourism in the Australian Capital Territory, I repeat that I will retaliate.
I join with the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) in the very fine remarks he made about the centenary of Lebanese immigration to Australia. As he said, it was my honour to represent the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) at that function. I was tremendously impressed by the community spirit and the basic patriotism to Australia shown by the Lebanese community which has rendered outstanding service for 100 years. As I pointed out, the Lebanese were here before this country became one nation. As the honourable member for Dundas made such a fine speech I was a little disappointed that during the main part of it no member of the Opposition was in the chamber. However, I feel certain that had Opposition members been here they would have agreed very strongly with what he said.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The Minister for the major proportion of his speech has exceeded the provisions of the extended debate. It is designed so that a Minister may provide information -to honourable memberswho have raised matters during the debate. It certainly does not encompass the state of the House on my left.
Mr HODGMAN-I am sure that the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) will appreciate the sentiments which I have expressed. The honourable member for Dundas made a very fine speech. That brings me to my final comment. I will draw the remarks of the honourable member for Chifley (Mr Armitage) to the attention of that courageous and tenuous campaigner, the Leader of the Opposition in New South Wales, Mr McDonald. I feel it is appropriate that he should be aware of what has been said.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Minister's time has expired. The debate having concluded, the House stands adjourned until 1.45 p.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 10.36 p.m.

PAPER

The following paper was deemed to have been

presented on 22 September 1981, pursuant to

statute:

.

Lands Acquisition Act-Statement of land acquired by agreement authorised under sub-section 7 (1).

1642 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Requestsfor Detailed Information

REPLIES TO REQUESTS FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Department of the Parliamentary Library On 1 April 1981, Dr Blewett asked Mr Speaker:
(I) What formal mechanisms exist for consultation with staff in all sections of the Parliamentary Library with regard to decisions on the Library's organisation and function.
(2) What is the rate of staff turnover within the Library, by section, for each of the last 7 years.
(3) Have Library staff made any representations regarding increased staff consultation during that period; if so, when was it made and what action followed these representations.
(4) Have there been any expressions by staff about any matter which would indicate reduced staff morale during that period.

Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Formal consultation procedures within the Department of the Parliamentary Library are detailed in Administrative Circular No. 1979/7 of 16 November 1979. The Principal Officers (now Head Librarian, Head Research Specialist, Head Systems and Co-ordination Unit and Senior Executive Officer) meet with the Permanent Head on a regular fortnightly basis and more frequently if required. Each Principal Officer meets with Group Directors or Section Heads, who in turn hold Group or section staff meetings at least once a month, on non-sitting days. Records of these meetings are kept and placed on departmental files.
These procedures are still in operation.
(2) It is not practicable nor meaningful because of organisational changes to calculate staff turnover rates by section for each of the past seven years. For the Department, commencements and cessations as a proportion of full-time staff at 31 December have been:

Commencements Cessations

1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 42.1 35.0 31.7 37.2 50.4 34.3 45.0 31.6 25.0 30.8 29.8 39.8 32.8 43.5

(3) and (4) Some officers of the Department have made many representations to various persons and organisations in recent years. At a Library Committee meeting of 27 Match 1980, a letter from the Professional Officers' Association concerning Library accommodation and staff consultation was distributed to Committee members.
The formal mechanisms (see (I) above) and the distinction between consultation and proper decision making processes were outlined and discussed by the Committee.
Department of the Parliamentary Library
On 5 June 1981, Mrs Child asked Mr Speaker:
(I) How many positions of Special Duties, Research Officer, referred to in Appendix I of the Annual Report of the Department of the Parliamentary Library for 1980 existed as at (a) I July in each year since 1974 and (b) I June 1981.

(2) What are the levels of each position.
(3) Who occupied each position as at (a) I July in each year since 1974and (b) I June 1981.
(4) What are the functions of each position presently on the Department's establishment.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) Between I July 1974 and I July 1979, one position at Class to level, occupied by K. I. Inglis. At I July 1980, the position was not occupied and at I June 1981, there was no such position.
(4) Not applicable.

Answers to Questions

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES l643 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Department of Social Security: Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons
(Question No. 471)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) In view of the fact that 1981 is designed as the International Year of Disabled Persons, what special arrangements has the Department"of Social Security made to assist disabled persons.
(2) Do any special arrangements made include (a) increased employment of disabled persons and (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building or other facili ty occupied by the Department; if so, what are the details.
(3) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to faciliate any special arrangements for disabled persons in the Department of Social Security.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister in Federal Affairs to Question No. 458 (Hansard, 10June 1981, page 3564).
Department of Science and Technology: Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons
(Question No. 477)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) In view of the fact that 1981 is designated as the International Year of Disabled Persons, what special arrangements has his Department made to assist disabled persons.
(2) Do any special arrangements made include (a) increased employment of disabled persons and (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building or other facility occupied by his Department; if so, what are the details.
(3) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to facilitate any special arrangements for disabled persons in his Department.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Minister Assistif)g the Prime Minister to Question 458 on 10 June 1981 (Hansard, page 3564).
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs: Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons
(Question No. 479)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) In view of the fact that 1981 is deSignated as the International Year of Disabled Persons, what special arrangem.ents has his Department made to assist disabled persons.

(2) Do any special arrangements made include (a) increased employment of disabled persons (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building or other facility occupied by his Department; if so, what are the details.
(3) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to facilitate any special arrangements for disabled persons in his Department.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Prime Minister to Parliamentary Question No. 458 (Hansard, 10 June 1981,pages 3564to 3566).
Departmental Officers' Air Travel: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1138)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(I) How many travel warrants have been issued for the Attorney-General's Department officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980t031 March, 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) The information requested is not readily available and the Minister has advised that he is not prepared to authorise the use of resources to identify the particular information requested.
Expenditure Commitments: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 1206)
Mr Bungey asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(I) What specific commitments for expenditure, excluding normal recurring costs of running the Department such as salaries and administrative costs, does his Department have for (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sum is involved in each. commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to the fact than when a similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining the information would involve collection of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.
(4) Has the development of forward estimates in his Department now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer valid.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer by the Minister representing the Minister for Finance to Question No. 1216 (Hansard 10 June 1981, page 3551).

1644 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Answers to Questions

Expenditure Commitments: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 1219)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) What specific commitments for expenditure, excluding normal recurring costs of running the Department such as salaries and administrative costs, does the Department of Social Security haveFor (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
(3) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the fact than when a similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining the information would involve collection of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.
(4) Has the development of forward estimates in the Department of Social Security now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer valid.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer by the Minister representing the Minister for Finance to Question No. 1216 (Hansard 10June 1981, page 3551).
Expenditure Commitments: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 1224)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What specific commitments for expenditure; excluding normal recurring costs of running the Department such as salaries and administrative costs, does his Department have for (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sumis involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to the fact than when a similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining the information would involve collection of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.
(4) Has the development of forward estimates in his Department now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer valid.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Minister for Finance to Question No. 1216 (Hansard 10 June 1981, page 3551).
Annual Reports and other Publications: Department of Transport
(Question No. 1246)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.

(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) My Department produces an annual report entitled 'Australian Transport'. In addition the four Transport Business Undertakings-the Australian National Railways Commission (ANRC), the Australian National Airlines Commission (TAA), Qantas Airways Ltd and the Australian Shipping Commission (ANL)-each produce an annual report.
(2) The cost of producing these annual reports for 1979-80 was:

Publication

Cost

AustralianTransport ANRC Annual Report TAA Annual Report Qantas Annual Report ANL Annual Report

$ 14,488 7,873
14,770 71,350
15,960

(3) The costs of Production of other regular publications
issued by the Department and by the Transport Business Undertakings for 1979-80 are shown below.

Publication

Production cost

Transport Australia . . . Trade and Cargo Review Stevedoring Labour Review Report on Man Hours Lost by Operational Em-
ployees of Stevedoring Companies due to Industrial Disputes Port Authority Cargo Movements Sea Transport Statistics Australian Shipping and Shipbuilding Torr.es Straits Tide Tables . Domestic Air Transport International Air Transport Commuter Air Transport Airline Aircraft Utilisation Survey of Hours Flown Aerial AgricuIture Operation Provisional Statistics of Domestic Scheduled Airline Performance . . . . . Flight Crew Licences . . . . . . . . Survey of Accidents to Australian Civil Aircraft Aviation Safety Digest Transport Planning and Research Program: Progress Report
Transport Business Undertakings
AN News (ANRC Staff Magazine) TAA Staff Magazine TAA In/light Magazine Qantas Staff News Qantas In /light Magazine All Hands (ANL Staff Magazine)

$ 9,299 2,860 2,356
4,188 2,200 3,000 2,400
664 2,196
800 1,480
84 294 266
153 70 1,417 34,605
5,000
33,000 10,800 255,000 5,200 96,000 20,172

Generally speaking, distribution costs for these publications
could not be isolated without considerable research, and I am not prepared to direct that resources be devoted to this task.

\ Answf!rs to Questions

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1645

Employment of Private Consultants: Pepartment of Social Security

(Question No. 1271)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by the Department of Social Security in 1979-80; if so, (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed, and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(a) 13.

(b) and (d)-

Escarp Industries . . . . . The Yooralla Society of Victoria
Orana Incorporated (Mentally Retarded
Children's Society) Victorian Aid to Mentally III (VATMI In-
dustries) . . . . . . . . . . .
The Royal Talbot Rehabilitation Hospital The Association of Sheltered Workshops in
New South Wales
The Pheonix Society Incorporated Good Samaritan Industries of WA
The Spastic Children's Society
The Queensland Subnormal Children's Welfare Association . . . . . . . .
The Subnormal Children's Welfare Associ-
ation of NSW . . . . . . . . . The Advance Linen Service (Sisters of the
Good Shepherd)
Dr P. Edwards . . . . . . . . . .

$ 4,004.05 2,199.70
6,319.10
2,106.70 2,666.59
868.55 431.70 827.20 289.30
296.10
508.55
644.25 882.75

Departmental records are unable to separate accurately the travelling allowance and fares component from the actual fee paid to each consultant. Consequently, there may be instances where travelling allowance and fares have been included in the above figures.
(cY The first twelve of the above consultancies were arranged to provide advice on service management, accounting practices and principles, and fund raising activities to voluntary and religious organisations administering services to handicapped people (and receiving subsidy assistance under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act).
Dr Edwards conducted a workshop for departmental staff on the readability of computer-generated advices, form letters,leaflets and forms.
Annual Reports and other Publications: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 1233)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80. .
(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Annual reports are produced by: Department of Trade and Resources; Export Development Grants Board; Export Finance Insurance Corporation; Uranium Advisory Council; and Australian Overseas Projects Corporation.
(2) $24,869.
(3) Other regular publications produced are:

Publication
Australian Trading News . . . . . . Export Finance Insurance Corporation Overseas Trading . . . . . . . . Import Requirements for Overseas Markets

Frequency of issue
Quarterly Fortnightly
Quarterly

Cost of production
$ 370,875
3,673 202,632
13,763

Cost of distribution
$ 193,716
2,000 106,855
1,396

Vehicle Conversion to LPG Usage: Department of National Deyelopment and Energy
(Question No. 1548)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(l) How many (a) cars, (b) commercial vehicles and (c) trucks were being operated by the Department of National Development and Energy, excluding vehicles supplied by the Department of Administrative Services, as at 30 June 1980.
(2) How many of these vehicles had been (a) converted to LPG usage and (b) purchased already equipped for LPG usage.
-(3) Have plans been made to increase use of LPG in vehicles operated by the Department; if so, what are the details.

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the Minister for Administrative Services' reply to Question No. 1563 which appeared in the House of Representatives Weekly Hansard for 10 June 1981 (pages 3579-80).
Participation in Commonwealth Heads of Goyernment Meeting: Department of Science
and Technology
(Question No. 2179)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 7 May 1981 :

1646 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division and (c) 4th Division officers in his Department are engaged (i) full time or (ii) part-time in administrative, policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.
(2) How many officers of his Department are expected to attend the meeting.
(3) What is the expected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel and other expenses.
(4) What other expenses does he expect his Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the meeting.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Prime Minister to Question 2162 (Weekly Hansard of 10 June, p. 3560).
Aluminium Production
(Question No. 2308)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) Does Australia enjoy a comparative, if not absolute, cost advantage over Great Britain and the United States of America in aluminium production.
(2) Has Australia's domestic price for aluminium been significantly higher than the spot price in the United Kingdom, for example, was it 36 per cent higher than in the United Kingdom on 13 May 1981.
(3) Has the price of aluminium in Australia also been significantly higher than in the United States.
(4) Did he suggest in answer to a question without notice from the Member for Batman on 13 May 1981 (Hansard, page 2297)' that users of aluminium should, if they had any complaints about price-fixing or the alleged operations of a cartel, take the matter to the Trade Practices Tribunal.
(5) Is the Government a significant user of aluminium.
(6) Will he refer allegations of price-fixing to the Trade Practices Commission or take action in the Federal Court; if not, why not.
(7) IF the Government itself does not wish to take action will it ensure that the Trade Practices Commission has adequate resources to pursue the matter.
(8) As an alternative to referring this matter to the Commission will he help facilitate the provision of corporate legal aid to any local user of aluminium products who is aggrieved at the present pricing practices of aluminium producers but is unable to afford the cost of a private legal action in the Federal Court.
Mr Moore: The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am informed that the substantial level of actual or proposed investment in new aluminium production facilities in Australia suggests that some locations in Australia currently enjoy a cost advantage for new smelters over alternative locations in the United Kingdom and the United States.
Conversely, there are plans to construct new smelters in the United States which indicate that some locations in that country may have a cost advantage over alternative Australian locations. The relative competitiveness of existing plants in Australia and overseas is not known. Much of the existing 5 million tonnes of aluminium production capacity in

the United States is in smelters which are substantially depreciated and which benefit from low cost hydro-electric power. Accordingly their operating costs may be less than those of existing Australian smelters.
(2) There are two broad categories of prices for aluminium-producer prices representing relatively stable longer term considerations, and spot prices which relate to day-to-day situations and are comparatively volatile. Therefore direct comparison between the two prices is not always valid. This can be seen by looking at movements in the two price series over the last few years. I am advised that, in 1979-80 the London Metals Exchange (LME) spot price was for a period 40 to 50 per cent above the Australian producer price, whereas a subsequent easing of world demand resulted in the LME price falling sharply, so that in May 1981 the Australian producer price was about 36 per cent higher than the LMEprice.
(3) I am advised that producer prices in the United States have been about $A80 to $A 160 per tonne lower than Australian producer prices since early 1980. For three years or SO before then, producer prices in the United States were higher than in Australia. The range of published producer prices in the United States and the producer price in Australia have remained relatively unchanged since early 1980, but exchange rate relativities between the $US and $A have changed causing a comparative change in the prices in the two countries.
(4) Yes. However, my answer was meant to refer to the Trade Practices Commission rather than the Trade Practices Tribunal.
(5) A search of contracts arranged by the Department of Administrative Services for aluminium from I July 1978 reveals the following:

Year
1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 (t021/5/81)

Contracts arranged
65 26 37

Amount
$ 1,088,744
532,580 813,885

The above information only relates to materials procured by the Department of Administrative Services at the request of client departments. The information does not include purchases that could be made directly by departments or items that could include components of aluminium in a finished product, for example supply of buses, caravans, et cetera.
(6) I will refer to the Trade Practices Commassion, as the appropriate body to investigate such matters, any allegations made to me of price fixing of aluminium.
(7) The Government considers that adequate resources are provided to the Trade Practices Commission to undertake its statutory responsibilities. It is for the Commission to determine its own priorities in making the most efficient use of its resources.
(8) The provision of financial assistance to a person or corporate body involved in certain proceedings brought under the Trade Practices Act 1974 is a matter to be determined by the Attorney-General under section 170 of that Act. Under section 170, the Attorney-General is required to consider the criteria of 'hardship' and 'reasonableness'. Guidelines setting out the matters that the Attorney-General takes into account when considering the criteria were tabled in the Parliament on 12 March 1981.

\ \
Answers to Questions

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1647

British Pension: Effect of Exchange Rate

(Question No. 2398)

Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:

(I) Does the Department of Social Security take into
account fluctuations in the exchange rates between the Australian dollar and the English pound in the process of deter-
mining to what extent the receipt of British pension affects the amount of Australian pension paid to a person receiving both an Australian and a British pension.

(2) [s it a fact that during the first 6 months of 1981, the exchange rate between the Australian dollar and the British
pound has fallen from approximately $A2 for  Istg to $A 1.80 for  Istg.

(3) What has been the effect of this fluctuation on a pensioner receiving the maximum entitlements for British and Australian pensions.

(4) Is it a fact that while the exchange value of the British pension has fallen during this period the Department of Social
Security has not altered the assessed Australian dollar value of the British pension during that period.

(5) [f so, has this resulted in pensioners being disadvan-
taged because (a) of reduced real income from their British pension and (b) no compensation is made of the reduced real
income in respect of the assessment by the Department of extra income for means test purposes.

(6) How regularly are adjustments in national exchange

rates made to overcome this situation.

.

(7) Will a new exchange rate apply from 4 June 1981.

(8) Will the re-adjustment be made retrospective to take account of fluctuations during the six month period referred
to in part (2); if not, why not.

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has
provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) Yes.

(2) Yes. The Commonwealth Trading Bank on-demand air mail buying rate for pounds sterling varied from $A2.0044 on 2 January 1981 to $A1.796 on 29 May 1981.

(3) to (7) It is impracticable to ensure that Australian pensions, when affected by British pensions, are assessed on
exchange rates obtained by pensioners from banks on a dayto-day basis. Accordingly, for the purpose of calculating the
amount of Australian pension to be paid to a British pensioner, a notional exchange rate is set, based on the Commonwealth Trading Bank on-demand air mail buying rate (the
CTB rate). The general rule has been to alter the notional exchange rate when it differed by five cents or more Aus-
tralian per one pound sterling from the CTB rate if that appeared to be stable. Consequently, to the extent that the
notional exchange rate differs from the CTB rate, people entitled to both British and Australian pensions may receive less or more than their actual entitlem'ent at any given time. Pri-
marily because of the continuous and substantial decline in the value of sterling and the necessary lead-time to effect
changes, it has not been possible at all times to keep the notional exchange rate in line with the CTB rate.

Since I January 1981, the Department of Social Security has altered the notional exchange rate as follows:

from $A2.05 to $A2.00 =  I stg with effect from pension

payday 12/2/81

.

from $A2.00 to $A 1.80 =  I stg with effect from pension

payday 4/6/81

'

from $A 1.80 to $A I. 70 =  I stg with effect from pension payday 16/7/81
from $A1.70 to $AI.60=  I stg with effect from pension payday 27/8/81
Under normal circumstances, the notional exchange rate would have been altered to relate to published exchange rates for the first week in April 1981 but because of machine Lime limitations consequent on the need to pay indexation increases in May 1981, it was not possible to adjust to a new exchange rate until the payday 4 June 1981. The notional exchange rate to apply from that time was fixed at  I stg = $A1.80 having regard to the published exchange rates applying early in May 1981. Subsequent adjustments are detailed above.
The procedure for fixing notional exchange rates is an adminstrative measure designed to avoid the many thousands of transactions that otherwise would be required if adjustments were made for minor variations in the exchange rates. It is also designed to enable minor variations in published exchange rates to be compensated, over time, by balancing variations in the other direction, so providing pensioners with equitable treatment overall. Where the direction of variation is consistent over an extended period, adjustments in the notional exchange rate lag behind the true position but this is the case whether the published exchange rate favours or disadvantages the pensioner.
(8) It has been decided to make retrospective adjustments in Australian pensions to compensate people for losses they have sustained in recent months. Because of the very large number of cases involved it will not be possible to ensure that adjusting payments are made immediately in all instances, but arrangements are being made to process such payments as quickly as possible.
Medical Research: Expenditure
(Question No. 2406)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) Does the paper entilled 'Strategies for funding in the 1980's' prepared by the Public Affairs Commillee of the Australian Society for Medical Research indicate that Australia, through the National Health and Medical Research Council, expended only 85 cents per head of population on medical research in 1978.
(2) Does the paper also show that Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States of America spent on medical research $1.86, $1.29, $1.99 and $10.77 per head respectively.
(3) Does the paper estimate that only 0.43 per cent of the 1980 direct Commonwealth health bill was spent on the Council's budget.
(4) Does Australia expe,nd a sum .sufficient for effective medical research, or is the sum,expended representative of the Government's priority for medical research, in view of overall budgetary restraints in the Pfevailing economic conditions.
(5) What constitutes medical research so far as the Council is concerned.
(6) Is it a fact that, despite a real increase in the total 1981 allocation for research, the perceniage of new projects funded (346 out of 770) was lower than for (a) 1977, (b) 1978 and (c) 1979.
(7) [s there a need to extend the period for which research projects are funded beyond one year; if so, will he consider implementing this proposal.
(8) Is it a fact that, of those applicants for grants in 1980, approximately 100 were unsuccessful.

1648 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Answers (0 Qu(!stions

'(9) Of those sllccessful applicants, have approximately 200 been funded for one year only,
(10) Does the re-application of these projects for consideration for funding constitute an excessive workload for both the applicants and the Council, as the assessors.
(II) Does the position paper describe this situation as one of crisis proportions.
(12) What proposals has he received and will he consider taking steps to resolve this situation.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Yes. The paper does not, however, acknowledge the doubtful validity of such comparisons because of the different bases on which national governments provide support for medical research.
(3) Yes. This figure however is obtained from a comparison of support for medical research through the National Health and Medical Research Council (NH & MRC) with overall Commonwealth expenditure on health. As such it ignores a major contribution to medical research provided by the Government through the Tertiary Education Commission and the Department of Health. The figure also fails to acknowledge the substantial contribution to Australian medical research from local private funding bodies.
(4) Although the Australian medical research community is relatively small, it has achieved international recognition for its contributions to medical research which bears witness to the effectiveness of the research efforts. The Government accepts this, and has continued to pursue its policy of increasing support for medical research as and when economic conditions allow.
(5) Medical research is defined as including all research in which human subjects are involved and all investigations in physiology, biochemistry, pathology and other medical sciences and disciplines reasonably likely to have a close bearing on problems of human health.
(6) Yes. However, the percentage of new projects funded in 1981 was 44.9 per cent, which is considerably higher than the 1980 figure of 36.3 per cent, despite a major increase in the number of applications in 1981.
(7) There is no restriction of project grants to one year funding. The present scheme allows support for one, two or three years.
(8) No. As part (6) of the question states, 770 applications were received in 1980 for support in 1981, of which 346 were supported.
(9) Yes.
(10) to (12) It is acknowledged that. support of medical research projects for one year only is, in many cases, less efficient scientifically and administratively than longer term support. The NH & MRC is investigating methods of reducing the number of one year grants and any recommendations will be carefully considered.
Overservicing by Doctors
(Question No. 2424)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(1) Has his Department any record of the numbers of cases and costs of overservicing by doctors.
(2) What resources does his Department devote to recouping sums associated with overservicing.
: (3) How many cases have been reviewed in the period January to 2 June 1981'

(4) In what States have Medical Services Committees of In-

quiry been established.

.

(5) Do these Committees use uniform criteria in each State.

(6) What sums in assessing overservicing have' been recovered due to the actions of the MediCal Service
Committees.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) My Department has been concerned to determine the extent of overservicing and to develop appropriate measures to bring under control any unnecessary medical benefits
expenditure.

A large-scale (computer-based) fraud and overservicing detection system has been developed and I have asked my De-
partment to undertake full analysis and to produce a plan of
action for consideration by the Government.

Overservicing is defined as services provided by doctorS
that, in the terms of the Health Insurance Act, are not reasonably necessary for the adequate medical care of the patients
concerned. I must make clear that the Health Insurance Act deals with eligibility for medical benefits and not situations where patients and their doctors make arrangements for the
provision of medical services outside the MedicalBenefits
Scheme, for such things as cosmetic surgery. It is the Government's decision that priority for medical benefits expenditure
is to be given to what are regarded as the more essential medical services and that for other medical services patients are free to make other arrangements with their doctors.

(2) It is difficult to be specific as to the resources my De-

partment devotes .to recoup sums associated with overservic-

ing as many resources are used in a multitude of tasks, such as

the computing resources used concurrently in the payment of

Commonwealth medical benefits, the production of statistics

and the production of profiles for the fraud and overservicing

detection system. However, seventeen officers are directly

associated with the support work for medical counsellors and

the eight State Medical or Optometrical Services Committees

of Inquiry and two Review Tribunals. As well, a large part of

the time of the seven medical counsellors currently employed

by my Department is directed to counselling doctors regard-

ing their patterns of practice, and to giving of advice, or of

warnings where appropriate.

.

(3) The number of cases reviewed in the period I January 1981 t02June 1981 involved:

(a) 195 doctors, who were counselled by Departmental medical officers; and

(b) 19 cases of possible overservicing which are undepconsideration by Medical Services Committees of Inquiry.

(4) Medical Services Committees of Inquiry have been es-

tablished in each State (New South Wales includes the Aus-

tralian Capital Territory, and South Australia the Northern

Territory for this purpose). The Health Insurance Act allows

for the establishment of more than one CQmmittee in' each

State and a second Committee has been established in New

South Wales.

.

(5) These Committees have regard to the same definition of
overservicing in the Health Insurance Act and are provided with general guidelines as to operating procedures. However,
each Committee is independent and uses its own professional
experience and judgement in determining whether excessive medical services have been provided.

(6) Effective determinations made since the cOf!1mence-

ment of the operation of the Medical Services Committees of

Inquiry system in 1977 involve the recovery of $) 15,419.37

Commonwealth or fund benefits.

.

Answers to Questions

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1649

Pensions: Persons Residing Overseas
(Question No. 2522)
Mr Charles Jones asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
(I) How many Social Security pensions are paid to persons residing overseas permanently by (a) country of residence and (b) type of pension.
(2) What is the annual cost of each pension referred to in part (I).
(3) Are any pensioners referred to in part (l) required to lodge income statements annually; if so, how many and are they checked.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) (a) Statistics of Social Security pensions paid to persons residing permanently overseas by country of residence are not available. However, statistics of Social Security pensions paid overseas to persons residing overseas, whether permanently or temporarily, by country of residence and by type of pension received, are available for 30 June 1981 and are shown in Table I below.
(b) Statistics of Social Security pensions paid overseas to persons residing overseas, who stated at the time of departure that they were leaving Australia permanently, are available by
type of pension and are sho,wn in Table 2 below. or the 17,230
pensioners residing overseas and paid overseas at 30 June 1981, 1,345 expected to stay overseas for a period of less than I year, 5,424 expected to stay overseas for a period of I year or longer, 9,863 expected to stay overseas permanently and 598 did not state how long they expected to stay overseas.

TABLE 1
PENSIONS AND BENEFITS PAID OVERSEAS
Number of Australian pensions and benefits paid overseas (other than under reciprocal agreements with N.Z. or the UK.) to persons absent from Australia (a) by country ofresidence-30 June 1981

Country of residence

Wives' pensions

Widows pensions Supporting

Age Invalid

parents'

pensions pensions

Age Invalid Class A Class B benefits

Total

Europe-
Albania
Austria Czechoslavakia
Denmark
Finland France Germany (Fed. Rep.)
Greece Hungary
Italy
Malta Netherlands Norway
Poland Portugal
Spain Sweden
Switzerland United Kingdom/Eire
USSR. Yugoslavia
Other Europe Americas-
United States of America
Canada Argentina Chile Other Americas
AsiaCyprus Hong Kong
India Israel
Lebanon Turkey Other Asia
AfricaEgypt
South Africa Other Africa Oceania-

25

2

28

57

14

4

1

7

3

5

91

14

6

1

I

I

I

24

14

7

1

I

I

3

27

23

7

I

4

4

6

45

45

16

I

4

8

3

2

79

188

44

8

6

7

23

4

280

1,444

1,142

121

633

130

345

34

3,849

58

23

3

I

1,526

. 657

128

282

8

84

167

I

94

19

2,863

295

222

17

86

20

29

3

672

224

26

8

6

15

23

3

305

14

5

1

1

2

I

I

25

77

20

6

3

2

6

1

115

49

25

3

17

3

II

I

109

78

55

5

31

19

23

2

213

15

4

1

2

22

22

5

2

5

1

35

2,722

379

61

108

209

565

113

4,157

11

2

4

17

412

483

50

225

47

89

8

1,314

52

18

2

2

4

4

3

85

271

22

8

7

23

32

11

374

209

22

6

7

13

18

5

280

3

II

7

6

2

1

30

3

1

4

8

2

18

24

11

5

9

10

5

65

63

17

10

8

104

27

5

2

5

I

40

12

7

2

1

5

2

10

39

106

8

7

3

5

11

140

36

39

5

20

6

II

4

121

6

49

31

18

7

1

112

30

22

4

7

3

9

1

76

I

12

39

6

14

5

3

4

6

4

30

2

3

7

2

60

2

2

4

I

28

1650 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Answers to Questions

Country of residence

Wives' pensions

Widows pensions Supporting

Age Invalid

parents'

pensions pensions

Age Invalid Class A Class B benefits

Total

New Zealand Papua New Guinea
Other Oceania Notstated(b)

479

120

33

4

14

5

145

82

7

21

97

64

124

912

I

3

I

42

2

I

3

2

27

17

II

18

9

283

Total

8,877

3,612

477

1,549

779

1,544

392 17,230

(a) includes pensions originally paid by virtue of reciprocal portability agreements with Italy, Malta, Turkey and Greece and
continued in force under general legislation of 1973. (b) The intended country of residence of pensioners paid overseas is now recorded in the Pensions ADP System. 'Not stated'
cases are those where the necessary information has not yet been recorded on the ADP System. Note: The above statistics are based on records maintained in Australia of pensioners being paid overseas. Included are pen-
sioners in the process of being transferred from payment in Australia to payment overseas, or vice versa, and also pensioners recently terminated by overseas offices where the Australian record has not yet been adjusted. These statistics are not directly comparable with corresponding figures published last year, but are comparable with preceding years.

Table 2
Estimated pensions and benefits paid overseas to persons residing overseas permanently-30 June 1981

(3) Pensioners residing overseas are required to complete annually a questionnaire which includes details of their income. These forms are checked against the existing record and
where necessary an adjustment is made to the rate of pension.

Age pensions Invalid pensions Wives pensions Widows' pensions-Class A -ClassB . . . ' . . .
Supporting parents' benefits

5,540 1,804 1,072
438 829 180

9,863

(2)-
Age pensions Invalid pensions Widows pensions Supporting parents benefit

$m 23.75 15.41
7.33
1.28

Total

47.78*

- Where figures have been rounded in the tables any discrepancies between totals and sums of their components are due to rounding.

Assistance to St Vincent de Paul Society
(Question No. 2710)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
What financial assistance in the form of grants, loans or subsidies has been given to the St Vincent de Paul Society in each of the last five years.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
My department has not provided any financial assistance in the form of loans to the St Vincent de Paul Society in the last five years. The table below sets out the financial assistance provided by the department in the form of grants and subsidies in the last five years.

Type of assistance
Grants to Community Welfare Agencies (Emergency Relief)
Australian Assistance Plan Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act and
Aged Persons Hostels Act Homeless Persons Assistance Act Handicapped Persons Assistance Act Children's Services Program
Totals

Financial years

1976-77 1977-78

$

$

30,833

2,500

1,850,092 874,500
286,573 32,046

3,384,558
501,136 294,300
37,679

3,074,044 4,220,173

1978-79 $
270,057 567,624 337,925
46,070 1,221,676

1979-80
$
146,000
1,998,211 416,644 349,522 178,929
3,089,306

1980-81

Totals

$

$

143,100

291,600 30,833

1,176,871 1,472,865
427,595 197,778

8,679,789 3,832,769
1,695,915 492,502

3,418,209 15,023,408

Immigration: Timorese Citizens
(Question No. 2726)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:

(1) Further to his answer to question No. 986 (Hansard,5 May 1981, page 2008), are the 343 persons referred to in part (I) as being on the list of persons permitted to migrate to Australia from East Timor, ethnic Timorese.
(2) Does the special humanitarian program referred to in part (3) of his reply provide for the entry of relatives of

\

Answers to Questions

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1651

AustraliaJTimorese residents who are currently resident within East Timor.
(3) Does the answer to part (3) of question No. 986 mean that only 200 ethnic Timorese, out of the 2,668 persons originally nominated, have been permitted to migrate to Australia.
(4) Will he indicate the exact nature of the difficulties in the way of sending a special migration mission to Dili to process applications from the remaining persons on the agreed list.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) As migrant statistics do not reRect ethnic origin, it is not possible to provide the information requested.
(2) The main objective in establishing the Special Humanitarian Program for Timorese last year was to assist those whose lives had been disrupted by events of 1975, and who had been living temporarily outside East Timor (particularly in Portugal) and experiencing settlement difficulties. The program provides for the sponsorship of any Timorese relative of Australain residents who was outside Timor before the end of September. Relatives of Australian residents still in East Timor are eligible for sponsorship under family reunion policy.
(3) No. Information about those of the 2,668 persons who did not qualify for inclusion in the 'agreed list' and who may have subsequently emigrated is not available. Some, however, may have already come here under the Special Humanitarian Program. This is in addition to those who have arrived under both the relaxed and normal family reunion programs. To date, 1,200 persons have been visaed for entry under the Special Humanitarian Program.
(4) As I indicated in ,my reply to question 986, the operation of a special migration team in Dili would depend upon the co-operation of the Indonesian authorities. It is clear from recent discussions with these authorities that it would not be practicable to propose sending another mission to Dili.
Brisbane Airport Development
(Question No. 2756)
Mrs Darling' asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:

(I) Has his attention been drawn to a resolution of the Queensland Liberal Party's Convention recommending to the Federal Government that the proposed opening date for extensions to Brisbane Airport be brought forward.
(2) If so, what action has he taken with respect to this suggestion.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes, the Government has noted details of the resolutions carried at the 1979 Queensland Liberal Party Convention.
(2) As part of the Commonwealth's commitment to the redevelopment of Brisbane Airport, it was announced in the Budget that an estimated $29.9m will be spent on site preparation work in 1981-82. It was also announced that the Commonwealth had approved expenditure of $2m on extensions to the international terminal building to cater for increasing passenger loads. These extensions are scheduled for completion prior to the commencement of the Commonwealth Games in September 1982.
HELP Industries Ltd
(Question No. 2770)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
What assistance has been (a) sought and (b) provided through the Department of Social Security to HELP Industries in Brisbane, for each of the last 5 years.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
HELP Industries Ltd has applied to my Department for various types of subsidy assistance under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act during the past five years. Details of the types and amounts of financial assistance sought and provided appear in the following table:

1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81
Total

Equipment
$ 25,040 47,718 44,324 49,712 36,024
'202,818

Salary
$ 33,553 43,881 48,624 60,699 73,990
260,747

Capital Maintenance

$ 7,049

$ 3,825 2,258

928 247,533

254,582

7,011

Total
$ 69,467 93,857 92,948 111,339 357,547
725,158

Brisbane Airport
(Question No. 2775)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Further to his answer to my Question No. 385 (Hansard, 24 February 1981, page \06) wherein he stated that he was unaware of any great concern from residents in the Shorncliffe and Sandgate areas, Queensland, over the

positioning of the crosswind runway in the plans for the redevelopment of the Brisbane Airport, is it a fact that his Department has received no Parliamentary representations on this matter on behalf of these residents.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. No evidence is available offormal Parliamentary representation to the Department of Transport. However, Senator Georges has referred to the matter in a question upon notice on 28 August 1980 on behalf of the residents in the Eventide Home for Retired Servicemen at Sandgate.

1652 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Answers to Questions

Immigration: Timorese Citizens
(Question No. 2786)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) When was the list of Timorese citizens permitted to migrate from East Timor to Australia agreed to byboth the Indonesian and Australian Governments.
(2) How many persons were included on the original list.
(3) How many of those who have been permitted to leave East Timor and who have arrived in Australia have been of (a) Chinese, (b) native East Timoreseand (c) other origins.
(4) What difficulties have been experienced by those on the original list in obtaining permission from the Indonesian Government to migrate.
(5) How many of the 650 relatives of Australian residents referred to by him in his reply to question No. 986 (Hansard, 5 May 1981, page 2007) have come from (a) Portugal, (b) East Timor and (c) other countries.
(6) What are the difficulties in sending a special migration mission to Dili and are these difficulties outweighted by the humanitarian considerations of the proposal.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) July i978.
(2) On the assumption that the honourable member was not referring to the list which was negotiated between the Australian and Indonesian Governments in July 1978, the original list included 2,668 persons. As a result of the negotiations in July 1978 this list was reduced to 625 persons.
(3) As statistics of migrants do not identify ethnic origin, it is not possible to provide the information sought.
(4) The difficulties claimed by some East Timorese in obtaining permission to migrate under the 'agreed list' program have been the subject of continuing discussions with the Indonesian authorities. We have recently received positive assurances from the Indonesian Government that family reunion movements will not be impeded.
(5) An estimated 80 per cent of the evacuees arrived from Portugal. The remainder came from other sources such as Hong Kong and Taiwan, excluding (of course) East Timor.
(6) As I indicated in my reply to question 986, the operation of a special migration mission in Dili would depend upon the co-operation of the Indonesian authorities. It is clear from recent discussions with these authorities that it would not be practicable to propose sending another mission to Dili.
Cathay Pacific Airways: Services from Brisbane to Hong Kong ,
(Question No. 2824)
Mr Jull asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:
(I) Has Cathay Pacific Airways applied for rights to operate services from Brisbane to Hong Kong and has this application been rejected; if so, why.
(2) Which other international airlines have applied for rights into Brisbane since 1 January 1981 and which have been accepted.
Mr Hunt-The answer td the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) In May 1981 the United Kingdom sought Al\stralia's agreement in principle to services by a Bri.tish airline between Hong Kong and Brisbane. The present level of demand was not considered sufficient to justify an increase in capacity between East Australia and Hong Kong.
Passengers can travel between Brisbane and Hong Kong without any cost penalty, compared to passengers travelling to/from Sydney and Melbourne, because fares are set at the same levels for all three East Australian cities.
The United Kingdom indicated it would raise the question again, when it had a more precise idea of the time at which a British airline would wish to commence Brisbane-Hong Kong services.
(2) Philippine Airlines was granted traffic rights at Brisbane in March 1981. PAL currently operate one service per week between Brisbane and Manila. No other applications were received.
Alleged Design Flaw in Ford Cortinas
(Question No. 2829)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 25 August 1981:
(I) Is he able to say whether the Australian Automobile Association alleged that a design flaw exists in the brass connections linking fuel lines with carburettors in 2 litre Ford Cortinas constructed between 1972 and 1974.
(2) Have investigations into this matter been conducted at the request of the Government; if so, what are the details.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Under the terms of an industry code of practice endorsed by the Australian Transport Advisory Council in 1972 it is the manufacturer's responsibility to rectify safety related vehicle defects when he is satisfied that they stem from a design deficiency. I understand that there are on-going discussions in this particular case between the Australian Automobile Association and the manufacturer as to the source of the problem reported. My colleague, the Minister for Transport, informs me that the Australian Transport Advisory Council has recently established a task group to review the operation of the industry code and the evidence and the negotiations between the parties in this case will most likely have some relevance to the arrangements which that Council will adopt for the future.
Statutory Authorities under the Prime Minister
(Question No. 2839)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Prime Minister, and all other Ministers, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I) Further to the Review of Commonwealth Functions which called for Ministers to scrutinise all authorities within their portfolios (Hansard, 30 April 1981,page 1850) which statutory authorities within the Minister's portfolio are.to be (a) terminated, (b) continued and (c) reviewed in depth.
(2) If the scrutiny referred to in part (I) has not been completed, when will it'be finalised and the results reported to Parliament.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1653

(I) and (2) Ministers are at present examining all statutory authorities within their portfolios with a view to recommending those that should be terminated, continued or reviewed in depth. The investigations are to be completed so that the results can be forwarded to the Prime Minister within the next three months. The Government will then be in a position to give further consideration to matters raised in those reports. The,outcome of the deliberations will be made public in due course.
Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Social Security
(Question No. 2851)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for: Social Security, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I) Further to the Review of Commonwealth Functions which called for Ministers to scrutinise all authorities within their portfolios (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1850) which statutory authorities within the Minister's portfolio are to be (a) terminated, (b) continued and (c) reviewed in depth.
(2) If the scrutiny referred to in part (I) has not been completed, when will it be finalised and the results reported to Parliament.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) Before I July 1981, the only statutory authorities within my portfolio were the Compensation Tribunal and the Commissioner for Employees' Compensation.
Following the Review of Commonwealth Functions, it '>ras decided that the Compensation Tribunal be transferred to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal from I July 1981 with support services being provided by the Attorney-General's Department, and that the Office of the Commissioner for Employees' Compensation be continued.
Committee of Privileges: Mr David E. Berthelsen
(Question No. 2865)
Mr Jacobi asked the Leader of the House, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
Further to his answer to questions Nos 407 and 408 (Hansard, 13 May 1981, page 2361) concerning the report of the House of Representatives Committee of Privileges into the alleged discrimination and intimidation of Mr David E. Berthelsen, when will the House be given an opportunity to debate the recommendations of the Committee, particularly those relating to a proposed parliamentary witnesses protection Act and the conferring of power on Mr Speaker to make an interim referral of a matter to the Committee of Privileges when the Parliament is not sitting.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
An opportunity will be provided in this sitting to debate the report of the House of Representatives Comrriittee of Privileges referred to by the honourable member.
Staff Establishment for Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 2873)
Mr Morrison asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:

How many (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Division positions were on the establishment of his Departmentasat (i) 30June 1975and (ii) 30June 1981.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The establishment of the Department as at (i) 30 June 1975 and (ii) 30June 1981 was:

First Division
(i) (ii)

Second Third Fourth Division Division Division

43

455

302

42

368

225

Total
801 636

Consultants: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 2874)
Mr Morrison asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I) Does page 2 of the 1980-81 Annual Report of his Department list O. Harries and A. Wilson as consultants; if so, when did each become consultants and what are the terms and conditions of their employment.
(2) In what activities are they engaged as consultants.
(3) Have either been associated with the Commonwealth Public Service previously; if so, in what capacity and for what periods.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) Professor O. Harries commenced a full time engagement with the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet on 27 March 1981 with remuneration at the level 4, Second Division salary level. He provides advice on a variety of policy matters including Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting policy issues and related subjects. Prior to his engagement he had been employed with the Department of Foreign Affairs.
Dr A. Wilson is an officer of the Australian Atomic Energy Commission. Since January 1981 his services have been available as a part time adviser on energy matters. Dr Wilson continues to be paid by the Australian Atomic Energy Commission and receives no additional salary in respect of his part time advisory role.
Transcontinental Railway: Use of Radioactive Rocks as Ballast
(Question No. 2875)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I) Was radioactive ballast, taken from uranium mines in South Australia, used on the up-graded Transcontinental railway; if so, what quantity;
(2) What types of radioactive rocks were used;
(3) When were these rocks laid as ballast;
(4) Who were the contractors who laid the ballast;
(5) How much was paid for it;
(6) Between what locations on the line was the radioactive ballast used;
(7) What is the current level of radioactivity in the relevant area;
(8) How often is the level of radioactivity monitored;

1654 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Answers to Questions

(9) When was it last monitored.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes, 254,000 cubic yards of tailings were used from the Radium Hill Mine heavy media section of the concentration plant.
(2) The types of rocks used were non-mineralised rock (country rock) plus small quantities of Davidite (IronTitanium Mineral with small amounts of Uranium).
(3) The rocks were laid as ballast between 1964 and 1967.
(4) The ballast was laid by South Australian Railways Day Labour Force.
(5) The cost and delivery of the ballast totalled $296,1 14.
(6) The ballast was used between Winnininnie and Cockburn.
(7) Tests conductd by the Health Commission of South Australia show that results are typical of a background for a granite area which does not constitute a health hazard.
(8) The level of radioactivity over this section is not monitored.
(9) The tests conducted by the Health Commission were carried out early in 1981.
Canberra Army Reserve Unit
(Question No. 2897)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that the Canberra Army Reserve units have cancelled Monday night parades; if so, does this constitute a reduction in the amount of training time available.
(2) If the training time has been reduced, what is the reason.
(3) Have similar cancellations taken place elsewhere.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) No. Individual unit training programmes are at the discretion of unit Commanding Officers. The Canberra Army Reserve Unit (3 RNSWR) has structured its night parades principally for Officer and Senior NCO training. Training of soldiers will be conducted on selected night parades, weekends and annual field exercises. There has been no reduction in the total training time available.
Food Aid: Infant Milk Formula
(Question No. 2961)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 8 September 1981:
(I) Were 100 tonnes of skim milk powder included in the food aid donated by the Australian Government to Afghan refugees in 1980-81?
(2) Was infant formula part of this particular form of food aid?
(3) Has it been Australia's practice to donate infant milk formula as food aid to under-developed countries since 197 5?
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(I) Yes. In response to a request from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 100 tonnes of skim milk powder were provided for inclusion in the basic food ration of wheat, edible oil and skim milk powder, for distribution to Afghan refugees in Pakistan.

(2) No.
(3) No.
Defence Force Salary Rates and Allowances
(Question No. 2981)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
Has the Government accepted the recommendations of the Committee of Reference for Defence Force Pay contained in the second report Adequacy of Defence Force Remuneration (Work Value Change); if not, what alternative adjustments are to be made to salary rates and allowances and from what date are they to operate.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes.
National Aboriginal Conference Election
(Question No. 3000)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) Will the Australian Electoral Office be involved in any way in the National Aboriginal Conference (NAC) election to be held in October 1981; if so, what are the details.
(2) What consideration has the Australian Electoral Office given to using the NAC Election as a means of Aboriginal electoral enrolment.
(3) If no such plans are or have been made, will he now urge the Electoral Office to give this matter speedy consideration, especially with respect to remote areas; if not, why not.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Australian Electoral Office (in conjunction with the Department of Aboriginal Affairs) has the responsibility for the conduct of NAC elections.
(2) and (3) The position is as set out in my answer to Question Number 2876 in the House of Representatives on 10 September 1981 (Hansard pages 1263 and 1264).
Water Resources: National Objectives
(Question No. 3006)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 September 1981 :
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the ASTEC Report entitled 'Basic Research and National Objectives' which advanced National Objectives for Water Resources as being to (a) develop and apply improved mamigement practices, integrated with land use planning and management, which reverse trends in the deterioration of water quality and associated land resources, (b) devise and l\pply improved practices to minimise water use and eliminate waste, and develop alternative water resources such as desalination, re-use, and the maximum use of water from high-rainfall areas and (c) improve understanding of subterranean water resources, their sustained yield management and utilisation.
(2) If so, is it a fact that the report notes that each objective is of national as distinct from regional or local importance.

Answers to Questions

22 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1655

(3) Does the Minister support these 3 objectives; if so, (a)
what action will the Government take to implement this basic research and (b) through which agency will it do so.

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) Yes.

(2) Yes.

(3) Yes. These objectives are consistent with those iden-
tified in the Government's water policy statement (House of Representatives Hansard. pages 1211-1213,28 March 1979).

(a) Most of the projects funded by the Government under the research program of the Australian Water Resources
Council are directly relevant to these objectives. In addition,
the Commonwealth-States water resources assessment program has considerably improved knowledge of the quantity and quality of Australia's groundwater resources.

(b) As far as practicable, research related to these objec-

tives will be considered within the scope of the research

program of the Australian Water Resources Council. It is also

a matter for consideration by CSIRO, which undertakes the

largest water research program in Australia.

.

Groundwater Pollution: United Nations Environment Program
(Question No. 3007)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(1) Can the Minister say whether the pollution threat to Earth's water is one of the emerging dangers featured in the 1981 State of the World Environment Report from the United Nations Environment Program in Nairobi.
(2) If so, has the UN Environment Program identified the need to protect our supplies of usable groundwater as one of three topics which are especially timely.
(3) Does the Minister support this element of the UN program; if so, what action will be taken to protect groundwaters in Australia.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) Yes. Support for this element of the report is consistent with the Government's water policy statement as set out in the House of Representatives Hansard, pages 1211-1213, 28 March 1979. The Government is providing funds for research and assessment activities relating to Australia's groundwater resources and the report will be referred to the Groundwater Committee of the Australian Water Resources Council for its consideration.

Groundwater Pollution Conference
(Question No. 3062)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the recently published proceedings of the Groundwater Pollution Conference, which was supported by the Australian Water Resources Council.

(2) Has Australia developed criteria for groundwater quality in the 2t years since the conference was held as recommended by the conference participants; if not, why not.
(3) Has intergovernmental support been provided for research into (a) the land treatment and groundwater treatment of waste-water and (b) microbiological and radio-active pollution.
(4) Has intergovernmental co-operation been reached to develop guidelines for the monitoring and management of the quality of groundwater, as recommended by conference participants; if so, what is the extent and nature of this support; if not, why not.
(5) What action has been taken to promote each of the specific research needs, and to promote the direction of future research into groundwater pollution in Australia as envisaged by conference participants, namely (a) the increased study of the fundamentals of solute movement in the unsaturated zone, in heterogeneous rocks and in fractured rocks, (b )the determination of whether solute dispersion in aquifers is velocity dependent, (c) the development of equipment and guidelines for obtaining representative samples from bores, (d) the urgent need to develop practical techniques for determining trace viruses in water, (e) the determination of the life cycle of pathogens and the persistence of carcinogenic substances in groundwater and (f) the identification of groundwater systems likely to be affected by future development and evaluation of the efficiency of local industry's effiuent disposal techniques.
(6) Which bodies or authorities have undertaken this work and how has this research been co-ordinated.
(7) Did the summary of the conference state that management (of groundwater) was seen to be a responsibility of government and specify that this should be integrated with national development planning; if so, does he support this statement and what action has been taken, or will be taken, to give effect to the recommendation.
(8) If he does not support the recommendation referred to in part (7), what is the reason.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.
(2) The Australian Water Resources Council (AWRC) and the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC), in collaboration, have recommended guidelines on desirable quality for drinking water in Australia. These guidelines apply equally to surface and underground water.
(3) to (8) Prior to, and since the Groundwater Pollution Conference, the Commonwealth has provided funds under the research program of the Australian Water Resources Council for many projects in the research areas identified by the honourable member. Summaries of these projects are included in the Inventory of Water Resources Research in Australia which has been published by the Department of National Development and Energy or its predecessors in eight editions since 1965. Information on groundwater-related research topics can be readily identified, including the source of funds. The collaborative Commonwealth-States water resources assessment program continues to provide valuable information on the quantity and quality of Australia's ground water resources, and the AWRC Groundwater Committee provides a valuable forum for the consideration at the national level of groundwater issues.
In relation to research issues emanating from the Groundwater Pollution Conference, they will be considered by the Groundwater Committee of the Australian Water Resources Council at its next meeting as a basis for advice to the Council

1656 REPRESENTATIVES 22 September 1981

Answers to Questions

on desirable action within the Council's collaborative machinery.
In addition, the AWRC is sponsoring a seminar on the assessment and management of groundwater in fractured rocks, to be held in Canberra between 31 August and 3 September 1982, and an international conference on groundwater for late 1983. Planning for this conference is at an early stage, but it is likely to deal with assessment, pollution and development aspects of groundwater.
Victorian College of Pharmacy
Mr MacKellar-On 15 September 1981 (Hansard page 1286), the honourable member for Melbourne (Mr Innes) asked me a question without notice concerning the funding of the Victorian College of Pharmacy.

The Minister for Educatiop has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Funding for the Victorian College of Pharmacy falls within the Commonwealth's grants program for advanced education. The Government has indicated the total level or recurrent funds to be provided for higher education over the 1982-84 triennium and the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission; and its constituent Councils, have been in consultation with State and institutional authorities on the detailed distribution of available funds among institutions. J expect to be in a position to table the Commission's report shortly. The report will include recommendations on the level of recurrent grants to be provided to the Victorian College of Pharmacy over the fourthcoming triennium.


