House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 124, 1981 Wednesday, 9 September 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Petitions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1049

Wednesday, 9 September 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS
The Deputy Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That a need exists within the community for the Community Youth Support Scheme.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government not remove any funds for the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Adermann and Dr Everingham.
Petitions received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
We, the undersigned, are concerned with Government closure of CYSS (Community Youth Support Scheme).
CYSS groups act as a resource centre for unemployed youth and provide low budget living skills, job orientated skill, crafts and communication skills. The breakdown of this link between Youth and general Community Activities will surely be of great harm to many unemployed Youth in the Illawarra Region.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government continues its allocation of funds to enable the provision of Community Youth Services in New South Wales.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrBaume.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia who respectfully showeth their anger and condemnation at the Fraser Government's decision to abolish all Community Youth Support Schemes on 31 st October 1981.
Further they denounce the decision for the disastrous effects it will have on growing numbers of unemployed young people around Australia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government immediately and fully reverse its decision and restore complete funding to the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lionel Bowen.
Petition received.

Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament as assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia who respectfully showeth their anger and condemnation at the Fraser Government's decision to abolish all Community Youth Support Schemes on the 31 st October 1981.
Further they denounce the decision for the disastrous effects it will have on growing numbers of unemployed young people around Australia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government immediately and fully reverse its decision and restore complete funding to the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr John Brown.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. The Community Youth Support Scheme provides meaningful activities for the unemployed;
2. It lends assistance in acquiring job-searchi ng skills;
3. And it provides an opportunity for them to talk through personal problems.
The Special Projects for Activities, Crafts and Employment program (S.P.A.C.E.) is therefore essential in meeting the needs of the unemployed young people in the community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(I) Current Community Youth Support Scheme funding is maintained and continued after October 31st, 1981,
(2) The Special Projects for Activities, Crafts and Employment program is continued to be funded in full during these times of growing unemployment.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Cass.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we oppose the legislation which will cancel funding for CYSS (Community Youth Support Scheme).
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government allow the CYSS to continue to give the service which is so necessary for many youth in these difficult times.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

1050 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Petitions

That a need exists within the community for the Community Youth Support Scheme.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government not remove any funds for the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the decision of the Government to abandon the only tangible form of direct assistance to Australia's young unemployed, i.e., the Community Youth Support Scheme, will have a serious effect on the thousands of young Australians presently benefiting from the operation of the scheme through almost 300 decentralised CYSS centres around Australia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will reverse this retrograde decision before the due date of termination on October 31 st.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the abolition of the Community Youth Support Scheme shows a callous indifference and lack of sensitivity to the needs of the unemployed youth of Australia.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government continues to fund the Community Youth Support Scheme throughout Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned at the Federal Government's decision to abolish the Community Youth Support Scheme (CYSS) There is no other agency to give the support and care which the participants of the COI:nmunity Youth Support Scheme require. Transitional Education schemes are suitable for only a small number of the unemployed.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament allocate the necessary funds to enable the continuation of the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.

Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully demand:
That the decisions of the Government to end funding for the Community Youth Support Scheme on October 31st, 1981 as announced by the Treasurer in the Budget Speech of 18th August, 1981 be reversed.
Community Youth Support Schemes have operated successfully for five years and provided valuable community support and educational opportunity for unemployed young people which will not be adequately provided by other Government programmes.
The full effect of the abolition of CYSS will be felt by the unemployed people whose opportunities to participate in the Australian community will be further diminished.
The petitioners humbly pray that the House of Representatives take all steps necessary to ensure continued Government fundingofCYSS.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Wallis.
Petition received.

Community Youth Support Scheme

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully
showeth:

That the serious youth unemployment problem is a direct result of the Community's failure to create sufficient jobs.

In these circumstances the decision to abolish Community Youth Support Schemes (CYSS) is a socially retrogressive step. The CYSS projects provide valuable support services and work training for many young unemployed.

We the undersigned are concerned that the closure of

CYSS Projects may lead young unemployed to become in-

volved in anti-social behaviour such as crime, vandalism, pros-

titution, rebellious behaviour and mob action. There is the

even more frightening prospect that many more young people

will give up hope of obtaining a job, become idle and even con-

template suicide.

.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government reverse its decision to abolish CYSS Projects and provide sufficient funds to enable the various CYSS Centres to continue their valuable work with the young unemployed in the future.

And your petitioners as in.duty bound will ever pray.

by Sir Phillip Lynch, Mr Fisher, Mr Kent and MrMilton.

Petitions received.

Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully request:
That the Government Fulfils its responsibility in ensuring adequate support For unemployed youth, and require the following steps be taken as a matter of urgency:
I. That the Community Youth Support Scheme be retained.

Petitions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1051

2. That a co.mprehensive evaluatio.n o.f all yo.uth training and suppo.rt programmes, including CYSS, be co.nducted and that this evaluatio.n fully inco.rpo.rates the views o.f participants, project o.fficers and management co.mmittees.
And yo.ur petitio.ners as in duty bo.und will ever pray.
by Dr Jenkins.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To. the Ho.no.urable the Speaker and Mem1?ers o.f the Ho.use o.f Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petitio.n o.f the undersigned citizens o.f Geelo.ng respectfully sho.weth:
That the serio.us yo.uth unemplo.yment problem is a direct result o.f the co.mmunity's failure to. create sufficient jo.bs.
We, the peo.ple o.f the Geelo.ng Co.mmunity, request that the Co.mmunity Yo.uth Suppo.rt Schemes (CYSS) througho.ut Australia be resto.red.
We particularly ask that the Geelo.ng and Co.rio. CYS Schemes be o.ngo.ing after the propo.sed c1o.sure date, 31st Octo.ber, as they have co.ntributed much to. o.ur co.mmunity. CYSS has provided interests, suppo.rt, o.ppo.rtunities for service, a vo.ice in the co.mmunity and jo.b training fo.r its tho.usands o.f participants o.ver the past fo.ur years in Geelo.ng.
CYSS is an impo.rtant part o.f o.ur co.mmunity and we, as a co.mmunity, suppo.rt it especially in times o.f high yo.uth unemplo.yment that serio.usly affects o.ur regio.n.
Yo.ur petitio.ners therefo.re humbly pray that the Federal Government reverse its decisio.n to. abo.lish CYSS Projects and provide sufficient funds to. enable the vario.us CYSS Centres to. co.ntinue their valuable wo.rk with the yo.ung unemplo.yed in the future.
And yo.ur petitio.ners as in duty bo.und will ever pray.
by Mr Scholes.
Petition received.
Health Care Services
To. the Ho.no.urable the Speaker and Members o.f the Ho.use o.f Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petitio.n o.f the undersigned citizens o.f Australia respectfully sho.weth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes propo.sed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal o.f Co.mmo.nwealth medical benefits fo.r the uninsured and the introductio.n o.f a means test fo.r free public ho.spital care;
That the health insurance changes promo.te inequity, inefficiency and lack o.f universal co.verage;
That the public ho.spital system and co.mmunity health pro.- grammes will be financially disadvantaged by the abdicatio.n o.f Co.mmo.nwealth respo.nsibility and funding.
Yo.ur petitio.ners therefo.re humbly pray that the House o.f Representatives will take all steps necessary to. reintroduce a system o.f health care based o.n ability to. pay, and access to. health care based o.n medical need.
And yo.ur petitio.ners as in duty bo.und will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett, Mr Dawkins, Mr Free and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.

Diabetics: Insulin
To. the Ho.no.urable the Speaker and Members o.f the Ho.use o.f Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petitio.n o.f the undersigned citizens o.f Australia respectfully sho.weth:
That in view o.f the recent standardisatio.n o.f insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect o.f increasing the Co.st o.f bo.th items to. the Diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent Diabetic must use the same, daily o.r twice daily acco.rding to. medicatio.n.
Yo.ur petitio.ners therefo.re humbly pray that syringes be made available o.n the N.H.S. and that insulin prescriptio.ns revert to. 10 bo.ttles as previo.usly supplied.
And yo.ur petitio.ners as in duty bo.und will ever pray.
by Mrs Child, Mr Drummond, Mr Holding and Dr Jenkins.
Petitions received.
Trans Australia Airlines
To. the Ho.no.urable the Speaker and Members o.f the Ho.use o.f Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petitio.n o.f the undersigned citizens o.f Australia respectfully sho.weth:
Many Australians depend almo.st exclusively upo.n Trans Australia Airlines fo.r the provisio.n o.f essential air services.
The Federal Liberal party po.licy o.bjective o.f selling Trans Australia Airlines within 4 years is co.ntrary to. the natio.nal interest.
Sale o.fTrans Australia Airlines wo.uld inevitably result in:
(i) the creatio.n o.f a private mo.no.po.ly of majo.r airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher do.mestic air fares.
Y o.ur petitio.ners therefo.re humbly pray that the House o.f Representatives will reject o.utright any propo.sal to. sell Trans Australia Airlines.
And yo.ur petitio.ners as in duty bo.und will ever pray.
by Dr Everingham, Mr Kent, Mr Morris and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Postal Services
To. the Ho.nourable Speaker and Members o.f the Ho.use o.f Representatives o.f the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petitio.n o.f the undersigned citizens o.f the Co.mmo.nwealth respectfully sho.weth. That the plan by the Australian Po.stal Co.mmissio.n to. investigate do.wngrading or c1o.sure o.f Maldo.n Po.st Office places in jeo.pardy the existing po.stal and mail services to. o.ur co.mmunity.
Yo.ur petitio.ners therefo.re pray that the Australian Government will take immediate actio.n to. prevent the Australian Postal Co.mmissio.n taking any actio.n to. do.wngrade the po.stal and mail services o.f o.ur co.mmunity.
And yo.ur petitio.ners as in duty bo.und will ever pray.
by Mr Bourchier.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To. the Ho.nourable Speaker and Members o.f the Ho.use o.f Representatives o.f the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petitio.n o.f the undersigned citizens o.f the Co.mmo.nwealth respectfully sho.weth:

1052 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Petitions

That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Geelong West Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scholes.
Petition received.
Funding of Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia/New South Wales respectfully showeth:
That many thousands of women and children in the Australian community .who use the services of Women's Refuges, Rape Crisis Centre and Women's Health Centres:
I. Express their concern at the decision of the Federal Government to pass to the States, the responsibility of funding those essential services because of the poor record already demonstrated by some States;
2. Call on the Federal Government to reverse that decision;
3. Request that the Government ensure that there is one department which will administer all funds for the above under the heading of Women's Services;
4. Propose that future funding should be on a guaranteed triennial basis which must take into account inflation and indexation rises;
5. Request definite government policy commitment to a substantial injection of funds to consolidate existing services and develop new ones. That such funds be distributed in such a way as to insure equitable national distribution of these resources.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles Jones and Mr Morris.
Petitions received.
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
I. Note that legislation establishing plant breeders' rights in other countries has had serious adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilisers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
2. Recognise that maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and

promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic materials from falling into private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant breeders' rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent and Mr Milton.
Petitions received.
Department of Social Security
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That current welfare staffing levels in the Department of Social Security are totally inadequate and that serious consideration be given to increasing Social Work and Welfare Officer positions in the Department.
Your petitipners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government not remove any Social Work or Welfare Officer in the Department of Social Security positions either through direct action or through any Ilonfilling of those positions which exist.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Adermann.
Petition received.
Smithfield Tranit 412 Station
To the Honourable Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully states:
As concerned residents of the Elizabeth-Smithfield community we regard the present site of the Smithfield Tranit 412 Station, in the midst of a densely populated residential region, as totally unacceptable. We request that a base of such operational capacities and critical strategic military and navigational importance be relocated at an appropriate distance from the metropolitan area.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Copyright
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
The Copyright Act as amended by the Copyright Amendment Act, 1980, places unnecessary restrictions on the education system.
All photocopying and videorecording used exclusively for education purposes should be exempted from the provisions of the Copyright Act.
Any amendments to the copyright law which affect the education system should not be made operative during an academicyear.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Carlton.
Petition received.

Petitions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1053

Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency.
(I) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-c1assified under Therapeutic Agents (not under "Cosmetics" as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-c1assification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. The proposal to introduce fees for higher and second degrees will mean that access to post-graduate and recurrent education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and ability to cope with technological change will suffer; this proposal must be seen as a step in the direction of the introduction of fees for all tertiary students.
2. The proposed introduction of a loans scheme for students will mean graduating with a heavy debt or being denied a tertiary education if loans are refused because a student is seen as a "poor risk" (particularly affecting women and those doing non-vocational courses); only the rich will be able to get a tertiary education without course restrictions and the burden of indebtedness.
3. In regard to the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the light of the availability of loans, it should be noted that any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate, can only further limit access to education.
4. The proposed restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance to those needing qualifications for employment will severely restrict access to a full high school education and necessary bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school early.
5. The proposal not to fund 30 Colleges of Advanced Education if they are not rationalised is an attack on teacher education. This attack will create teacher shortages in the mid I980s, restrict access to education now and endanger the future quality of teaching available to Australian children.

Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(i) post-secondary tuition fees not be introduced for any courses or For any category of students;
(ii) that the TEAS scheme be extended so as to more fully meet the real financial needs of students.
(iii) that a comprehensive loans scheme not be introduced. (iv) that there be no restriction of Adult Secondary
Assistance. (v) that the proposal not to fund 30 CAEs unless they are
rationalised be rescinded.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Institute of Early Childhood Development
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the Federal Government should reconsider the proposal to merge the Institute of Early Childhood Development with another tertiary institution.
Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray that the Institute of Early Childhood Development be allowed to continue operating as an independent and autonomous institution providing specialised skills and unique training applicable to the development of children aged 0-6 years.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Commonwealth Superannuation Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That it is unfair and discriminatory to make cost of living adjustments to fortnightly payments of Commonwealth Superannuation on an annual basis, while most other members of the Australian community receive twice yearly adjustments to their income.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will end this anomalous practice by instituting twice yearly adjustments for Commonwealth Superannuees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the basic rate of pensions and rent allowance is not sufficient to meet present day needs. In light of the 20 per cent increase in MPs salaries pensioners are being unfairly treated.
Therefore, your petitioners urge that:
I. Basic rate of pension be increased to 30 per cent of the average weekly earnings.
2. Rent allowance be increased from present $5.00 weekly to $20.00 weekly.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

1054 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Petitions

:,

Diabetics: Insulin

To.the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of

Representatives in Parliament. The undersigned citizens of

Australia respectfully showeth:

That an anomaly exists in the Government's health scheme
which allows diabetics free use of the life saving drug, insulin, but not the syringes used to administer the drug;

That the use of syringes is not an additional medication, but an essential part of the same trea-tment, that the cost of a yea~'s supply of insulin syringes is in excess of$IOO.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will allow diabetics free use of insulin syringes.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mrs Darling.

Petition received.

Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government and Telecom management have presided over the deliberate scaling down of Australia's telegram services, to the disadvantage of those poorer people in the community who cannot afford Telex or telephone facilities and rely on the telegram service in time of emergency;
That the Government and Telecom management have undermined the telegram service by increasing the unit cost of telegrams by over 130 per cent in four years with the result that the use of telegrams as a form of communication has fallen by approximately 60 per cent in that time.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government and Telecom management retain the telegram service at a standard and cost that will not disadvantage the ordinary citizen.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

Funding of Community Kindergartens
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That community kindergartens perform indispensable services in the preparation of children for education;
That, without sufficient Federal and State Government funding, community kindergartens will be placed beyond the economic reach of many families, to the disadvantage of their children;
That the Commonwealth Government's contribution to the funding of community kindergartens has decreased greatly in recent years, causing concern among parents and those concerned with children's education.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth GovernmeQt's support for funding of community kindergartens be restored to 1976 funding levels, i.e., 75 per cent of total approved wages for kindergarten staff.
And your petitioners as in du\r,bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

Overseas Aid
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That Australia, as an affluent and developed nation, should be able to expend more of its resources on the alleviation of human suffering and deprivation in other less developed countries.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will:
Increase overseas aid to 0.7% of Australia's G.N.P.
Increase to 4% the proportion of overseas aid channelled through recognised non-government organisations such as World Vision.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Pancrease: Australian Drug Evaluation Committee
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth: that tests performed at the Royal Children's Hospital, Brisbane, indicate that the drug, pancrease, can provide significant relief and assistance to sufferers of cystic fibrosis.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Government will require the processing of the drug, pancrease, by the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee of the Department of Health, as a matter of high priority.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Use of Live Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
2. That no central records exist on such inhumane use of live animals for experimentation purposes, yet research institutions in several Australian States engage insuch practice.
3. That there exists no uniform legislationbetween the States concerning responsible standards of research conduct, indeed, in some States there is a complete lack of legislation altogether.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Hpuse of Representatives will enact legislation to require:
(a) the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics on the numbers of live animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purpose;
and (b) the National Health and Medical Research Council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all Government, Industry and Educational Research Laboratories.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.

Petitions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1055

Petition received.
Taxation: Compensation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Australian Taxation Office has now advised that payments of weekly compensation arising from pneumoconiosis are to be considered assessable income for the purposes of taxation.
That pneumoconiosis is a progressively disabling illness, which places its victims in a physically and socially disadvantaged position.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Australian Government will amend the relevant sections of the Income Tax Assessment Act (1936 as amended) to exclude payments of compensation arising from pneumoconiosis.
That in the meantime the Australian Taxation Office will not make taxation deductions from such payments.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Proposed Sinai Peacekeeping Force
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. Bipartisan concern exists in the Australian community over involvement of Australian military forces in the Middle East where those forces are not under United Nations auspices;
2. Concern is also evident about Australia's military capacity to provide those forces without weakening Australia's defence;
3. Sinai is not an area within Australia's sphere ofinftuence; and,
4. Australian agricultural export markets may be adversely affected by Australian military particillation in Sinai.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Parliament does not ratify Australian military participation in the proposed Sinai peacekeeping force, unless that force is fully controlled by the United Nations.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Privacy and Personal Information
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Personal Information discussion paper number 14, brought down by the Law Reform Commission in June 1980, undermines the family unit and the authority of pareQts, which is the Christian basis of our society, by proposing that 'between 12 and 16 years, a child should be entitled to object to disclosure of information to a parent.'
It is your petitioners' sincere belief that:

(a) An adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a mature enough stage of life to decide whether or not the disclosure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.
(b) As a record keeper has no responsibility for the child, and as his moral standards maybe different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.
(c) A parent has a unique position which may enable him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the right to guide the child in the direction he/she feels fit.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Members of the House of Representatives will reject the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission and find some other means to protect children from the excessive abuse of some parents.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrDobie.
Petition received.
South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned at proposed future hydro electric developments in South West Tasmania. This area is on the Register of the National Estate and therefore is of national concern.
We call on the Federal Government not to allocate runds or allow funds to be raised for development of roads or dams in the South West but rather to provide such funds as would enable the preservation of this area. It is a national issue and therefore Tasmanians should not be made to bear any financial burden resultant from its preservation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free.
Petition received.
Community Health Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the continued cutback in funds for our local Community Health Centre will lead to a decline in the status of our community. We appreciate their varied services, which include baby-health services, counselling, physiotherapy, community nurses, preventative services, etc.
We believe that the Community Programme will cut rising health costs by supporting people in their homes. Therefore, we support the basic health care and prevention carried Qut by our Health Centre.
We request that adequate funding is provided for the continuation of, and expansion of these valuable services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House consider this petition.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFree.
Petition received.

1056 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Petitions

Vehicle Manufacturing Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the proposed changes to assistance to the passenger motor vehicle and components industries after 1984 shall lead to the collapse of the vehiCle manufacturing industry in Australia. Your petitioners there for~ pray that the Industries Assistance Commission report be not given effect.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hurford.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the people who have signed this petition, ask all parties, Labor, Liberal, Democrats and others, to stop the latest increase in taxes, and the forever increases in taxes which hit all people of the country of Australia in all goods and consumer goods and we call for a referendum on taxes and interest rates.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Jenkins.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not fulfilling its responsibility in ensuring an adequate standard of living for all Australians, which is causing untold hardship on relief agencies' limited resources, and require the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
I. That the Commonwealth Government raise the level of all pensions and benefits at least to the poverty line.
2. That the Commonwealth Government reconsider its recent decisions in relation to the health system and cuts to Commtlnwealth activity.
YoUr petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert further poverty and suffering in our community by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrKent.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This humble petition of citizens of Australia showeth that:
Citizens of this country are concerned with increased house interest rates and that this Government has not taken action to peg increases in such rates. We ask that the Government establish a maximum fixed interest rate on the First Mortgage that would cover the entire period of time for which the loan is taken out. The rate of interest to be set at the time of signing the contract.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrKent.
Petition received.

Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) The financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) The imposition of post-secondary tuition fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1971 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study from doing so.
(iii) Those students and potential students from social groups currently under-represented and disadvantaged in the post-secondary education system would be most severely affected by the reintroduction of fees for post-secondary education.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
I. post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any courses or for any category of students
2. the visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately
3. the Minister of Education immediately clarify the Government's attitude to the re-introduction of postsecondary tuition fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrKent.
Petition received.
Medibank
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully requests that the Federal Government ensures that:
(a) It honours its 1975 election promise to maintain Medibank-a free, universal health insurance scheme, and institute methods of improving hospital and health services for the Australian people.
(b) The Community Health Program remains a Federal Government responsibility, with increased funding and expansion of services.
(c) It abandons means-testing and the re-introduction of charges at public hospitals which will severely disadvantage low and middle income groups.
(d) Every effort be made by the Federal Government to meet the health care needs and demands of the Australian community.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled will give earnest consideration to this most vital matter.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent.
Petition received.
Medibank
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

Petitions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1057

That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for Free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programmes will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and Funding.
Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce Medibank.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Rights of Disabled
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members oFthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:
I. The Failure of the Federal Government to seek inFormation from the census re disabled people-i.e. partial or total disability-to enable for adequate planning of, and For, types of services needed by disabled people to be undertaken.
2. The failure of the Federal Government to lead the way in employment of disabled people by employing a greater number of such people within the Commonwealth Public Service-note the small number currently employed within the Service.
3. The wastage of the Federal Government funds perpetuating large bureaucratic institutions and organisations where there are oFten few disabled people on their boards and little emphasis is placed on consumer participation in decision making.
4. The Failure of the Federal Government to encourage independence of disabled people, or to develop 'normalised' support systems-attendant care.
5. The failure of the Federal Government to provide. 'noninstitutionalised' specialised accommodation for those people who would not be able to benefit from, or cope with attendant care.
6. Failure by the Federal Government to alter, or create a 'disability' allowance means test free for all disabled peoplethis would assist with necessary equipment and mobility costs.
7. Failure to provide a national compensation scheme thus saving time and enabling people to be automatically covered in the event of a disability.
8. Failure by the Federal Government to abolish tariffs on all equipment available to the disabled-e.g. Optacon.
9. Mismanagement of Federal I.Y.D.P. Funds-e.g. nonreceipt by some States of Funds through unresolved negotiations.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that immediate action be taken to remedy the above stated and that the Federal Government recognise that disabled people are citizens who should have equal rights.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.

Aboriginal Land Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the projected repeal by the Queensland State Government of the Aborigines Act 1971 and the Torres Strait Islander Act 1971-1979 will almost certainly lead to the degazettal of all Aboriginal reserves in Queensland, as has already been the case with Aurukun and Mornington Island.
That if, as is likely, the Aboriginal communities from these reserves are placed under similar shire council legislation on fifty year leases, they will be exposed to serious encroachment on their land by mining and tourist interests.
That it is also quite clear, on past evidence, that these interests will have the full backing of the Queensland Government and the rights of Aboriginal people to land rights and self-management will not be granted by the Government.
That the Commonwealth Government has the power to legislate and acquire land for Aboriginal people under its constitutional powers since the amendments to the Constitution in 1967, but it is your Petitioners' sincere belief that it Failed to act in 1978 and thus, failed in its duty before the people of Aurukun and Mornington Island.
That the Aboriginal people of Queensland have stated that they want land rights and self-management.
Your Petitioners thereFore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government make use of its constitutional and legislative powers to grant Full land rights and selF-management to the Aboriginal people of Queensland.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrUren.
Petition received.
Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned members of parents and citizens associations respectFully showeth:
That retention of the Schools Commission and the Curriculum Development Centre in their present forms is essential for the balanced and progressive allocation of educational resources and facilities in the Australian community:
That serious concern has been generated by the decision within the Schools Commission guidelines, to cut Funds to the general recurrent and capital programs by reallocation to transition, the decision not to implement the school improvement program; and the divisiveness created between Government and Non-Government Schools due to increases of $43.25 million to Non-Government Schools while Government Schools funds have not increased.
Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray:
That the Government will reverse these decisions-will retain the Schools Commission and Curriculum Development Centre in their original Forms; retain the Schools Commission proposals including recurrent and capital funding proposals; basket of services and the schools improvement program.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling and Dr Eyeringham.
Petitions received.
Tertiary Education
To rhe Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.

1058 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Petitions

The humble petition of the undersigned members of the electorate of Parramatta respectfully shows our concern regarding the proposed introduction of fees for post-graduate researchers in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education, since it appears likely that this action will have a serious and detrimental effect on cultural, scientific and technical research and development within the Australian community.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Government will change the decision to' introduce tuition fees for post-graduate study.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr John Brown.
Petition received.
International Relations
To the Speaker and Honourable Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. It is the petition 'of the undersigned electors of Australia that:
Australia increase diplomatic contacts with countries with whom we have differences, not reduce negotiations.
Australia's leaders declare in advance that they will strenuously work for, and be bound by decisions of, a respected mediator agreed on by both sides in any dispute with another nation.
At least as much time, thought, and money be available to find such mediators as Australia now spends to plan military defence and forge military alliances, and to appoint conciliators and arbitrators whenever our international negotiations falter or break down.
Experts of departments, faculties and institutes for peace studies have equal facilities and status with military experts in international negotiations of our country, especially for disarmament talks or military pacts, and such studies have more government support.
The United Nations organisation develop into a body or bodies more democratically chosen by more enlightened people of all nations, with powers given to it by member nations to improve international law between consenting members, to provide adequate extension of the personnel, functions and facilities of the International Court of Justice to satisfy those countries which agree to abide by such courts' decisions on matters in dispute between those countries, with the powers and right to arrest, try, sentence and enforce penalties upon individuals in those countries who breach such laws, and the right to raise revenues from licensing and controlling of international activities of types agreed between the nations concerned.
The mass media of communication of our country exchange comparable amounts of coverage of news and views with comparable media in countries antagonistic to Australia, and try to put in depth all viewpoints before acceding to wartime style censorship, distortion or exhortation.
And your petitioners pray that you will act upon our plea and make public your response.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Everingham.
Petition received.
Staging of American B52 Bombers
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned in the Northern Territory respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base for American 852 bombers:

Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA. and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether 852's:
(a) Carried nuclear weapons
(b) Were engaged in bombing missions against another State.
Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy.
Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region.
Jeopardises the welfare of the Citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents.
Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of Peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's commitment fo the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.
Your Petitioners therefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American 852 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US. Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent.
Petition received.
GOVERNMENT WHIPS
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Acting Prime Minister)-Mr Speaker, I inform the House that the Government Whip, the honourable member for Bendigo (Mr Bourchier), will be absent from the House for three months from today in order to attend the United Nations General Assembly in New York. During this period the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) will act as the Government Whip and the honourable member for Eden-Monaro (Mr Sainsbury) as the Deputy Whip.
DEFENCE FORCE
Notice of Motion
Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That his House:
(I) expresses its concern at the continuing dissatisfaction of members of the Defence Force at the methods of determining remuneration and service conditions;
(2) considers that this unrest has been aggravated by the failure of the Government to make provision for the presentation of argument on behalf of members of the Defence Force;

Questions Without Notice

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1059

(3) calls for the immediate establishment of procedures to enable appeals against determination on Defence Force pay and allowances to be established; and
(4) calls on the Government to commission a professional industrial relations advocate to prepare and argue an appeal on behalf of service personnel against the determinations of 20 August 1981 on work value change and related matters.
SALES TAX
Notice of Motion
Mr HUMPHREYS (Griffith)-I give notice that on the next day of sitting I shall move:
That this House-
(I) condemns the Government for inflicting a 17t per cent sales tax increase upon the Queensland boatbuilding industry when the industry is in a depressed state due to the freeze on trawler fishing licences;
(2) reproaches the Government for its lack of forethought over such a contradictory action, which effectively invalidates a 27t per cent subsidy to vessels over 150 tonnes introduced only one year ago;
(3) deplores the potential loss of hundreds of jobs in the shipbuilding and ancillary industries because of the imposition of the sales tax; and
(4) calls for a full inquiry into the ramifications for the boat-building industry of amending Item 119 of the First Schedule of the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act.
SALES TAX
Notice of Motion
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) recognises the importance to the tourism industry, particularly in the Whitsunday Passage, of the provision of large and expensive tourist pleasure ctaft;
(2) condemns the Government's decision to impose a 17t per cent sales tax commencing on 19 August 1981 on the building of such craft in Queensland and other Australian shipbuilding yards; and
(3) calls upon the Government to review this decision in light of its disastrous effect upon the tourism industry throughout Australia, which is already under siege because of other Government decisions, particularly the imposition of the highest departure tax in the world.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
NABARLEK URANIUM MINE
Mr HOLDING-Is the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment able to inform the House of the reason for the delay on the part of . Queensland Mines Ltd in not notifying the Supervising Scientist until 14 July last of an overflow from the plant run-off pond which occurred on 7 March? Has the Minister sought a full report providing him with the details, circumstances and effects of the reported leak? Is he prepared to

make that report available to the Parliament? If not, why not?
Mr WILSON-Immediately I became aware of the overflow at Nabarlek I instructed the Supervising Scientist to make inquiries as to the reasons for the delay in the reporting of the incident. Those inquiries are current and I am awaiting a report from the Supervising Scientist. In addition to seeking a report on the particular incident, I have asked the Supervising Scientist, in conjunction with the Northern Territory supervising authorities, to take steps to ensure that the procedures are tightened so that immediately an incident occurs that might be any cause for concern it is reported to the authorities so that it can be fully investigated.
TAX AVOIDANCE
Mr RUDDOCK-I ask the Treasurer whether he has seen reports which have suggested that the Government's vigorous crackdown on tax avoidance is starting to languish somewhat as a result of staff ceilings which it is alleged are restricting the number of available officers in the tax enforcement area? Can the Treasurer assure us that there is no intention on the Government's part to see that its tax avoidance detection methods lapse because of lack of staff?
Mr HOWARD-My attention has been drawn to some of those reports. I wish to say that what has happened in relation to staff ceilings does not diminish in any way the Government's zeal in this area.
Mr Armitage-Rubbish! You go and talk to the officers in the Department.
Mr HOWARD-I point out to the honourable gentleman that the section of the Australian Taxation Office most directly responsible for the detection of those sophisticated tax avoidance arrangements which so obsess the honourable member for Chifley and others in this House is in fact the legislative branch of the Taxation Office. As the article in the Australian Financial Review points out, that particular section has not been affected by the staff ceilings in the manner in which other sections of the Taxation Office have been affected. I say more generally to the honourable member for Dundas that the effect of the staff ceilings upon the Taxation Office is currently under examination by the Commissioner of Taxation and the Public Service Board. It is the desire and concern of the Commissioner and me to ensure that in no way does the imposition of staff ceiling reductions hinder to any significant degree the implementation of the Government's anti-tax avoidance program.

1060 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 19S1

Questions Without Notice

MEAT INSPECTION SERVICES
Mr JOHN BROWN-I direct my question to the Minister for Primary Industry. Is it a fact, as reported in yesterday's Sydney Morning Herald, that horse meat has been discovered by Victorian Department of Agriculture inspectors in cartons of Profreeze labelled export beef? Is it also a fact that this horse meat carried traces of methyl violet, the dye used to indicate that this meat originated from a knackery and was thus unfit for human consumption? Is it also a fact that there is no full time inspection service atknackeries to ensure that all the products of these works are comprehensively dyed with methyl violet to prevent possible substitution as product for human consumption? Does the Minister agree, therefore, that this incident of dyed pet food appearing in beef cartons highlights the serious threat to public health posed by a lack of a strong and uniform inspection service throughout Australia?
Mr NIXON-I am advised that traces of methyl violet have not been found in cartons examined so far. Therefore, the matter has not been referred to the Australian Federal Police by either my Department or the Victorian Department of Agriculture. As to the latter part of the question relating to the general problem of meat inspection services, the honourable member will be aware of my concern and effort for some time to get a single meat inspection service. He may also be aware that at the Australian Agricultural Council meeting on Friday this matter was discussed and it was decided that the Commonwealth and Victoria-Victoria having agreed to further talks on this matter-should meet in the next couple of weeks. There will be a meeting on IS September to try to resolve the issue. However, I have to say that the New South Wales Government has not shown the same alacrity to try to resolve the problem concerning the introduction of a single meat inspection service. Nor has the Queensland Government shown the same alacrity. However, the Victorian Government has shown some concern in getting a single meat inspection service. I hope that, as a result of the meeting on IS September, a further step will be taken along that line.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Tuckey having addressed a question to the Minister for the Capital Territory-
Mr SPEAKER-I rule the question out of order. The honourable gentleman could probably obtain information by reframing his question. But coupling it, as he has, with the private affairs of a member of the Senate leads me to rule the question out of order.

DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Kent proceeding to address a question to the Minister for Primary Industry-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. He is not allowed to use those sorts of terms in a question.
HOUSING POLICIES
Mr CADMAN-Is the Minister for Housing and Construction aware of recent criticisms of Commonwealth housing policies by State Ministers? Has the Minister's attention been drawn to comments by the New South Wales Minister, especially those in regard to the Commonwealth's policies as they affect home buyers? What are some of the significant costs affecting home buyers?
Mr McVEIGH-I am indebted to the honourable member for Mitchell for giving me the opportunity to expose certain facts. I am disappointed that the New South Wales Minister for Housing has seen fit to attack the policies of the Federal Government. One can only presume that he believes attack is the best means of defence. Quite obviously, he has many things to defend. I bring to the attention of the House some of the very high cost factors in New South Wales. The first is the very high cost ofland. The average cost of a block of land in Sydney is $30,000; elsewhere in Australia it is $15,000. The reason is that the New South Wales Government has not seen fit to develop urban and regional development policies. I also draw to the attention of the House the fact that the cost of building per square metre is higher in Sydney than anywhere else in Australia. The cost of building an average home in Sydney is about $42,500; the cost elsewhere in Australia is $39,000. Those are some of the things for which the New South Wales Government should rightly take the blame and take up the challenge. More specifically, in money terms stamp duty collections in New South Wales increased from $121m .in the previous year to $IS4m last year-a staggering increase of 52 per cent in the one year.
Mr Cadman-How much?
MrMcVEIGH-Fifty-two per cent. In money terms the first home purchaser purchasing a medium house costing say $64,700, for which he has to borrow $36,250, faces a charge of $1,400 in stamp duty and a mortgage establishment fee of $140. If we add those two figures together we find that on account of the very high charges imposed by the Wran Government in New South Wales--

Questions Without Notice

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1061

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister is answering in more detail than the question warrants. I suggest that he draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr McVEIGH-I accept your advice, Mr Speaker. The $1,450 would help a first home buyer get the deposit for his home. I draw to your attention, Mr Speaker, the fact that the Liberal National Country Party Opposition in New South Wales has a policy of reduced stamp duties and the abolition--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister is not entitled to speak on its behalf. The Minister will resume his seat.
MEAT WORKERS: COMPENSATION FOR LOSS OF WAGES
Mr KENT-I ask the Minister for Primary Industry whether he will ensure that the thousands of Victorian meat workers stood down because of his procrastination in handling the meat scandal will receive government compensation for loss of wages?
Mr NIXON-As I have said to the House before, the fact is that I have delisted 27 independent boning rooms and six boning rooms attached to other establishments following the discovery of horse meat in Australian meat in America. The fact is that the independent boning rooms that have export licences cannot export to America at the moment because of the requirement to lay down new and stricter procedures for them to follow. Following the delisting, yesterday I announced that three of them had already been put back on the list. Another one was put back on the list last night and more are to be put back on the list today. I can only say that, once the boning rooms make their application for relisting and satisfy my Department that they can follow the stricter security procedures in relation to the transfer of meat, they will be relisted. It is, therefore, in the hands of each boning room to make sure that its house is in order.
COMMUNITY YOUTH SUPPORT SCHEME
Mr MILLAR-Will the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs inform the House whether there is any prospect of the Government altering its stance on the future of the Community Youth Support Scheme and, more particularly, whether the phasing out period could be extended to accommodate transitional problems in localities where technical and further education college facilities -are lacking and training scheme opportunities limited?

Mr N. A. BROWN-The decision to which the honourable member refers is, of course, a Budget decision and it will not be changed. It was made on good grounds and will remain in place. The Government is convinced, as I have said on other occasions, that it is in the best interests of all young unemployed people that they should be encouraged to use the Government's expanded training and work experience programs. We believe that young unemployed people can best be helped by helping them to acquire the skills, training and work experience that they need and which employers seek.
It may be, as a result of the interviews that are presently being conducted by officers of my Department with participants in the CYSS projects and the project officers, that it emerges that some young unemployed people are unable to avail themselves of these expanded opportunities. That may be because of the geographical location of some of those concerned. The illustration which the honourable member gives may well turn out to be one such case; that is to say, there are no technical and further education colleges or similar institutions in the immediate locality. It may also be that their own unsuitability is such that some particular need emerges in some areas or with respect to some such people. Should it emerge that there are particular needs of that sort which are not catered for by the present expanded programs, then the Government will, of course, look very closely at the need for any different or new forms of assistance or special program action that might emerge. Naturally we want to give all young unemployed people positive help that meets their real needs. The Government's record on that attitude is there for all to examine. We will be looking very carefully at what emerges as a result of our investigations.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr Kent-Mr Speaker--
Mr SPEAKER-Is the honourable member for Hotham taking a point of order?
Mr Kent-Is the Minister allowed to read his answer?
Mr SPEAKER-I draw to the attention of the House the fact that the honourable member for Hotham stood and I presumed that he was taking a point of order but I could not hear him because of the level of interjections. This is one of the reasons why it is important for me to ask all honourable members to cease their continual interjections. As to the point of order that the honourable member for Hotham has raised, if he wishes he can call for the Minister to state whether he was reading from a document. If the

1062 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Questions Without Notice

Minister was reading from a document it will be required to be tabled unless it is a confidential document. The honourable member for Hotham is a new member and I will therefore interpret his point of order as requesting the tabling of the document. Was the Minister reading from a document?
Mr N. A. Brown-I was referring to notes but I am quite happy to table them, Mr Speaker.
Mr SPEAKER-The document has been tabled.
MEAT EXPORTS
Mr WALLIS-I ask the Minister for Administrative Services: Is it a fact that the Minister for Primary Industry said that he would be embarrassed if he were in charge of the Australian Federal Police regarding investigations into meat substitution? Does the Minister agree with the Minister for Primary Industry that the Australian Federal Police has the responsibility for stopping fraudulent behaviour because it has to produce evidence to justify prosecution of offenders? On how many occasions have allegations of improprieties or breaches of regulations in meat inspection or the meat export industry been investigated by the Australian Federal Police, and with what result? If the Minister does not have these facts readily available, would he be prepared to make a statement to the House at a later time itemising the allegations and the result of police inquiries?
Mr NIXON-It is a fact that I did say that I would suffer more embarrassment if I were in charge of the Australian Federal Police. If the honourable member likes to look at the record and see what Sir Colin Woods said about this matter he will see the reasons why. As to the number of allegations that have been referred to the police--
Mr Dawkins-The National Country Party is standing over the Minister again.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fremantle will remain silent. A probing question was asked of the Minister. The question was delivered in silence. The Minister is entitled to reply in silence. The honourable member for Fremantle has been a member long enough to know that it is a matter within the discretion of the Ministry as to which Minister answers a question. A questioner is not entitled to insist on any particular Minister answering. I ask honourable members on the Opposition benches to remain silent while I call the Minister for Primary Industry.

Mr NIXON-As I was saying, I refer the honourable member to what Sir Colin Woods, who is in charge of the police, said about this matter, and his mind might rest easy. I wilJ get a detailed list of the allegations that have been referred to the police over the years and provide the information to the honourable member.
FREEHOLD LAND
Mr TUCKEY-I refer the Minister for the Capital Territory to a private member's Bill introduced in the Senate which has the purpose of granting freehold land to certain residents of Queensland. Does this BilJ also make provision to grant freehold title to other Australians such as the residents of Canberra?
Mr HODGMAN-The Bill does not make any provision, as I understand it, for the granting of freehold land to any other citizens of Australia, including citizens of the Australian Capital Territory. I indicate, in response to the honourable member, that as all honourable members would be aware there is no freehold of any sort in the Australian Capital Territory, either for persons of Aboriginal descent or for any other Australian citizens. However, I will look at the proposed legislation to which the honourable member referred. I have had representation5 both for and against the introduction of a freehold system in the Australian Capital Territory. The only other matter which I think is relevant in answer to the question raised by the honourable member is that when one looks at the granting of freehold to any group of Australians by means of an Act of Parliament one also ought to have in contemplation other Australians who do not have the chance of getting freehold, no matter what their race or origin may be.
MEAT EXPORTS
Mr HAYDEN-I refer the Acting Prime Minister to the sixth annual report of the Export Development Grants Board which was tabled yesterday. Is he satisfied that the claims for export market development grants, and in particular export expansion grants, are given the most rigorous examination? If he is so satisfied, will he explain how a company such as Protean (Holdings) Ltd and its subsidiaries whose export beef products were found to contain horse meat--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is making a statement. I understand that some information has been laid against a person. I would not want the honourable gentleman to transgress the sub judice rule.
Mr HAYDEN-As you will discover from the subsidiary part of the sentence--

Questions Without Notice

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1063

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman has made a statement to the effect that a certain company's meat contained a certain substance. That, I think, as a statement from the Leader of the Opposition would be wrong and would infringe the sub judice rule. Perhaps the honourable gentleman can rephrase the question.
Mr HAYDEN-Perhaps I can put that to one side and rephrase that part of the question: Is it a fact that a company, Protean (Holdings) Ltd and its subsidiaries, under these arrangements, have been able to receive export incentive payments totalling nearly $lm since 1976-77 and $613,000 in 1980-81 alone? Will the Acting Prime Minister provide the House with details of any pending claims for exportincentive payments to Protean? Will he ensure that no such payments will be made while there remains any suspicion about Protean, its activities and the quality of its product, or does he intend--
Mr Nixon-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I think I should point out to the honourable member that he is getting Protean. confused with Profreeze. Protean (Holdings) Ltd has not been charged with having horse m"eat in its--
Mr Scholes-No one said it had.
Mr Nixon-lam trying to be helpful to the Leader of the Opposition. If he wants to proceed with this, let him do so. The facts of the matter are that establishment 140C, Profreeze, has been named as being involved with horse meat. Protean is not related to the company, Profreeze. I think the honourable member ought to be aware that he is casting aspersions on a company that, at this point, certainly does not deserve it.
Mr SPEAKER-I will now proceed to call questions.
RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Mr CONNOLLY-Is the Minister for Trade and Resources and Acting Prime Minister aware of recent criticisms at the Australian Council of Trade Unions conference of the Government's resources policies? Is such criticism justified? What impact have the Government's policies had on the developrnent of Australia's natural resources? Does he agree that a case exists for encouraging greater individual Australian equity participation, and that increased commitment for a greater sharing of the risks and the opportunities of Australia's development could be achieved through initiatives such as Trust Australia and equity participation programs generally?
Mr ANTHONY-I think everybody in this House will agr.ee that a great surge of resource development is taking place. Some people even

refer to it as a boom. I think it is an unfortunate word. I have said that before. It is interpreted by some people as meaning that a bust will follow. In fact, the resource development that is proceeding very strongly is the best ever in Australian history because it is based mainly on long term contracts. There will not be a bust, provided we can keep the sound progress going and retain the confidence in the industry. Most of these developments-such as those involving uranium, steaming coal or alumina-are based on long term contracts, for up to 10 years or longer in some cases. It means that the situation is very stable for people to invest huge amounts of money in these development projects. In fact, I think everybody is very proud of the impact that the development is having on the Australian economy as a whole.
Certainly we would like to see Australians benefiting to the maximum and we would like to see more Australians participating in the ownership of these resources. The idea of an Australian trust, which has been promoted by the honourable member and by other honourable members of this House, is worthy of consideration to try to help the small investor to participate in the rewards of this sort of development. I hope that when the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System reports it will make reference to this particular aspect of encouraging people's savings into this area.
I would also like to refer to the criticism by the ACTU. I think it is quite unfair to reflect on the Government's policies which have been so eminently successful in getting this development going. It is because we have given stability to the economy and confidence to invest in this country to people that progress is now taking place. The policies that have emerged from the ACTU appear to me to be nothing more than a mishmash of old, discredited, tired Australian Labor Party policies such as imposing a resources tax, establishing a hydrocarbons commission and taking over the private sector-in fact, a reintroduction of its old socialist policies.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr ANTHONY-It is most amusing that honourable members opposite should react when one uses the word 'socialist'--
Mrs Child-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. I draw your attention to the Hansard of 27 August. You ruled:
The Minister will answer the question and not engage in irrelevancies, such as contrasting the Government and the Labor Party.

I064 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr SPEAKER-I think it was a very sound decision. I ask the right honourable gentleman to draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr ANTHONY-I still have some very valuable points to make in reply to the question. I think it is fair to say that the ACTU really does not have a policy for resource development. If it introduced the policies, as it has suggested, it would bring resource development to a halt, as we previously saw when those sorts of policies were introduced by a Labor government. I think the ACTU could best help in resource development in this country if it did everything possible to discourage the irresponsible strikes that take placestrikes which do so much damage to our international trading credibility-and if it could do more to restrain the excessive wage demands that are being made. That would help considerably in the progress that is being made in resource development, which will be so valuable to every Australian.
MR TONY JOYCE
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I direct my question to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. I refer to the late Mr Tony Joyce, the Australian Broadcasting Commission foreign correspondent who was fatally wounded in a shooting incident while in police custody in Zambia some 21 months ago: I refer also to the fact that the Prime Minister said he would investigate and report on that tragic event. Is it a fact that the Minister for Transport travelled to Zambia earlier this year and reported .to the Government on what he had been able to ascertain from his own inquiries? Was that report given more than a month ago? Has the Minister for Foreign Affairs or his predecessor made any representations or inquiries about this matter? If so, could the Minister inform the House of the latest information in the tragic case of the late Tony Joyce?
Mr STREET-The Government is aware of the continuing concern about the shooting of the Australian journalist, Tony Joyce, in Zambia in 1979. Some time ago the Australian Government received an expression of regret from President Kaunda over that fatal shooting. Two things which have emerged from this tragic event are the genuine regret of the Zambian Government that the incident occurred and that, given the confused wartime situation which then existed, it is unlikely that an explanation completely satisfactory to all parties concerned will ever be found. Any further comment on the death of Tony Joyce will be made only after consultations with his family.

SALES TAX
Mr IAN CAMERON-Will the Treasurer ensure that, to save resources and red tape, the Treasury will allow primary producers and manufacturers to use their existing diesel certificate numbers to get an exemption from sales tax on oils and greases? They are different taxes but in the interests of good management they should be grouped on the same certificate.
Mr HOWARD-This is an administrative matter that I will take up with the Commissioner of Taxation. I will ask him whether it is possible to do that. I suspect that, because some of the purchases of oils and greases will be for exempt use and some for non-exempt use, it might prove difficult to do.
AUSTRALIAN FILM: 'FOR THE TERM OF HIS NATURAL LIFE'
Mr CROSS-I address my question to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment. I refer to the classic Australian film For the Term of His Natural Life which recently has been restored by the national film archives within the National Library of Australia. Can the Mi~ister advise the House when the film will be released for public exhibition? Will the Minister be able to arrange for members and senators to preview the film prior to its release in order that they might have a better appreciation of this important achievement of the National Library?
Mr WILSON-The film For the Term of His Natural Life was made in 1927. It was a classic of its time, a classic of the silent movies. Only two incomplete copies of that film were discovered to be in existence. The National Library's film archives, with the financial support of the Australian Film Commission, has done a remarkable job in putting together those two films to provide a nearly complete copy of the original film. The film was outstanding in its time. It would be regarded as outstanding even when measured alongside the achievements of the present day. Because of the achievements of the present day by the Australian film industry there is increasing interest in looking at films developed in the early history of that industry. The National Library has made a very real contribution through its archival efforts in putting this film together.
With regard to the first part of the honourable member's question, efforts are being made by the National Library, with the assistance of the Australian Film Commission, to market the film commercially. Negotiations are currently in hand, and it is hoped that the film will be available for public exhibition early in 1982. If the indications of the

Questions Without Notice-

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1065

response received at the Sydney and Melbourne film festivals are anything to go by, the film when publicly released should be one that will attract large audiences. If honourable members have not already received notification concerning this film from me, I hope that early this afternoon when they return to their offices they will do so. The film will be shown in the theatrette at the National Library tomorrow evening between 6.20 and just before 8 o'clock so that honourable members will have an opportunity of viewing this historic Australian film.
MEAT EXPORTS
Mr GROOM-I refer to the question asked earlier relating to the involvement of the Australian Federal Police in investigating the meat issue, and ask the Minister for Administrative Services whether he has anything to add to the answer given to that question.
Mr NEWMAN-I thank the honourable member for the opportunity to add to the answer given by my colleague the Minister for Primary Industry, and I thank the Minister for making his comments clear in the context in which he made them. It goes without saying that in this meat fraud case I have been in very close contact with the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police on the way in which he is pursuing inquiries into the allegations that have been made. It is true that in the advice he has furnished to me he said that, in hindsight, it is a pity that investigations made in the past were not pursued with more vigour. I cannot comment on that. I was not the responsible Minister then, so I would not wish to examine what the Commissioner said in that context. One thing I would like to say because I think it is very relevant to comments made by the Leader of the Opposition yesterday is that in the advice presented to me by the Commissioner, which included the comment to which I have just referred, he has made it clear that he has never been 'nobbled by heavyweights from the highest level'-the words used by the Leader of the Opposition yesterday. I am glad I have the opportunity to make that clear to the Leader of the Opposition and honourable members who sit behind him in this chamber.
I am confident from the advice given to me by the Commissioner that the present inquiries are being undertaken with all the vigour that the AFP can bring to the problem. The AFP is inquiring into allegations which were made in the past and which are presently being made. I repeat theinvitation extended by my colleagues in debate yesterday. If any honourable members wish to bring any

allegations to the attention of the Australian Federal Police I invite them to do so.
The Australian Federal Police officers are to be commended for the progress they have made in their investigations to date. I think all honourable members are now aware that one Richard Vincent Hammond, a principal in one of the meat firms named in relation to this scandal, has now been arrested and charged on 20 counts of forgery under the Commonwealth Crimes Act. I assure the House that the Australian Federal Police force, in co-operation with other concerned departments and Ministers, is pursuing this inquiry with all the vigour it can command. The Commissioner has advised me that he has given the officer in charge of the inquiry all the resources that he needs and that he stands ready to provide any more assistance that officer may ask for. In recent days I have been able to commend the Commissioner of the AFP for the personal commitment he is giving to this inquiry.
HEALTH CARE BENEFITS
Dr BLEWETT-I direct my question to the Minister for Health. Given the Government's alleged concern for the socially disadvantaged in the health area, why has the Government not seen fit to provide pharmaceuticals to health care card holders under the same conditions as those which apply to pensioner health benefit card holders? Given that the income entitlements for the two cards are similar, is this one further anomaly in the latest medi-muddle?
Mr MacKELLAR-The Government has given consideration to the cost of pharmaceuticals. I acknowledge that the cost can be considerable in cases where, for instance, a large family may have some illness within it or where chronic iIInesses occur. However, looking at the costs associated with the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, the Government is not in a position at this stage to alter the arrangements that have been made.
SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS
Mr BRAITHWAITE-My question is directed to the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security. The Government has indicated that it intends to legislate against those who voluntarily deprive themselves of income in order to become eligible for pension benefits. Does the Government intend at the same time to legi!>late against those who voluntarily deprive themselves of wages or salary by strike action but who still retain eligibility for unemployment relief for the family?

1066 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr HUNT-It is proposed to amend the Social Services Act so that a person will be ineligible for unemployment benefit for as long as his or her spouse continues to be disqualified from unemployment benefit because of industrial action. I expect that legislation to be introduced into the House very shortly. However, where there is hardship the spouse will be able to obtain the special benefit.
YOUTH TRAINING PROGRAMS
Mrs CHILD-The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs has said that altogether 25,000 places will be provided for young people in government retraining programs. As 60,000 young people are presently being helped by the Community Youth Support Scheme, can the Minister now tell the House what provision he has made for the other 35,000?
Mr N. A. BROWN-There seems to be a fair amount of ignorance among certain members of the Opposition with respect to our training and work experience programs. I thought I had made it plain that there would be 70,000 new approvals under the work experience program in this financial year in addition to 20,000 people whose training would be carried over from the last financial year. In fact, the program could well benefit 70,000 individual people. In addition to that, of course, the transition allowance is payable. Last year we paid 8,800 of those allowances. This year we have budgeted for 16,000 allowances. The system encouraging employers to take on additional apprentices by way of rebates last year catered for 92,000 apprentices. This year 95,000 apprentices will be catered for. Other schemes also cater for a large number of people and particular programs apply to young people as well as to adults.
I have made it perfectly plain that the Government has in place a large range of programs. Those programs have been expanded with respect both to funds and to the number of places available. The Government is quite confident that it is acting in the best interests of young unemployed people across the board. More attention should be given to those schemes by those who profess to be interested in the welfare of young unemployed people. I hope that the debate we have had over the CYSS issue will at least serve this end and that it has drawn attention to these schemes which are practical and sensible. It should be understood, perhaps more widely than it has been in some quarters, that this is a real and substantial contribution which the Government can make to the interests of young unemployed people. They must get the skills and the training they need to acquire

a job and keep it and they must get the work experience which employers demand.
SPECIAL YOUTH EMPLOYMENT TRAINING PROGRAM
Mr BEAZLEY-My question is directed to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs. As Special Youth Employment Training Program subsidies are now classified under 'work experience', can employers now quite freely employ someone for the period of the subsidy and then sack him and get another person on subsidy? Has this change to the Special Youth Employment Training Program been instituted because the staff of the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs have recently been insisting that special youth jobs have, firstly, a training aspect and that, therefore, barring special circumstances, a person trained on subsidy should be kept on at the end of the subsidy period? For example, does the Minister now consider it reasonable that an employer should take on a car washer on 34 weeks special youth subsidy, presumably taking 34 weeks to learn to wash a car, then to be laid off, presumably having been unsuccessful in his or her training?
Mr N. A. BROWN-This is one example of the many myths which members of the Australian Labor Party have sought to perpetrate in the community to sap the confidence of young unemployed people. Of course, it is completely consistent with the whole approach of members of the Labor Party on these matters; that is, they want to sow a lack of confidence amongst young unemployed people. Let me make it perfectly plain that the Special Youth Employment Training Program has been a very valuable program indeed. It has provided many thousands of young people with very valuable work experience. The myth which members of the Labor Party seek to encourageisthat--
Honourable members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! Honourable members on my right will remain silent. I ask honourable members on my left to cease the continual interjection.
Mr N. A. BROWN-If the honourable member and his colleagues are prepared to listen, the facts are that the available research and data show that most young unemployed people who take part in the Special Youth Employment Training Program either remain employed at the end of the subsidy period with the employer providing the training or they move into other employment. In other words, the Special Youth Employment Training Program has been successful.

Questions Without Notice

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1067

Dr Theophanous-Mr Speaker, I raise a point' of order. Will the Minister state the facts supporting his statement?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. There is no point of order.
Mr N. A. BROWN-If the honourable member read some of the public documents he would see that material--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will not make any reference to the point of order.
Mr N. A. BROWN-I will not do that at all, Mr Speaker. I will simply say that the program has been very s4ccessful. Indeed, with respect to one area I had drawn to my attention the other day--
Mr Beazley-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. Will the Minister answer the specific question, whether the Government will discourage employers sacking people? That was the question and he has not answered it.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Swan. asked the question. If he had asked it as simply as he has now put it in his point of order he may have got an answer.
Mr N. A. BROWN-If I might say so, Mr Speaker, I think you have a fair point. Let me say two things. Firstly, the results of our research and investigations are to the effect that most young people who take part in the program remain with the same employer after the subsidy period has come to an end or they move into other employment. In addition, on those occasions when there has been some attempt to abuse the schemethere have been some attempts by a few employers in the past-my Department has highlighted that situation and has refused to refer to such employers who have attempted to abuse the scheme any more trainees under the Program.
DISTINGUISHED VISITORS
Mr SPEAKER-I draw the attention of the House to the presence in the House of a delegation from the Japanese Diet. I am sure all honourable members will welcome the delegation led by Mr Aino.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY NOMINAL DEFENDANT
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-For the information of all honourable members, I present the Australian Capital Territory Nominal Defendant annual report for the year 1980.

COMMITTEE OF REVIEW ON MIGRANT ASSESSMENT
Report and Ministerial Statement
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs)-For the information of honourable members. I present the report of the Committee of Review on Migrant Assessment. I seek leave to make a brief statement relating to the report.
Leave granted.
Mr MACPHEE-Honourable members will be aware that in March this year I announced a major inquiry into Australia's migrant selection system-the Numerical Multifactor Assessment System, NUMAS. This flowed from the Government's policy statement for the election last year and its previous commitment, made at the time NUMAS was introduced, to review the system after a reasonable period of operation. The objective of the review, which is still under way, is to ensure that our selection system provides, as efficiently as possible, migrants who can settle easily and make a contribution to the economic and cultural life of Australia without displacing Australians from jobs. As part of the review process, an independent Committee of Review was set up to report to me on the views of the community, as well as on the findings of a number of studies undertaken on the operation of NUMAS. The Chairman of this Committee was Dr Charles Price of the Australian National University. Other members were Mr Justice Gobbo of the Supreme Court of Victoria, Mr James Samios, President of the Ethnic Communities Council of New South Wales and during Mr Justice Gobbo's short absence overseas in June, Mr David Cox of the University of Melbourne.
The Committee's findings are contained in the report which I have just tabled. Copies of this report may be purchase from Government bookshops. The Committee had the task of reporting on the operation of NUMAS. It did this by sounding community views on the operation of NUMAS. and by analysing the results of a number of studies. The views of the community were obtained through a series of community forums held around Australia and through submissions which were invited by the Government. The report, in accordance with the Committee's terms of reference, contains findings but no recommendations. The Committee has done a splendid job and I am indebted to it for this report. The Committee's findings are now under' consideration, and I expect that during the present parliamentary sittings I will be able to announce to the

1068 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Committee on Migrant Assessment

House a new migrant entry policy. 1commend the report to honourable members.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (2.48)-1 wish to respond to the statement made by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee). 1 commence with the observation that the report of the Committee of Review on Migrant Assessment is a disappointing document, and in that respect 1 sympathise with the Minister. The Committee concluded that it was not within its obligations, as described by its terms of reference, to submit recommendations to the Minister. In that respect I believe the Committee copped out. The Minister, in his Press release on 5 March this year relating to the setting up of this Committee, said inter alia:
. . . the review of NUMAS is aiming to establish:
whether, in the light of these findings, any changes to NUMAS are indicated- . . .
whether a new selection system and, if so, what system, should be introduced.
Neither of those very positive requirements has been responded to, and both make it explicitly clear that the Minister felt it was incumbent upon the Committee to come down with the recommendations. In the absence of recommendations one must then resort to the findings of the Committee, and again 1 am disappointed. There seems to be more implication than explicit assertion in relation to NUMAS, the Numerical Multifactor Assessment System. Certainly, in a comparative sense it is very strong on the English language as a prerequisite for migrant selection procedures-I think, and I stress that, because one is required to read between the lines. There seems to be a great deal of hedging in this report on any particular finding which is prescribed. For instance the very last paragraph on page 115 of the report, states:
Concern was expressed that a non-discriminatory policy could jeopardise social cohesion and harmony within the Australian community but there was also strong support for the retention of the present non-discriminatory policy.
We can have it one way or we can have it the other. I repeat: I sympathise with the Minister as he seeks to navigate his way through the rather tricky course of findings that have been laid down by the Committee. I repeat that the report is disappointing. I would interpret it as a cop-out. NUMAS is clearly a problem in the community. It is a major problem for important ethnic groups within Australia. They see it as a symbol of some discrimination, some unfairness of a varying order. Some see that unfairness as being of a very large order. Certainly, it generates dissatisfaction.

Its pre-occupation with the English language tends to give it an Anglo-Saxon dominance in selection procedures. I suggest that, taking every~ thing on balance, we need a broader vision in terms of our selection procedures.
Australia, as an Anglo-Saxon enclave in this part of the world, is really an anomaly. Whether we like it or not, the future of Australia increasingly will be determined by events in our region. The populations of the countries of our region have two things in common; they are all brown-skinned and none have English as their first and basic language. The implication of NUMAS is that it discriminates in favour of Anglo-Saxons. It discriminates even more in favour of English speakers and it certainly discriminates in favour of people who are higher on the socio-economic ladder. In a very important respect there is an explicit clash of principle between the application of NUMAS and the enunciated purposes of the Government's immigration policy. The Government declares that its immigration policy is based on multi-cultural principles, yet here we have a selection system which discriminates in a significant way-although not completely-against the development of such a principle.
1 have outlined the sorts of things that 1 believe are needed in this country. They are things which, had there been a different result at the last national election-it was nearly achieved-would in many cases have been applied by now, and those which would not have been applied by now would apply in the near future. I refer to the abolition of NUMAS and the introduction of a new family reunion program to enable all unmarried children of all ages to be reunited with their families. I believe that we should allow Australian residents to sponsor all their relatives, including parents. We should abolish maintenance guarantees, allow former permanent residents to return to Australia and grant citizenship to permanent Australian residents after 12 months' continuous residence-and I mean all such people. English should no longer be a prerequisite for Australian citizenship and all new citizens should automatically be enrolled on the electoral register.
I think we need to declare a more philosophical content to our approach to immigration. I suggest that the aim of an immigration policy for Australia should be to achieve a cohesive, pluralistic society which gathers strength and fulfilment from its diversity of composition and the sharing of common national goals. The enrichment of the Australian nation will come from the diversity of and the mutual respect among all people who go to make up the nation. In essence I

Committee On Migrant Assessment

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1069

am declaring that the cohesiveness and greatness of achievement of our society will be built upon variety which will strengthen tolerance rather than upon uniformity which imposes restrictiveness. There is no room for bigotry or prejudice. In that respect, thank goodness, White Australia is a crumbling hulk in a forgotten graveyard for grotesques from a public life belonging to an earlier and less thoughtful era.
Australia is a rich country and there is a moral imperative for those who are guided by ethical standards in the daily conduct of their lives and in their sense of social responsibility that riches ought to be shared. There have been great flows of migrants to this country, especially in the postwar period. Indeed, in a very real sense, all of us, except perhaps full Aborigines, are transplants or the products of transplants from other countries-the progeny of people who came in search of an ideal and in pursuit of a better deal. In that sense Australians have been the beneficiaries of that philosophy, although the benefits are not distributed fairly. For all that I prefer to see Australia still as a haven for many of those who come here, and as a land of greater opportunity---,-in the variety of ways in which the word 'opportunity' can be positively interpreted-for all who reach our shores. Our immigration policy should not be based on a narrow-minded perception of the need of our industrial system and our resources development. We want to offer more than the opportunity of merely being forgotten factory fodder.
Some people look to distant parts of the world such as England and react with shock at the social tensions and conflict that have taken place there in recent times. But it is wrong to look at the colour of the skins of people confronting authority and conclude that therefore the race of people determines that this sort of conflict is inevitable. It is wrong because many white skinned people are involved in the confrontation and clashes but it is more especially wrong because by so doing we fail to understand that those disturbing social clashes are a product of terribly harmful and quite unfairly imposed economic policies. They are a sort of social radioactive fall-out from the impact of Thatcherism on an economic system in no condition to bear that sort of devastating impact. It is wrong too because there is a far nastier conflict nearby in Northern Ireland, one of which I am aware of with melancholy concern. There all of the skins are of one colour-the same as ours.
I am talking about a sensible multicultural immigration policy attracting people who can add to the variety and develop the harmony of our

society-a non-discriminatory immigration policy, one which will enrich us materially, socially, culturally and spiritually. Australia of the year 2080 will be vastly different from the Australia of 1980. Its success, a century away, will be determined in many important respects by what we are doing today, and no less importantly than in this field.
The Minister has issued a bipartisan invitation to the Opposition on the issue of the development of immigration policy. There will be no dispute about the need for a non-discriminatory policy. But there will be areas of disputation about the numbers, about the timing of the numbers, about the composition and most of all about the treatment and support of people who arrive here. I support an immigration policy which will enlarge the population of this country. I believe that ultimately a population of something like 50 million would add a great deal of strength and security to this country, most especially in the area of economic need. But a pre-condition of this will be that increases in immigration flows must be associated with economic recovery. It is pointless to bring people to Australia on the promise of a better deal and better job opportunities and when they arrive here they discover that by government policy the economy is being screwed down and all we can offer them is the rather mean fare of unemployment benefits.
In composition there should be no racial biasthe principle should be the ability to settle in and participate in and enrich our way of life. We accept refugees as long as they are genuine refugees. In this respect I remind the House of the concern I expressed here a few weeks ago that the overwhelming number of Vietnamese now coming here who are being presented as refugees are no such thing. They are short-circuiting proper immigration procedures. On that score I am pleased to have noted some of the public comments of the Minister in the past several days.
But it is the issue of treatment and support that gives us greatest concern on the Opposition side. There will be an increase in the intake of immigrants lhis year of some 10 per cent, but the budget for the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs will be reduced by nearly 6 per cent; that is, the capacity of the Department to be attentive in an appropriate sense and a continuing sense of the needs of new arrivals will be diminished.
I will be more specific. In migrant education, in spite of the forecast increase of some 10 per cent in the immigrant intake in 1981-82, the education budget will be reduced by some 3 per cent in real

1070 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Committee on Migrant Assessment

terms. In real terms in 1981-82 the budget for migrant education is more than 12 per cent down on that level which was provided in the Budget of 1975-the last Australian Labor Party Budget, the last Budget that really demonstrated a caring concern for immigrants as people and did not merely treat them as imports for the needs of the industrial system.
If, in fact, the aid for migrant education over the past several years of the Fraser Government had equalled in real terms that provided in the 1975 Labor Budget in this area alone immigrants would be some $37m better off than they have been.
One in three migrant students needs remedial assistance. Approximately every second migrant child between 10 years of age and 14 years of age has serious reading difficulties, and yet we find over this period of the Fraser Government a substantial reduction in assistance. There has been a reduction from 10 weeks to five weeks in English language training under the Australian orientation education program for Indo-Chinese refugees. In regard to community support the Budget will provide $1.87m for 118 agencies serving ethnic communities to employ social welfare workers. The description of the task comes from the Government sources. That is less than $16,000 for each agency. One cannot afford to employ a qualified stenographer with the equipment a stenographer requires with that level of support from the Government. Translating services are now iIi the profit making sector and are to provide profits for entrepreneurs-scarcely an appropriate area for welfare services to operate in. We find the amount allocated is nearly $1.5m-almost as much as is provided in that crucial welfare sector I have just mentioned.
In regard to housing in 1981-82, in spite of an anticipated increase of 1,700 immigrants requiring hostel accommodation there will be a decrease in spending of over 60 per cent, and in real terms a drop of over 80 per cent on the level provided in the 1975 Labor Budget. Migrants who arrived 18 months pdor to June 1981 have an unemployment rate of1'5.7 per cent. The Australian rate is a little over 5 per cent. That is, the rate of unemployment for those migrants is three times higher than that which applies for Australia generally. So in whatever respect honourable members consider this matter, immigrants are being treated much less caringly, there is much less compassion, there is much less sensitive understanding of their requirements, and overlying it all there is no respect for them or a welcoming of them as individuals who can create and contribute as individuals in our society. They are being seen increasingly

and exclusively as inputs for the industrial system-as just cheap factory fodder. We resent that and we reject that. Until that attitude changes it will be very difficult to obtain bipartisanship from the Labor Party in this important area of immigration policy because we respect them as people.
Motion (by Mr Sainsbury) proposed:
That the debate be now adjourned.
Mr Donald Cameron-I wish to say something, MrSpeaker.
Mr SPEAKER-Is the honourable member asking for my indulgence to be heard?
Mr Donald Cameron-I wish to make just a brief comment on the previous speaker.
Mr SPEAKER-No, I will not permit that.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
Membership
Mr SPEAKER-I have received advice from the Opposition Whip of alterations to the nomination of members of Estimates Committees B, C, D and F. The details are as follows:
Estimates Committee B-Membership: Members of Estimates Committee B to consider the proposed expenditure for-
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Dr Klugman in substi"tution for Mr Young, discharged.
Estimates Committee C-Membership: Members of estimates Committee C to consider the proposed expenditure for-
Department of Science and Technology-Mrs Darling in substitution for Mr Howe, discharged.
Estimates Committee D-Membership: Members of Estimates Committee D to consider the proposed expenditure for-
Department of the Treasury-Mr Cunningham in substitution for Mr Howe, discharged.
Estimates Committee F-Membership: Members of Estimates Committee F to consider the proposed expenditure for-
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr R. J. Brown in substitution for Mrs Kelly, discharged.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
That leave of absence for three months be given to the honourable member for Bendigo, on the ground of public business overseas.
FOOD PURITY AND PRODUCT SAFETY
Discussion of MaUer of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:

Food Purity and Product Safety

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1071

The failure of the Fraser Government to implement legislation to ensure a standard national code of food purity and product safety, and compulsory recall of impure or dangerous products.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (3.4)- Consumer protection is, or rather should be, a prime responsibility of the national government. This Fraser Government, however, refused steadfastly to accept its moral responsibility in this area. In fact, it is backpedaling at 1,000 miles an hour-just as fast as it can-to opt out completely from this most important area of real public concern. The razor gang cuts in the area of the Trade Practices Commission highlight the total abrogation of the Government's duty and, in fact, its arrogance towards the Australian consuming public. Is that not each and everyone of us? Mr Deputy Speaker, do you not think it is ludicrous that in a country as rich, sophisticated and technically advanced as Australia we are conspicuously lacking in terms of any uniform national code relating to food purity and product safety. Almost every other advanced society on this earth is in front of us in this area of governmental concern.
We in Australia, shackled and constrained as we are by this Government's philosophical hobbles, exist not as Australians but as New South Welshmen, Victorians, South Australians, Queenslanders, Taswegians, et cetera, because almost 100 years ago our founding fathers, for whatever reason, drew funny lines on the map of Australia. We have a national defence force, albeit a fairly run down one under this Government's control, to protect us from international threat. Does anybody seriously consider that this governmental military action on a national basis is a manifestation of latent socialist tendency or rampant government monopoly? Of course they do not. Does it not strike this Government therefore that the protection of people's health and well-being throughout this nation is also a national issue? Can the Government really say that public health and safety standards should be a matter of where in Australia or in what State particular people live? Surely a person in Perth is worthy of as much protection as one in Parramatta or Prahran. Surely we Australians are entitled to expect more than this Government offers, or should I say refuses to offer'.
Fragmentation of consumer protection between State governments is just not good enough.

Leaving protection of consumers to the good graces of business interests is, in most cases, like leaving a drunk in charge of a brewery or Dracula in charge of a blood bank. Self-regulation in most cases does not work given the profit motive under which most businesses operate. The Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore), who is at the table, is living in fairyland if he thinks his recent exhortations to business to implement a stronger voluntary code of recall of dangerous products will be followed.
There have been several notable cases in recent times of dangerous or impure products appearing on the Australian market which I feel reinforce my case. This Fraser Government has been totally delinquent in its moral responsibility to protect all Australians, all the people who elected it to government, from dangerous products-imported or otherwise. I would like to refer briefly to a few of those cases. In 1980 some insulin was produced in Australia which was released onto the market for use by people suffering from diabetes and other complaints requiring the use of insulin. The insulin was found to be faulty to the extent that it produced dangerously high levels of sugar in the blood or urine of diabetic sufferers. The company that produced that insulin was in fact a signatory to a voluntary recall code in the drug area. When it was pressed to recall that particular product, it refused. The' only way that users of that insulin knew that the insulin that they mayor may not have been using was dangerous was through Press reports.
In Canberra the Canberra Times, to its disgrace, published only a very small lO-line article regarding that insulin. I think that particular case points up the fact that voluntary recall codes just do not work. It certainly needs some sort of legislative implementation by the Government to make sure that there is a compulsory recall code on dangerous products. Earlier this year in South Australia a matter arose concerning pickled onions, of all things. I know that pickled onions are a particular fascination for the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), for putting in people's pockets_. These particular onions were being placed in people's mouths, to their great detriment. I have a Press report here from the Adelaide Advertiser of 27 August. It reads:
Spring Gully Pickles Pty Ltd has recalled all its jars of pickled onions because some are believed to contain up to 12.6 times the legal amount of preservative.
Cardiac sufferers and asthmatics were 'highly susceptible' to such levels of preservatives, the Metropolitan County Board warned yesterday.
Anyone suffering from severe cardiac complaints could suffer a cardiac arrest-depending on the amount of onions eaten and preservative level in each jar . . .

1072 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Food Purity and Product Safety

If all those jars had been labelled as they should have been labelled under a national code which protected people's health and, in fact, were batch coded and date stamped, the recall process would have been much more simple. But as it turned out it was very difficult to have all of those jars of pickles returned from the delicatessens where they were on sale. Consequently, the health of
everybody who was exposed to those pickled onions was in jeopardy.
Another case which has made a fair bit of Press in the last couple of days was that relating to some bandages imported from India. It appears that these bandages are anything but as aseptic as they should be. In fact, they contain a certain amount of infection. A case was reported of a woman having to have her finger amputated after having used one of those bandages on a cut finger. I know that the Government's usual response when challenged in this area is to say that consumer affairs is a State matter. But this case highlights the total dishonesty of that claim because these bandages were imported; they hlid to come through Customs. If this Government undertook its proper responsibility there would be protections in this area to see that impure products are not imported into Australia. This does not happen. Now we have the problem of having to recall all of these bandages which are kept in first-aid kits all around Australia. In fact, I understand that some bandages have been used by the Army. These have to be recalled in order to protect the health of people which is prejudiced because of the lack of Government control and the lack of Government interest.
More particularly, and perhaps more urgently, I refer to the very tragic case of the salami salmonella. Over the last few weeks 350 cases of salmonella poisoning, including the death of one young child, have been reported because of some salami which was manufactured in Melbourne by a highly reputable firm called Tibaldi Small Goods (Australia) Pty Ltd. That firm, in fact, has been in business in Melbourne since 1934-for 47 years. It developed a business engaged in making salami and other small goods. Within the meat industry it is respected as being probably the most highly quality conscious and purity conscious company in that area. But because of some acci-
dent in its factory some salami was produced which, in fact, included some salmonella newport, a very dangerous bacterial form of salmonella. Salmonella is a very emotive term, I guess. People tend to be scared of it but they should not be because salmonella is found in almost every animal that is killed for human consumption. It is found, very commonly, in most humans. I guarantee that

if all of us in this chamber were tested for salmonella at the moment some residual level of salmonella infection would be found within us but not at a dangerous level. It is only dangerous when it manifests itself in the form of salmonella newport.
This salmonella could have found its way into the salami or into the product which was used to make that salami from the piggery, from the abattoirs, during the production process or even at the delicatessen. But the result was that 350 people became sick and one boy died. The most tragic point about that boy's death was that it occurred three weeks after the first case of salmonella poisoning was reported in Melbourne and the first person was admitted to the Fairfield Hospital for infectious diseases. The simple fact is that if we had a national code which required people manufacturing salami or people engaged in other manufacturing food industries to batch code their products, it would be a simple matter to have them returned.
To its eternal credit, Tibaldi took every possible action to try to get all of its product back, at great expense and to its great embarrassment. If the Government had implemented the recommendations of the National Health and Research Council regarding date stamping and batch coding, recall would have been much more simple and more prompt. The culprit in this case was the Government. I have no desire to score political points from the death of an innocent child but if a lesson is learned from the death of that child perhaps his death is not in vain. The aim of the Government should be to redress the imbalance of power between the supplier and the consumer. Consumer protection should not become bogged down in the continuing controversy over State rights. At a meeting held in 1974, convened by my colleague the honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison), then the Minister for Science and Technology, between all the State Ministers involved in the consumer affairs area, they all agreed that responsibility for setting consumer standards belonged rightly with the national government. The States agree, the industries agree, consumer organisations agree, but the Fraser Government is out of step.
I turn now to putting to the Government a case which indicates that it has a capacity to introduce national legislation in this area. I know that the Minister probably will say that it is the States' responsibility to do that. I suggest that in this area various roles should be played by bodies under the control of the Commonwealth Government. Specifically, I want to say a few words about the

Food Purity and Product Safety

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1073

Trade Practices Commission and the Trade Practices Act which it administers. It is worth emphasising at the outset that the Commonwealth Government has ample power under the Constitution to make laws with respect to consumer protection in general and product safety and production information standards in particular. There is scope under the corporations, interstate and international trade, Territories and even the foreign affairs powers for the Commonwealth to make national uniform and far-reaching laws, which are so badly needed. The judgments of the High Court on section 92 are clear and consistent, at least on the Commonwealth's authority to make laws to regulate trade when such regulation is to promote the health and well-being of the population and to make trade safe. Section 92 is no impediment to a national code. Yet because of either lack of interest or. a misplaced faith in Dickensian economics, successive Liberal Ministers have not made the best use of the powers given under the Constitution.
Basically, the Trade Practices Commission is under-resourced and the provisions of the Trade Practices Act are seriously deficient. I deal first with the state of the legislation. The States have a mUltiplicity of legislation, much of which is poorly drafted and confusing to business and consumers alike. Varying standards placed on products from one State to another place added costs on business. Business would prefer one uniform national product safety and information code. The Trade Practices Act could embrace such a code. In contrast, only three States-New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland-have any thing approaching coherent statute law in that area. The Trade Practices Act has two major deficiencies. Sections 62 and 63 of the Act purport to cover the field but they contain major omissions. The Act contains no provision whereby a manufacturer or other supplier can be required to take steps to recall defective goods which have been supplied in breach of section 62. Some ancillary orders are available, by the-procedures are slow and not satisfactory for a number of technical reasons. Following amendments brought in by this Government in 1977, sections 62 and 63 of the Trade Practices Act do not apply to goods that are intended for export. That exemption goes to the very heart of our recent problems in the meat industry. If goods go abroad, we just do not care. I do not think that is a way to promote good trading relations.
I turn briefly to the treatment of the Commission. The Commission has suffered two severe staff cutbacks since December last year. The Commission even has a contingency plan to abolish its consumer protection division and its State

offices no longer have separate consumer protection sections. That has diminished rather than increased co-operation with State agencies. It has meant that information spreads less quickly through the national network of consumer bodies, with the type of result to which 1 referred earlier. The Government just does not understand that the Trade Practices Commission is there to promote competition and the making of the market. As I said earlier, that lack of understanding is matched by disinterest and neglect. 1 ask honourable members to consider the pathetically small number of regulations made by the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs setting product safety standards. There were only six. Summing up, 1 assert that the Government has been quite delinquent in refusing to accept that the health of the people of this nation should be a subject of national concern.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MOORE (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (3.19)-1 welcome the initiative of the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) in bringing forward this matter. The Government, far from resting in fairyland, as he claimed, is very conscious of the role played by the Trade Practices Commission and the consumer organisations. After all, we believe in private enterprise. As a consequence, the consumer is king, and to meet his demands is the ultimate aim of any manufacturer, provider of services or anybody involved in the market-place. This basic misunderstanding by the socialists of the problem of the market-place is not new; it is very consistent. In similar debates I have noticed that the socialist cause has always been dominated by the belief that government must control. The socialists say: 'Let us have more regulations, let us have more rules. Do not have self-regulation which might be understood by the manufacturers, the consumers or people who might be interested in what is going on. Instead of self-regulation let us have yet another government body'.
One of the problems in administration is that there is -far too great a gap between bu_reaucracy and the general consumers of Australia; there is far too great a gap between business and government. To create a government agency to review and regulate everything that moves in the nation will surely stifle business, competition and enterprise. That is something which the Government does not stand for; certainly I do not stand for it. I am a great believer in the role of private enterprise and I know that the honourable member for Parramatta is secretly an admirer of it

1074 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Food Purity and Product Safety

also. When he referred to fairyland I thought he might have been misconstruing some of his private enterprise background.
To top off what I have said already, I can only point to the fact that there are such things as State governments and that the State governments existed a long time before the Federal Government came into being. Under the Constitution of Australia the States ceded to the Canberra Government, then based in Melbourne, a series of powers. This Government has not sought to interfere with those powers. In a number of areas we have attempted to adopt a co-operative federalist approach, be it in relation to companies and securities or consumer affairs. Because of that we have had to look at the co-ordination of the various roles of the States. It is true, as the honourable member for Parramatta said, that business would like to have one standard applying to all States, not one standard in Queensland, one in Western Australia and one in yet another State. It does wish to see movement in that area.
Mr John Brown-All you have to do is introduce it; they can police it.
Mr MOORE-I am glad the honourable member brought that up. Clearly he has not looked at the way in which the ministerial council of consumer affairs has moved to bring labelling into the national sphere. Very great advances have been made in that area with the full cooperation of all the States. I am not denying for a minute that negotiation with the States is difficult and time consuming, but in the overall interest of the whole of Australia it is pretty clear to me that negotiation is the most appropriate course. I believe that self-regulation is the best way in which any industry can provide for the consumer. That does not mean to say that there should be a closed shop operation in which certain areas of the private sector do not really welcome competition; the system must ensure that they do welcome it. But, properly seen to, self-regulation certainly provides the best product and the best performance for consumers.
The honourable member for Parramatta had some pickle problems with onions and perhaps some other produce. I think that the general area of food in Australia is one area in which there has been some co-operation. All the State Health Ministers have agreed to what is referred to as the model food legislation. In 1980 Queensland passed the relevant legislation. We are now waiting for the other States, including New South Wales-that famous Premier State-to pass similar legislation. If the State governments would go

along with what their Ministers agreed to and implement legislation--
Mrs Kelly-It is too conservative.
Mr MOORE-If it was too conservative, why did the New South Wales Minister for Health agree to it? He agreed to it in the ministerial council. He had better get on with it rather than standing back and saying nothing is wrong. That legislation provides for mandatory recall and destruction or denaturising of adulterated food. That would cover all the aspects raised today by the honourable member for Parramatta in relation to a variety of food products. On top of that, a national register of banned and recalled food products has been evolved in association with departments and statutory authorities, including the Australian Federation of Consumer Organisations, State and Territory departments of business and consumer affairs, health, and primary industry, and the Trade Practices Commission. These people have all made a contribution to the establishment of the national register. All States, once they invoke the legislation, will be far better placed to provide the sort of protection that the Commonwealth would like to see for all Australians. By doing this we have, I think, made a significant contribution in this area.
The honourable member for Parramatta raised a couple of other points in relation to the contamination of certain products imported into Australia. These, of course, have to be faced up to. The products were recalled in conjunction with the State Ministers after testing. It is not possible in real life to sample every product that enters Australia. If we were to stand at the ports of entry into Australia and physically sample every product that came across the dock there would not be an employment force in any other part of Australia. A sampling process must be embraced. Of course, this requires a certain time delay. Nevertheless, it was undertaken by the Commonwealth investigating body, the National Biological Standards Laboratory. As a consequence, in co-ordination with the State Health Ministers, the offending contaminated wound dressings were recalled. I can only point to that as an area in which positive action was taken by co-operation.
It was also alleged that somewhere along the trail we are not using the provisions of the Trade Practices Commission to ban unsafe goods. Quite clearly that is wrong. I do not know the precise number of unsafe goods which have been banned but I refer the honourable member for Parramatta to the answer to question on notice No. 49. The question was asked by the honourable

Food Purity and Product Safety

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1075

member for Hughes (Mr Les Johnson). He asked how many goods had been banned under the Trade Practices Act since the introduction of provisions empowering the declaration of consumer products safety standards and the banning of the
sale of unsafe goods. The answer contained a whole page of such goods. I do not know the number but it is certainly. more than the six items which, I think, was the number used by the honourable member for Parramatta.
Frequently the New South Wales Minister for Consumer Affairs has activated himself in relation to toy standards. In the last Christmas period New South Wales held a series of tests on one particular toy and as a consequence banned the product. Victoria and Tasmania checked the same toy. They applied a test and decided that it was not unsafe and no ban was enforced. South
Australia conducted the same test as New South Wales but got a different result and decided to take no action. In those varying circumstances the Commonwealth decided to seek co-operation and to review the reports as a whole. As a consequence we took no action. There is no doubt that toys are a very emotive area. They certainly cause concern to parents throughout the nation. The ministerial council for consumer affairs has asked the Australian Standards Association to bring forward for its consideration a product information standard for determining these sorts of problems in the future. These products are of concern to parents. I certainly agree that if we can bring about a rationalisation of consumer demands in this area it will be most encouraging.
I am surprised that the honourable member for Parramatta did not take some interest in fireworks. That is an area with which the Australian Labor Party in New South Wales has had a particular relationship. It has caused considerable concern in consumer affairs. The ALP had a big fireworks party. A pa,rticular brand of a firework-the Horse brand magical roman candle was sold by the ALP despite the fact that it had been banned by the New South Wales Government. The firework was still being sold by the ALP branch in Sussex Street at the time that it was banned by the Government. Eventually the ALP caught up. I have no doubt that some of the great big balls of fire-no doubt they were coloured red-that were pouring out were all good for the sideshow that goes on in the New South Wales branch of the ALP. That incident bears a resemblance to the type of multicoloured, multihanded approach that the ALP has to consumer policies. They are a mishmash of confused views which do not coincide with the requirements of Australian consumers. They certainly do

not meet the real desires and aspirations of the manufacturers and providers of goods.
I am sure a Labor government would not understand that it takes two people to make a market. There must be a buyer and a seller. Quite clearly, the buyer will not be in the market place if the goods are seen to be inadequate or, if food is concerned, not suitable for consumption. They will certainly not buy toys if they are seen to be in-
adequate. In view of those circumstances the very real discipline of market forces will win through and make sure that the producers in this nation meet the market in terms of price, quality and supply. Because of that the matter brought forward today by the honourable member for Parramatta falls rather flat.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (3.32)-The Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) in his reply to the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) has given us a great deal of justification for his being the Minister for business but very little justification for his being also the Minister for consumer affairs. He has explained to the House why this Government has abrogated its responsibility to protect Australian consumers. He has attempted to give us an argu-
ment that the market place should be allowed to control everything in Australia. It is the view of the Australian Labor party that in certain areas the Federal Government has a responsibility to take control. The honourable member for Parramatta has given many examples of this, particu-
larly as it applies to the need for adequate protection to ensure food standards. However, before I extend that point I will give the House some other examples which highlight the great neglect that we have seen in Australia over the last five years. I have been able to gather a few examples in the last few months.
The Adelaide Advertiser on 11 July this year reported that a health food company was fined a mere $500 for selling chocolate bars and muesli bars infested with insects and beetle larvae. The Sunday Telegraph on 29 March this year contained an article discussing the use of cleaning fluid to decaffinate coffee beans. The use of a dangerous chemical stain remover, called trichlorethylene, and other dangerous inorganic solvents was banned by United States food and drug authorities after they discovered cancers in animals who were fed traces of the' chemical. Any controls which exist in Australia apparently are implemented only after United States authorities have taken action. In the meantime, Australian consumers suffer from government inaction. The Canberra Times on 20 February this year contained a report about a brand of mineral water

1076 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Food Purity and Product Safety

with excessive levels of radium. The problem was first noticed in Queensland and the other States subsequently recalled their stocks.
This is a ludicrous situation. An unsafe product is unsafe wherever it is sold in Australia. Consumers should not have to wait for seven sets of State machinery to take action on a problem. Uniform national standards are clearly in the best interests of all Australian consumers. We need protection not only from unsafe or contaminated products but also from inadequate or untruthful labelling or advertising.
The Sydney Daily Telegraph of 31 March this year carried a report about the lack of meat in the famous Aussie meat pie. I think we can put 'meat' in inverted commas these days. The Sydney Morning Herald of 13 July 1981 carried a warning from the Cattlemen's Union that consumers, when buying meat, have no way of knowing whether it came from prime cattle or old cows. These days we can add horses or kangaroos. It is interesting that the spokesman also said that the beef industry had concentrated mainly on the export markets and had paid little attention to domestic consumers. If the recent beef export fiasco is the result of concentration by the industryon the export market, God help the local consumers. But these examples are only a small sample which serves to indicate that Australian consumer standards are well below those of overseas. For example, in the United States the supreme courts have outstripped their government counterparts and have established a large body of judge-made law giving direct rights of action against the manufacturer. I noticed with interest an article in the Australian recently which said that to find a decomposed cockroach in one's breakfast cereal in the United States is better than winning a $lm lottery. Australian laws do not protect people to anything like that sort of degree because we have no real uniform legislation. The recent kangaroo meat scandal and the examples I have mentioned clearly indicate the need for effective consumer protection. The 'she's all right mate' mentality displayed in recent weeks over the export of contaminated meat is deplorable.
The Australian Labor Party recognises that it is more difficult these days for the consumer to decide on the best value between a large range of competing products. Consumers are in a weaker position than producers and suppliers who know how their products compare but do not pass the information on to consumers. National legislation is necessary to ensure that the information provided to consumers is not misleading or deceptive. But we do not want to make life hard for businessmen by harnessing manufacturers or shackling

them and the ALP clearly recognises that, despite the accusations that we have just heard from the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs. Suppliers themselves know the advantages of having to deal with only one set of laws. Manufacturers themselves have called for national food legislation because different State laws and regulations mean that they have to meet different requirements. What we are doing is acting alongside many of the manufacturers. Life would be made much easier for them if they knew the national laws with which they had to comply. Under the present system, instead of producing one food item for all of Australia, costs are increased because six different State laws have to be met. In this case industry and the Labor Party have one interest in common-reducing unnecessary cost and thus saving money for the consumer. Obviously this does not interest the Government.
The Labor Party has a completely different outlook from that of the present Government with regard to consumer protection. We would do two things. Firstly, we would enforce the consumer provisions which are already in our legislation and which Liberal-Country Party coalitions prefer to let lie idle. For instance, underthe Trade Practices Act the Commonwealth Government has the power to ban the sale of unsafe goods, as the Minister has outlined. But really what has it done? Do not tell me that every product in the market place is completely safe. That is simply not the case. In fact we know that there are hazardous products in the market because the Labor Party has already taken action with regard to many of them.
Let us consider the example of the toy referred to by the Minister in his speech. This toy, a hydropneumatic rocket, was banned from sale in New Sovth Wales. The toy had been tested by the department of Mr Einfeld, the New South Wales Minister responsible for consumer affairs, and had been clocked at speeds of up to 650 kilometres an hour, even though it was labelled as being suitable for use by children of up to eight years of age. The Federal Minister was correct when he said that other State governments decided not to ban the toy. But in the Australian Capital Territory we were faced with the situation that over the border the toy was banned but, because the Government would not act within its powers, the toy could come over the border from Queanbeyan to Canberra to be sold. That situation just is not good enough. Is it really good enough to have a toy which is able to move at speeds of up to 650 kilometres an hour and which can be played with by children of up to eight years of age? It is not good enough.

Food Purity and Product Safely

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1077

The level of consumer protection carried out by the Federal Minister's department is to be cut back even further now. It has been reported, as a result of the Lynch razor gang recommendations, that consumer protection areas in the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs are to be further scaled down by 'more selective complaints and investigations, reduced adjudication work, reduced education functions and safety and information standards monitoring'. This area of consumer product safety is a glaring example of the inadequacies of the Government in protecting the consumer.
The second major aspect of the ALP's consumer protection policy is our belief that it is essential to have a seperate department of consumer affairs to co-ordinate consumer affairs functions and to be responsible for the enforcement of legislation. We believe it is totally incongruous to combine the business portfolio with that of consumer affairs. We intend to take action in that respect by establishing a separate department of consumer affairs so that we would have one body, not a whole range of departments, controlling and operating proper and effective consumer protection in Australia. Because there has been so little action in this area, which in fact covers a whole range of areas, this 'it's all right Jack' mentality with respect to consumers exists under this Government and has led to people in Australia just accepting things without questioning their rights in the area. I believe there is a great need for consumer education and the Labor Party would act on this.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MacKENZIE (Calare) (3.43)-1 must admit that I have some sympathy on this subject with members of the Opposition, although not so much with the substance of their call for the Commonwealth to implement legislation, because I have some doubts as to whether the Commonwealth has that capacity. I share some of their concerns that there are a number of products, whether they be food products, recreational products or whatever, including chemicals, that give cause for concern in this country. I recall being presented a number of years ago in Japan during a visit there with a gas table lighter which was operated simply by applying pressure to the side of it. Not being a very bright individual I packed the lighter in my suitcase with the net result that the suitcase was set alight because of the pressure of clothes on the lever. I can only say that it was fortunate that my suitcase was burnt while it was

in the hotel in Japan and not in the baggage compartment of the aircraft I flew on. That incident brought home to me how easy it was to bring into this country, or for another country to manufacture, a product which was quite blatantly unsafe, considering the uses to which it could be put and the circumstances under which it could be transported.
In this debate we have looked at a number of issues. We have heard about pickled onions, salmonella, salami and contaminated bandages. We have talked about the exportation of contaminated meat and about the consumption of contaminated meat products within Australia. We have discussed Rapitard insulin, toys and fireworks. Flammable clothing is one matter we have not talked about, but we could very well do so. We have not yet mentioned the rather disastrous circumstances that surround toxic shock syndrome and tampons in the United States and to a much lesser degree in Australia. In the time available I wish to use some of those examples to point out how various means of control-whether voluntary, or the responsibility of the manufacturers or distributors, or by State governments, or the Commonwealth Government in association with the States-have to some extent worked.
I do not believe we should follow the line advocated by the Opposition speakers that all power, all responsibility, _all control, and all administration in this area should be vested solely with the Commonwealth. Responsibility must also lie with the manufacturers, the distributors, the wholesalers, perhaps the retailers, and with the State governments, who are responsible for much of the legislation that applies in the area of consumer protection. Of course, other areas which are very clearly the responsibility of the Commonwealth are those involving prohibited imports, which come under the Customs regulations, and the-Trade Practices Act.
The Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) has pointed out that some measures have been taken under those two pieces of legislation. I agree with the Opposition that it is not a very exhaustive list. In fact, only 12 goods or classes have been banned as unsafe under the Trade Practices Act and, as of earlier this year, only 10 consumer product safety standards have been declared. Some of those standards apply to things such as children's night garments and their flammability. In my opinion, that is something that should have been done long ago, and the States have been just as irresponsible, or at least as slow in moving in this area, as the Commonwealth. Buoyancy aids is another area where it was only relatively recently that some fairly

1078 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Food Purity and Product Safety

strict standards were laid down, particularly in relation to aids for children. We can all recall cases where children have drowned or nearly drowned as a result of unsatisfactory buoyancy aids. I compliment the Minister and his Department for imposing those safety standards, but at the same time. I believe that they are only just a start. There are many other areas where further standards could be introduced.
Mr John Brown-I think he is on our side.
Mr MacKENZIE-No, not necessarily. I am just taking a bob each way. Let us look at some of the areas to which the Minister referred. He advocated that there was a need and an opportunity for voluntary codes in many areas of consumer protection. A good example of voluntary response occurred late last year and early this year in relation to toxic shock syndrome and the use of certain tampons containing carboxy-methylcellulose. In October 1980 the Minister for Health, through the National Biological Standards Laboratory, released a statement saying that in America there had been a number of instances of TSS associated with certain tampons. The Laboratory considered that there was a very small risk of TSS through the use of such tampons in Australia, and fairly detailed suggestions for the use and handling of these products were given by the Minister in October 1980. I think that in that case the Minister for Health made a fairly responsible statement, and it was made, as a result of some circumstances that .had occurred in the United States, well before any case of TSS was identified in Australia. We know that in January this year a case of TSS was identified in Melbourne, and again it was associated with one of these products containing carboxy-methylcellulose. Again the Minister made a statement which, from memory, was well reported. It confirmed that the bacterium staphylococcus aureus was associated with this product, and very clear instructions were put out by the Minister as to what women who use this product should do. The manufacturer and the parent company were very quick to apply a voluntary code, and immediately withdrew that product from the market. I think that was a very effective example--
Mr John Brown-What about the insulin they would not recall;
Mr MacKENZIE-At the moment I am busy on this particular product. In March this year, after pretty exhaustive examination by the National Biological Standards Laboratory and some independent bodies, it was shown that the products available on the market in Australia had not contained staphylococcus aureus and that

manufacturing facilties had been inspected and declared satisfactory. The voluntary freeze was discontinued, and to my knowledge there has been no further problem. Indeed, there is some significant doubt as to whether it was the tampons or their ingredients that caused these few cases of toxic shock syndrome.
Let us consider another example. The National Biological Standards Laboratory identified pathogenic bacteria in certain wound dressings and bandages imported from India. To my knowledge, it was not brought to the Government's attention by users but was identified in routine testing and examination undertaken by the Laboratory. Again, that is an example of checks in progress, checks which have identified unsatisfactory products, and consequently appropriate action has been taken. This is not to say that in every instance this has been a satisfactory way of handling the matter. The honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) has pointed out quite rightly that the salmonella scare with Tibaldi salami in Melbourne is a matter that should have been covered by State and perhaps Commonwealth legislation.
It is interesting to note that if the codes recommended by the National Health and Medical Research Council on food labelling, batch coding at manufacture, and date stamping had been followed in this case-these codes were established several years ago, but I understand that only New South Wales has taken up date stamping and batch coding-it would have been much easier to trace the source of infected and contaminated salami. That may well have prevented not only the death that occurred but also the severe illnesses that resulted from eating the product. In this case the code has been developed by an agency. of the Commonwealth, and it is up to the States to accept the code and to implement legislation accordingly. Likewise, on the model food legislation, I am informed by the Minister's office that only one State, namely Queensland, has accepted the thrust of the legislative recommendations relating to the destruction, denaturing and otherwise disposing of food products that are unsatisfactory and may be dangerous to public health.
I am a member of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation, and in the short time available to me I wish to outline another area of considerable concern relating to hazardous chemicals. The Committee is conducting a very comprehensive inquiry into hazardous chemicals in Australia, and it is rather disturbing to find that in practice there is virtually no requirement for the correct labelling

Income Tax Amendment Bill

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1079

of hazardous chemicals, some of which are certainly dangerous to public health, some of which are suspected of being carcinogenic. I think the discussion on this subject has been useful. I do not accept the Opposition's proposition that control should be entirely the responsibility of the Commonwealth Government. It is a responsibility that should be shared between the Commonwealth, the States, and the manufacturers. I suggest that this is a matter of national importance and should be shared by all those bodies.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.
INCOME TAX (INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS) AMENDMENT BILL
(No.2) 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 27 August, on motion by MrMoore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (3.56)-The Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment BiII (No.2) 1981 is not the most exciting piece of legislation to come before the House in this session. Indeed, the fact that I am the only person listed to speak about the Bill indicates that it has not exactly grabbed the imagination of the Parliament. However, that is not to say that it is not an important piece of legislation. It gives effect to a taxation agreement which has been negotiated between Australia and Denmark. The agreement is essentially the same as several others that have been negotiated between Australia and other countries in recent years, none of which has been opposed by the Opposition. Countries with which we already have such agreements are the United Kingdom, the United States of America, Canada, New Zealand, Singapore, Japan, West Germany, the Netherlands, France, Belgium, Switzerland, the Philippines, Malaysia and Sweden. We have not opposed the application of any of those agreements, nor do we oppose the application of such an agreement now between Australia and Denmark.
All these agreements relate to taxation of income, both of individuals and enterprises, and have three essential purposes. Firstly, they aim to prevent double taxation of income where the income is earned in a country which is not the taxpayer's country of residence. Without such agreements it is'possible that the same income could be taxed in both countries without allowance for tax paid in the other. Secondly, the agreements aim to simplify the obligations of taxpayers so that they

know how their income earned in a country other than their country of residence will be'taxed; and, thirdly, they aim to prevent avoidance of tax on income by taxpayers who are able to use the international scale of operations to manipulate their affairs so as to avoid tax in one or both of the countries involved. Such reasons seem to the Opposition to be worthy of support. We are especially concerned that tax avoidance through transfer pricing, as iris known-that is, pricing of goods or services that are sold from one branch of a transnational corporation to another at artifically high or low levels designed to minimise the transnational corporatiqn's global taxation and to maximise after tax profits-should be eliminated.
There is no doubt that the opportunities for such tax avoidance are ever increasing as transnational corporations control an increasing proportion of world trade. The Brandt report, as it is known-the report of the Independent Commission on International Development Issues, headed by Willy Brandt, the former West German Chancellor-which was published last year, pointed out that the best estimation that could be made at that time was that between one quarter and one third of all world production was controlled by transnational corporations and that intra-firm international trade, that is, trade between branches of subsidiaries of transnational corporations in different countries, accounted for over 30 per cent of all world trade. Thus the opportunities for transfer pricing are rife not only in regard to goods but also in regard to services provided. As these already large scale transnational corporations penetrate our industries in an ever greater degree, especially in mining and manufacturing, there is an ever increasing opportunity for transfer pricing to be used to avoid Australia company tax. No estimate is given by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) or the Australian Taxation Office of which I am aware of the possible loss of revenues involved.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Orcler! I am reluctant to interrupt the honourable member. Honourable members in the House engaged in conversation are probably not aware of how audible their voices are in a silent chamber. I require them to subdue the level of their conversation.
Mr WILLIS-As I was saying, there is no authoritative estimate as to the kind of tax losses involved through tax avoidance as a result of transfer pricing, but Mr Eric Risstrom of the Australian Taxpayers Association estimated earlier this year, on advice given to him, which he says was from an authoritative source-I have

1080 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Income Tax Amendment Bill

checked this personally with him-that in the Melbourne Taxation Office alone the annua110ss of revenue through the use of tax havens and transfer pricing amounts to something of the order of $2,000m. Extrapolating that figure to the national level, given that there is a high percentage of company head offices in Melbourne, this would mean an annual loss of between $3 billion and $3.5 billion. Whether in reality that is a gross exaggeration or an approximation I cannot be sure, but Mr Risstrom asserts that it is a realistic assessment of the tax losses. If he is even remotely correct we are talking about a massive and extraordinary loss of tax revenue through the operation of such measures as transfer pricing and the use of international tax havens.
The importance of a double tax agreement in regard to transfer pricing is that it does two things. The double tax agreement supplements the existing taxation law and also makes it easier to obtain the information needed to overcome tax avoidance by the use of such devices as transfer pricing. With regard to the first aspect-that of supplementing the existing law-I suppose it needs to be said that the international agreements override the existing taxation law and so give additional power to control transfer pricing. Such an agreement commonly provides, as does the agreement now before the House, that where an enterprise in one country carries on a business in another country through a permanent establishment, the recorded profits of that establishrrient or firm can be re-arranged by the tax authorities in the latter country to show for tax purposes the profits that would have been earned had the enterprise been wholly independent of its parent or associated company. This power to re-arrange profits for tax purposes is a very important one. The fact that such a power is provided by the double tax agreement considerably increases the power of the Taxation Office to overcome some transfer pricing activities. In effect, the double tax agreement enables the Taxation Office to employ the arms length principle; to treat enterprises which are related to enterprises overseas as though they were totally independent of the overseas enterprise, to assess what the real market price of the goods or services transferred between them really is, to adjust their profits accordingly and to tax them on that re-arranged profit.
This provision is of special importance when the national law relating to transfer pricing is weak and ineffective, as ours has been and still is. Section 136 of the Income Tax Assessment Act purports to deal with transfer pricing but, for reasons that I explained in a speech in this House on 1 April this year, it has been rendered quite

useless by various High Court interpretations. Thus the only effective law we have against transfer pricing at present is that which is contained in the double tax agreements. This is not to say, however, that it does not matter if section 136 is ineffective. Indeed, it matters greatly, because double tax agreements give no protection against transfer pricing with enterprises in countries with which we have no such agreement. This is important not only because it means that transfer pricing through many countries is not covered but also because transnational corporations based in countries with which we have a double tax agreement can interpose a third country with which we have no such agreement and so avoid the impact of the double tax agreement on the transfer pricing activities.
This is essentially what happened in the Commonwealth Aluminium case decided by the High Court last year. In that case the Australian company sold bauxite to Japanese buyers through a company jointly established in Hong Kong by the Australian company and the Japanese buyers. The price to the Hong Kong company was artificially low but the price from the Hong Kong company to the Japanese buyers was roughly the real market price. The profits were therefore made in Hong Kong rather than Australia. As the Hong Kong company tax rate is 15 per cent to 17 per cent compared with Australia's company tax rate of 46 per cent, the after tax profits-were thereby greatly increased and were shared equally between the Australian company and the Japanese buyers who jointly established that Hong Kong company.
The fact that such blatant tax avoidance could occur despite a double tax agreement between Australia and Japan shows tha1 it is absolutely essential to have an effective national law against transfer pricing, the effectiveness of which can be considerably enhanced by the exchange of information provisions of the double tax agreement. The exchange of information provisions generally require each of the countries involved to exchange information for the carrying .out not only of the agreement as a whole but also of the domestic laws of each country in regard to the taxation of income and so enhance the effectiveness of the national laws against tax avoidance by means of transfer pricing. This is of great importance because clearly the prevention of tax avoidance by transfer pricing requires not only that the laws be upheld by the courts and therefore be effective in that sense, but also that the Commissioner of Taxation be able to obtain the. information necessary to prove that transfer pricing has taken place and

Income Tax Amendment Bill

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1081

to fairly reconstruct the company's profits to display what profit would have prevailed in an armslength tra"nsaction. The agreement now before the House contains such an information exchange provision, as in fact I think do all of the other double tax agreements, and so helps to ensure that the Commissioner of Taxation is able to obtain the necessary information for the prevention of tax avoidance by transfer pricing between companies operating in Denmark and Australia.
The fact that such agreements help in these ways does not, however, as I have already explained, overcome the deficiencies in our national taxation law. For that reason we welcome the statement by the Treasurer on 27 May this year that the Government intends to legislate to amend section 136 of the Income Tax Assessment Act to remove the deficiencies so clearly exposed by the Commonwealth Aluminium Corporation case. That statement by the Treasurer was made as an addendum to this second reading speech on the Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981 to introduce the new Part IVA into the Income Tax Assessment Act. That was a renewed attempt to achieve an effective annihilation provision against blatant tax avoidance schemes in general. Debate after the Treasurer's statement did not centre on the section 136 announcement but rather on the Part IV element, which was the subject of the Bill before the House.
On behalf of the Opposition I say now that we strongly welcome the Government's long overdue announcement of an intention to legislate to revise section 136. We have been calling for such action for at least the past two and a half years. Indeed, it has been clear since the Asprey Taxation Review Committee reported in early 1975 that section 136 had basic deficiencies that rendered it quite ineffective. The Asprey Committee recommended that amendments be introduced but nothing has been done until now, some six and a half years later.
There are a number of aspects of the foreshadowed legislation of which we approve and some aspects which cause us some concern. I shall refer briefly to both of those elementsfirstly, aspects of the Treasurer's speech of which we strongly approve. He said in his statement on 27 May that the legislation to revise section 136 would apply from the date of that speech. We have not seen the legislation yet, but presumably when it comes in it will be, as he said then, backdated to 27 May. We applaud that limited element of retrospectivity. It is just a pity that it was not brought in much sooner, particularly if Mr Risstrom is anything like right in his estimates of

the tax losses involved. Secondly, we note with great interest that in that statement on 27 May the Treasurer said that the tax avoidance which will be covered by the revised section 136 need not be the dominant purpose of an arrangement but merely one of a complex mixture of tax and other arrangements. This notion of a not merely incidental purpose is directly contrary to the test applied in Part IVA and conforms to Labor's ideas on what Part IVA should have included. When we debated Part IVA, which in general we supported, it was a very strong part of our criticism that it was too weak in the sense that it required that tax avoidance to be the dominant purpose of a transaction.
But in the same speech in which the Treasurer launched that legislation and in which he claimed that such a dominant purpose would have to be shown for a transaction to be covered by part IVA he went on to foreshadow legislation amending section 136 of the Income Tax Assessment Act to cover transfer pricing. He said that it would not be necessary to show that the dominant purpose was in fact tax avoidance for the revised section 136 to act against such a transaction. That seems to be an extraordinary contrast.
If it is appropriate to apply not merely an incidental purpose test in regard to section 136, which we thoroughly applaud, why do we not also have such an approach to part IVA? It seems to me to be quite extraordinary that in the course of the one speech the Treasurer was capable of saying that one form of test should apply in respect of one form of tax avoidance scheme but that in respect of another set of tax avoidance schemes relating to transfer pricing another test should apply. There seems to be an extraordinary inconsistency there. In regard to section 136 I do not in any way wish to criticise the Treasurer for establishing the test which he has foreshadowed he will apply, which is that the transaction need not be the dominant purpose of an arrangement in order for it to be covered by legislation.
A third aspect of which I approve and to which I refer briefly is that the guidelines given to the Commissioner of Taxation to reconstruct transactions and to recast taxable income, according to the Treasurer's statement, enable him to use explicitly the arm's length provision which is already embodied in double tax agreements and forms the basis of United States of America anti-transfer pricing arrangements. Section 136, as it currently stands, does not specifically authorise the use of that principle. That is one reason why that section is ineffective. Even if one can get it to apply to a situation-given the High Court interpretations that seems not to be the case at present in most

1082 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Income Tax Amendment Bill

instances-the Commissioner of Taxation then faces the problem of how he should go about reconstructing the transactions so that he can come up with a profit which is more taxable than the one which is nominally shown. It does not give him the specific authorisation to use an arm's length principle, and that is a deficiency in that legislation. From what the Treasurer has now said, the Commissioner will certainly have that power, and we applaud that.
It was also said by the Treasurer that if there is no basis available on which to determine an arm's length price, such as in monopoly situations and particularly in vertically integrated situations, the Commissioner will be able to assess taxable income on whatever amount he deems appropriate subject to review by the courts and boards of review. We also approve of that and note that there are various ways in which that can be done. These have been set out in Recommendation on the Determination of Transfer Prices Between Associated Enterprises, which is a publication of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. We note also that the Treasurer said in his statement of 27 May that business and non-business transactions and all forms of receipts or potential deductions will be covered. We think that is also highly appropriate rather than a more restrictive view of it.
Although we applaud all those aspects, I have just a few elements of concern. Firstly, we note that section 136 has fallen down in the need to show that a business is controlled principally by non-residents and on behalf of non-residents. This has been easily overcome by interposing a resident company or a majority of Australian directors, as in the case of Commonwealth Aluminium, who still act in the interests of foreign shareholders. The Treasurer in his statement has given no indication of how this problem will be resolved. This may be covered by referring to parties not acting at arm's length or by reference to associated parties, as in double tax agreements, or by defining indirect control. But the Treasurer has not spelt that out. We presume that he will do so in the legislation, but it seems that it would have been appropriate to mention that in his statement.
Perhaps more serious is the Treasurer's. statement that the penalty tax applicable in such situations should be of the order of only 10 per cent. That contrasts strongly with the 200 per cent maximum penalty tax which is to apply in the case of Part IVA. Again I remind the House that that statement by the Treasurer was part of a speech in which he announced to the House his new legislation for Part IVA, under which there is a 200 per cent tax avoidance penalty. But now the

maximum penalty to apply in respect of transfer pricing arrangements is 10 per cent. There is an extraordinary difference and no real reason that we can see why there should be any such difference. Is one to argue that tax avoidance through a blatant tax avoidance scheme of a Curran type is any more heinous than the tax avoidance in the Commonwealth Aluminium case involving transfer pricing? I do not think one can argue that one is worse than the other. It seems quite remarkable to have such an extraordinary difference in the degree of penalty. I foreshadow that if the legislation, when it comes forward, contains the penalty provision which the Treasurer has foreshadowed we would be critical of it and probably would move to amend it.
Finally, I refer to some other problem areas which are not covered by the proposed legislation. If we are concerned about tax avoidance through international transactions, more than transfer pricing is involved. As I said in my statement to this House on 1 April this year when we were discussing other double tax agreements, we should be looking also at arrangements made by Australian residents to reduce their income tax obligations through international transactions such as through the operations of section 23Q of the Income Tax Assessment Act and the lack of a foreign tax credit scheme. The use of foreign tax havens is rife as shown by Mr Risstrom's statement, and much more than transfer pricing is involved if we are really to clean up this area of the tax law. I recommend to the Treasurer that he do a thorough job-he would not deal with just one aspect, although admittedly an important one-by cleaning up these other areas of blatant tax avoidance.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.
MEAT INSPECTION SERVICES
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek the indulgence of the Chair to add information to art answer I gave in the House this afternoon. In response to a question from the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) during Question Time today, I stated that I was advised that traces of methyl violet had not been found in cartons examined so far bearing 140C markings and that therefore the matter of dyed meat had not

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1083

been referred to the Australian Federal Police either by the Department of Primary Industry or by the Victorian Department of Agriculture. I received advice at 3.30 this afternoon from the Bureau of Animal Health that the Deputy Director of Agriculture in Victoria had advised that his Department had found no traces of any dyed beef in the 140C cartons which currently are impounded and are being species tested. However, the Victorian Department has found some small traces of dyed horse meat in these cartons, and this matter is part of the current police investigation.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1981-82
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed from 8 September, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr PEACOCK (Kooyong) (4.19)-For a Budget to achieve its economic and social purpose, it has to do more than expound generalised theory and abstract statistics. It has to enlist the active co-operation of all Australians in an economic enterprise which is national in the true sense of the term, having meaning not simply for a government but for the community as a whole. There must, therefore, be a perceived and creative balance between restraint and opportunity, between taxation and reward, between sectional claims and fair play for all. Otherwise, there will be no widespread enthusiasm or effective opportunity for national economic growth and, as a result, no capacity to cater for real social need. A Budget should not become a scoreboard for winners and losers; rather, it should offer the chance for everyone to participate on a just and rewarding basis. To the degree that a Budget fails that challenge, it fails its own strategy.
In future, I would prefer to see a Budget framed on the basis of its being as economically and socially productive as possible. By 'economically productive' I mean a Budget that encourages the kind of national economic growth which generates real wealth for the benefit of all Australians. By 'socially productive' I mean a Budget which caters for carefully identified areas of genuine human need and avoids a situation in which those who do not need government assistance are given help at the expense of those who do. If one wants to see a Budget in national housekeeping. terms, there is no inherent value in coming out even at the end of the period if, in the meantime, some members of the family have been allowed to be

gluttons at the expense of those who have been undernourished.
A good Budget needs to be more than a balance of figures. It needs to promote balance in the process of growth itself, ensuring a sensitive adjustment between the challenge of economic productivity and the satisfaction of social need. A Budget has to be evaluated in terms of how well or how badly it meets these twin objectives: The objective of promoting broadly based and stable growth and expanding opportunities, and the objective of meeting genuine social need. I am talking here not just of broad aggregates-that is, whether certain monetary targets are met and the size of the Budget deficit or surplus, important though these are-I am talking also about how the Budget affects people-individuals and families-and about who is being asked to bear the burden for the Budget strategy, and why. It is not enough to see the Budget as a technical economic document. It has far reaching and very direct effects on every member of the community. Let me give some examples:
Firstly, the Budget's tax policies have a direct impact on the attitudes to work and productivity that now permeate the whole of the Australian community. From these flow current attitudes to wage claims and industrial disputes as well as people's capacity to spend in the Australian economy and to generate a steady demand for goods and services. Secondly, budgetary and monetory policies determine the level of interest rates to be paid by millions of homeowners and those seeking to own a home. Thirdly, the Budget directly affects small businesses throughout the country and the cost structure of all business.
Whatever their specific needs, all Australians are looking for a Budget which conveys a sufficiently broad national vision about the economic future of Australia. A constructive Budget will be fundamentally concerned with realising this country's economic potentiaL Unless we are effective in creating new wealth, we shall correspondingly be limited in our capacity to assist those in the community who really need government help. The direct link between productivity and wei fare-is one that Labor ignores. The Labor Party's policies emphasise the need for welfare without at the same time giving due recognition to. the corresponding need to create the additional productivity to pay for this welfare. The need to foster additional productivity should be a central concern of any Budget strategy, and the possibility for balanced development should be a basic criterion against which we judge the national opportunities a Budget provides.

1084 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

There can be no doubt that the policies of this Government since 1975 have been instrumental in restoring the basic strength of the Australian economy, particularly relative to the rest of the world, and have laid the base for sound expansion through the remainder of the 1980s. The stated aim of this Budget is to strengthen the foundations laid in the last five years, and in particular to deal with the threat posed by the signs of re-emerging inflationary pressures over the last year. This is absolutely appropriate. To this end, the Budget aims to restrict monetary growth to 10 per cent to II per cent. It aims for a domestic surplus of $1.5 billion, despite a real growth in spending of 1.9 per cent. '
The 1981 Budget must, however, be evaluated in the context of the total spectrum of the Government's economic policies. Firstly, monet-
ary policy has been significantly tightened during 1981. Long term bond rates have risen from less than 12 per cent 12 months ago to their current level of 15 per cent; other interest rates have moved up to a similar degree. Secondly, the exchange rate has moved up by 8 per cent since January, which affects export and import competing industries. Thirdly, as a result of the Premiers Conference and Loan Council decisions, State
Governments and their authorities have been forced to restrict their expenditure growth and loan raisings. Fourthly, in July, new health arrangements were announced, together with the half-indexation tax cut and the abandonment of tax indexation for the future. Fifthly, wage policies are in a state of uncertainty since indexation was abandoned by the Arbitration Commission, and sixthly, new directions are being assessed, and properly so, in tariff policy and other assistance to industry.
The Government's stated objective is to cut back the size of the government sector to allow the deployment of resources into growthgenerating private sector activities without adding to inflationary pressures. While I support this
objective, I believe that with this Budget the Government is risking excessive contraction of the economy during 1982. In the Government's own words it expects an erosion of profit margins in 1981-82 that would more than offset the rise incurred in 1980-81. Private capital inflow is set to play an important role in financing new investment. If capit,al inflow falls below projected levels-and there are signs that this may be the case-the Government must not allow credit conditions to become excessively tight. We do not want a repetition of the credit crunch that Labor administered in 1974. We do not want any more sudden lurches in policy.

It is important that Government economic policies allow for progressive improvement of the economy without excessive expansion ot excessive contraction. An economically efficient and socially humane approach to management of the national economy involves smooth and timely changes of gear. Flexibility is, of course, essential but it should not be at the expense of the stability people h9pe to find in Liberal as opposed to Labor Party management. Not only businessmen but all Australians need to be able to rely on a degree of certainty and predictability in Liberal government policy-making. State governments would also appreciate some predictability and stability at the national level. As they assume greater responsibilities that were previously acknowledged by the Commonwealth Government, the States are looking for-and should receive-more room to move. In this context, while total Budget outlays are expected to increase by 12.6 per cent in 1981-82, direct outlays by the Commonwealth will increase by 15.1 per cent. By contrast, payments to the States will increase by only 8.2 per cent. This is despite a transfer of functions to the States and curtailment of their borrowing capacity.
One of the key elements of the Government's strategy is the containment of wage increases. I am not convinced, however, that the Government is going about it the right way. Since the abandonment of indexation there is no real wages policy. The Government appears to hope that if profits are squeezed business will do the job for it.
I have said before that I believe the Government's objectives in the longer term should be to hand over to employers and employees greater responsibility for wage fixation, perhaps through a system of collective bargaining. But this cannot be done overnight. No country in the world has collective bargaining without an institutional or legislative framework. It must be introduced within a new framework of industrial law. The present system unquestionably needs a complete overhaul. While this is occurring there should be, firstly, a return to the disputes settlement role of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and, secondly, a national wage case in which the Commission can adjust for the consumer price index on a retrospective basis, all those wages under federal awards which have not moved, or have moved less than, the amount determined.
While the primary aim of this Budget is correct, the burden of its achievement will fall most heavily on those least able to afford it-such as young families wishing to purchase their first home and families with low earned incomes or statutory incomes. The average family has been

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1085

faced in the past 12 months with increasing taxes and charges on all fronts-higher interest rates, higher petrol prices, higher health charges and now higher sales tax across the board with little or no compensating increase in real disposable income. To my mind the real disappointment of this Budget is that the Government hopes to achieve economic restraint not by reassessing its own spending, but by effectively increasing taxes levied by the Commonwealth at a time when State Governments will also, inevitably, be moving to impose higher taxes. Commonwealth Budget outlays will remain at around 28 per cent of gross domestic product in 1981-82, down only marginally from the peak of 30 per cent in 1975-76 and well above the 24 per cent level of the early 1970s. Outlays of all public authorities, which include governlTIent authorities outside the Budget and State Government spending, will be 38 per cent of GDP in 1981-82, the same level which prevailed when we assumed government in 1975.
On the revenue side, the income tax burden on the individual has continued to grow. More importantly, it has fallen very unevenly on wage and salary earners paying pay-as-you-earn tax, to the benefit of those with the capacity and indeed the inclination to avoid tax. Individual income taxes have grown at an average rate of 19 per cent a year in the last ten years and they are now projected to grow a further 19 per cent in 1981-82. They now amount to just over half of all Budget receipts. PAYE taxes are expected to grow at 22 per cent in the coming year, compared with expected wage increases of 13 per cent. There can be no doubt of the damaging effects of the Government's growing dependence on personal income taxes. High taxes stifle incentive and encourage tax avoidance and tax evasion. It is hardly surprising that wage and salary earners seek to protect themselves through higher wage claims. Higher income taxes promote speculative investment for capital gains, and discourage productive, income producing investment. I endorse the Government's moves to close loopholes in the tax legislation and its commitment to examine the income tax treatment of small shareholders following the Campbell report.
Similarly, I support the objective of broadening the tax base by moving towards increasing reliance on indirect taxation, something which is much more difficult for the unscrupulous to avoid. However, the implementation of that objective has to be fair. I have reservations about the proposed sales tax increases, particularly because they have not been accompanied as was indicated previously that they would be-by

genuine reductions in the burden of personal income taxes. The Government has promised tax relief and people expect it. Australians will make sacrifices when required to achieve reasonable longer term objectives. But they also expect a fair sharing of the burden.
As I see it, the problem lies in the area of government expenditure. Despite promises to the contrary, real Commonwealth outlays have continued to grow. The fastest growing areas during the past decade have been education, health, and social security, all of which have achieved average annual rates of growth of over 20 per cent. On reflection we must surely question the extent to which this rising expenditure is economically and socially productive, and whether it meets genuine social need. So much of government spending goes to people who demonstrably do not need government assistance; that is, do not need an extra $76 a month from the Government to support three children, do not need a $3,000 grant from the government to buy their first home or who do not need the Government to pay one-third of the cost of their family's health insurance.
Let me illustrate some of the expenditures involved: For example, firstly, in the social welfare area dependent spouse rebates, costing $578m in 1979-80, and family allowances, estimated to cost $1,040m in 1981-82, or over 11 per cent of total cash transfers, are given regardless of income.
In this context, I am rather perplexed by the decision to limit increases in family allowances to families with three or more children. There are many large families with low income who will benefit, but the fact is that the majority of low incOme families have fewer than three children. Secondly, health insurance rebates, which will not be income related, are expected to cost $600m when they are introduced in 1982-83. Thirdly, a large part of the increase in housing spendingsome $30m-will go into the Homes Savings Grant Scheme which provides generous benefits, regardless of income, at the expense of funding for the States for welfare housing. Fourthly, at the same time, the position of many statutory income recipients has worsened, for example and in particular, the young unemployed, because not all benefits are indexed for increases in the CPI. These people will be particularly hard hit by, for example, the sales tax increases.
I have singled out these areas because they form a significant part of Government outlays. There are many other areas which would bear similar scrutiny. Expenditure on social security and welfarewill be a key area of Governmeht spending for the future. Already it amounts to $9.9 billion

1086 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

or around 27 per cent of total Budget outlays. The value of all pensions has increased and more people are taking up the age pension. Since 1970 the number of income support recipients has risen from l5 per cent of the working-age population to about 27 per cent. With an ageing population this ratio will move even higher. If the Commonwealth Government is to respond to this growing need and to protect the real incomes of those relying on it for support, without imposing an increasingly onerous taxation burden on the workforce, then a fundamental reassessment of the taxation welfare system is unquestionably required. I think we need to go back and reexamine the recommendations of the Henderson report. I am not pretending that there are any easy solutions. Needed decisions will demand a good deal of courage from Government leaders. I think a start could be made by making all assistance to families and individuals income-related. I am not overlooking the problems inherent in means testing, in particular the taxing of benefits at the margin, nor of the abuse the system receives from some. But I believe it should not be beyond the wit of man to come up with schemes more equitable than those we have at present.
In conclusion I believe the primary aim of this Budget~to prevent a resurgence of inflation~is undoubtedly correct. I support a firm monetary and fiscal policy. But the Government should be prepared to ease controls should credit conditions become too tight. My main concern is the means adopted to achieve the objective of restraint. Families have been hit with higher government taxes and charges, small business and sections of industry have been hit, State governments have been squeezed, while Commonwealth spending continues to increase. The Government needs to reassess its approach to spending, concentrating on the areas of genuine need, cutting out expenditure to those who do not need assistance, and thereby enabling the genuine cuts in personal income tax that this Government has so long promised. The essence of our budgetary strategy should be the opening up of opportunities. A vision of growth-balanced growth-must motivate the drafting of a creative national Budget.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr DUFFY (Holt) (4.39)-It is a tragedy that many of the matters raised by the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) were not heard by so many honourable members who sit opposite. This year's Federal Budget characterises the Fraser Government. It is a disaster for Australia. It is a document riddled with meanness

and elitism. The Budget continues the regressive distribution of wealth in this country which is the hallmark of the Fraser Government. There is nothing in this Budget for the vast majority of families except higher taxes, higher inflation, higher interest rates and higher unemployment. The rhetoric by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in the Budget Speech is typical of the duplicity of this Government. For example, while saying 'It is vital to the nation's interests that there be no acceleration in the inflation rate in 1981-82', two Government decisions, the decision on sales tax and the earlier decision on health insurance arrangements, will add at least 1t per cent to the cost of living. All Government members are as guilty of duplicity as the Treasurer is guilty. But one of the most blatant examples comes from the inept Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh). In the document entitled, 'Department of Housing and Construction, Notes for the 1981-82 Budget Debate-Housing and Construction Activities', the Minister stated:
The broad objectives of the Commonwealth Government's housing policies are (inter alia):
to ensure that every family in Australia is able to obtain adequate housing within its capacity to pay.
This is absolute nonsense. The Minister is ignorant of, or is ignoring, the facts. The independent report by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation found that housing is now out of the reach of 50 per cent of families because of high interest rates. The sales tax on building materials will add at least $500 to the price of a new home, taking it further out of the reach of most families. The fact that this Budget makes yet another increase in interest rates inevitable demonstrates the total failure of this Government in the area of housing.
Let us look at some independent views on this issue. In April this year, before the latest interest rates increase, the managing director of Jennings Industries Ltd, Mr J. J. Wood, said housing activity would slow substantially in: Australia if mortgage interest remained above 12 per' cent. Now the Government has forced even savings bank mortgage interest to over 12 per cent and building society interest to a record 14.75 per cent. In an article which appeared in the Melbourne Herald of 7 April this year, Mr Wood said that in looking at what was an affordable interest rate on mortgages, a number of key factors had to be kept in mind. Some of the factors mentioned by Mr Wood were these: Half of all employees in Australia earn less than $200 a week; the normal maximum term of a housing loan is 30 years; and an increase of one per cent in interest rates reduces borrowing power by around $2,500 for a

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1087

family which can afford mortgage payments of $100 a week. Mr Wood said further that to sustain a weekly repayment of around $100 on a $30,000 house and land package, purchased on a 10 pc::r cent deposit, a young couple would require a gross weekly income of around $350.
The Australian Bankers Association Research Directorate on 3 September 1981 disclosed that the value of housing loans from banks grew by 5.2 per cent over 1980-81 and from building societies by 2 per cent, while the value of loans from finance companies grew by 44.3 per cent. This was a massive increase on the 7.7 per cent growth for finance companies in 1979-80. The consequence of loans from finance companies growing at this rate at exorbitant rates of interest is horrifying and is another matter which the Minister has ignored. This issue is of grave concern to all Australians, particularly those in the electorate that I represent where many families are being forced out of their homes as a result of mortgage repayments. So much for the statement by the Minister that the Government's policy is to ensure that every family in Australia is able to obtain adequate housing within its capacity to pay.
A study conducted for a Melbourne family care organisation and produced by the department of social work at Monash University, based on 1976 statistics, found that the four municipalities of Berwick, Cranbourne, Pakenham and Sherbrooke:
. . . have a high proportion of young families who are in the process of buying their own home. Mortgages tend to be higher than average and hence suggest that financial liabilities and stress might be suffered by many prospective home buyers.
It is a fact that stress is being suffered by so many of these home buyers. In this rapidly developing area people are leaving their homes or are suffering under unbearable loan repayments. They will not be satisfied or placated by the bland assertions of the Minister. These people desperately need help. But again, the Mjnister has failed to act in the interests of the majority who will continue to suffer under this Government.
Nowhere in the Budget is the cynical and inhumane attitude of this Government more obvious than in youth unemployment. The Treasurer acknowledges that the level of unemployment will increase but at the same time he makes the decision to terminate the Community Youth Support Scheme. The 50,000 young people who depend on the Scheme for support are now faced with despair as a result of that cruel Government decision. The young unemployed are faced with desperate financial and psychological problems caused by the Government's failure to provide an

adequate unemployment benefit and its obsessive rejection of job creation programs. Through the Community Youth Support Scheme the Government was providing valuable assistance for the young unemployed. Dedicated project officers have provided essential support and advice. In addition, there is the support that the young unemployed have given one another.
Many of the projects operated under the Scheme have achieved true community support. It has come from voluntary workers committees and generous help has been provided by service clubs. Of course, those factors would not appeal to this Government. The Community Youth Support Scheme was working to educate the community about the real problems of unemployment. In areas in which Community Youth Support Scheme projects were working with community involvement it was difficult to hide or distort the problem by blaming the victims, which has been a favourite pastime of this Government. People were starting to realise the appalling situation of the young unemployed. I have no doubt that that awareness, created to a large extent by the Community Youth Support Scheme, was a major reason for the decision to axe the Scheme. The alternatives proposed by this Government will not help the long term unemployed. The Treasurer claims that new programs are more attuned to labour market conditions. The Minis~ ter for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) in a Press release dated 30 August claimed:
At a time when the economy is growing and with it employment opportunities for the young, the Government considers that the most practical way of helping young people is to provide increased education, training and work experience opportunities. In that way they will be able to improve their skills and better compete in the growing labour market.
The Minister further stated that circumstances had changed greatly since the Community Youth Support Scheme was introduced in 1976. For a change, that statement certainly is true, as between August 1976 and February 1981 the number of young unemployed in receipt of the unemployment benefit increased by 86,858, a massive increase of 80 per cent over a period of 4t years. What absolute nonsense to talk about the growing labour market!
The Government continues to attempt to sell that nonsense by fiddling the figures, using Australian Bureau of Statistics unemployment figures and refusing to collect Commonwealth Employment Service statistics because those statistics give a true analysis on a regional basis of the number of registered unemployed and the number of jobs available. However, the facts on unemployment are still revealed by statistics available through

1088 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

the Department of Social Security. Those statistics show that in August 1976 the number of people receiving the unemployment benefit was 190,632. By February 1981, the latest date for which figures are available, the number of people receiving the unemployment benefit was 332,560, which represents an increase of 141,928. An analysis of those figures for the young unemployed shows that in August 1976 107,092 of those people in receipt of the unemployment benefit were aged under 25 years. By February 1981 that figure had increased by 86,858 to 193,950, representing a percentage increase of 80 per cent in 4t years.
Yet the Treasurer talks about programs more attuned to labour market conditions and the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs compounds that ridiculous assertion by talking about a growing labour market. The facts are that the Community Youth Support Scheme provides assistance for at least 50,000 young unemployed. An analysis of the Budget statements covering the so called alternative programs indicates clearly that those programs will provide not more than 20,000 positions in training in addition to those for 1980-81, leaving 30,000 young people still unemployed, not in training and left to rot by this Government. The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs places great emphasis on skills training to provide assistance to overcome specific skills shortages and to train unemployed persons towards employment in occupations in demand. Yet Budget Paper No. 1 shows at page 176 that funds for skills in demand will allow for 11,000 on-the-job and 1,100 formal training approvals in 1980-81, compared with 15,600 and 1,900 approvals in 1980-81, a decrease of 5,40'0 positions. That information is taken from the Budget Papers.
Clearly, we keep coming back to the problem of the 30,000 young people who are not catered for in any alternative scheme. That figure is a conservative estimate, as many young people currently unemployed are not participating in Community Youth Support Scheme projects and will not be catered for in the new programs. For those young people the Government proposes one scheme, namely, the Community Youth Special Project, which will receive a miserable allocation of $340,000. That would finance about 10 projects of a nature similar to that of programs under the present Community Youth Support Scheme, which covers about 275 projects and gives support to 50,000 young unemployed.
Does the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs really believe that young people suffering from depression, loneliness and frustration from

long term unemployment will be suddenly

integrated into a work force which has rejected

them for such a long period? As clearly indicated,

when not enough jobs are available, finding em-

ployment will be very difficult for people who

obtain skills through training, but it will be absol-

utely impossible for so many young unemployed

who are unable to cope with skilled training. I

doubt that even the Minister is so stupid that he

cannot see that, but he and this Government have

decided to ignore those young people. The work

experience and training schemes proposed by the

Government will fail. Despite persistent claims to

the contrary, there are not enough jobs available

and there is no job creation element in any of the

schemes. They are elitist to the extent that

preference will be given to suitable unemployed

persons, whatever that may mean. One thing is

certain and that is that it will not apply to many of

the long term unemployed.

.

Much has been written and said about the psychological effects of continued rejection for employment. That position will be far worse when young people are rejected not only for employment but also for job training or for any support scheme. Since 1976 those young people have had real support through the Community Youth Support Scheme. The Government has now taken away the only real backup provided for the young unemployed. The tragic realities of prolonged unemployment include increases in suicide rates, alcoholism, drug abuse, violence and crime. One of the few studies on this matter was conducted by Doreen Parsons of the Department of Psychology at the Swinburne College of Technology. The report on that study states:

Whatever the aims of the Government are and whatever else it's doing or not doing about the unemployment problem,
it appears that while young people are unemployed the c.Y.S.S. groups provide an alternative to hanging around and
reduce the incidence of offending which could be increasing due to the effect of unemployment.

How worse the situation will become now. Experience in England should be a stark lesson for this Government but honourable members opposite are very slow learners. It must be said that when all the problems manifest themselves the blame will and should be placed on this Government, which, on this issue,has reached the depths of political depravity. The response of people associated with the various projects has been predictable. Their first reaction was one of shock, which was followed by deep resentment against a government which had deceived them. Deceive them the Government did. In September 1980 the then Minister fol.' Employment and Youth Affairs the honourable member for Stirling (Mr ,viner), paraded around Dandenong mouthing soothing

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1089

utterances for people associated with the Community Youth Support Scheme. His visit was reported in the Dandenong Journal of 10 September. It stated:
The Minister told other group leaders that funds for the CYSS had been increased in the Budget by $1.6m. Mr Viner said the increase would allow full retention dfthe 275 projects currently being undertaken in Australia, and enable funding of up to ten new ones. Mr Viner said there was strong community support and involvement with CYSS operating in the district.
Of course, at that time the Government was facing an election. We all know about the record of this Government in sticking to what it says at election time. Not to be outdone, the new Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs was most emphatic about future funding for the scheme. In an article in the Advertiser on 2 June 1981 he announced that youth support schemes need not fear coming changes to funding operations. How can we be expected to rely on or even take seriously any future statements by this Minister? In taking the decision the Government did not bother to evaluate what was done by the projects and the benefits to the participants. It must be condemned for its failure to consult with those involved at all levels of the CYSS projects. A classic example is the Peninsula Unemployment Assistance Board, a Community Youth Support Scheme project in Frankston. This project moved to new premises about six weeks ago. The premises were opened by Mr Weideman, the Victorian Minister for Tourism, acting on behalf of the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) who at the time was overseas. This opening took place on 14 August to be followed by the now infamous decision to terminate funding on 18 August.
The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs has acted blindly without even attempting to understand the consequences of the actions taken by the Government. There was no research or justification. In fact, the last evaluation of the Community Youth Support Scheme was carried out by the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs in 1977. That report concluded that the projects were a success and were providing essential assistance and support to the young unemployed. The Minister's performance on the Australian Broadcasting Commission program PM on 20 August was pathetic. Commenting on a demonstration by the young unemployed he said: 'I'd ask them to go home, to use the Commonwealth Employment Service where there are jobs available under our training schemes, or do some other course, one of the many courses or programs we have got so that they can get the skills and experience they need to get a job.' In the first place,

many young unemployed do not have a home to go to. Obviously, the tragedy of youth homelessness is another issue which the Minister prefers to ignore. He adopts the same attitude to job vacancies.
It is not too late for the Government to reverse this appalling decision. There is a domestic surplus of $1 ,542m in this Budget, yet these mean, miserable people have refused to allow the expenditure of a meagre $14m for our young unemployed. Surely the Government should show some compassion. If the Government fails to reverse this decision it must bear the full responsibility for its action. The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs has engaged in a vicious deception of those involved in the Community Youth Support Scheme. The failure of the Government to evaluate or even attempt to understand the consequences of its actions is appalling.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman wish to make a personal explanation?
Mr HAYDEN-Yes.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-He may proceed.
Mr HAYDEN-At Question Time today I asked a question of the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) in relation to Protean (Holdings) Ltd and its subsidiaries. Of course, the question related to meat exports. The Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) took a point of order and said that there was confusion on my part and that the company which had been suspended was called Profreeze; allegations about the substitution of horse meat had been made against it, not against Protean (Holdings) Ltd. I wish to get the record straight. I asked a question concerning export expansion grants and export market development grants to Protean (Holdings) Ltd and its subsidiaries. The Minister for Primary industry took the point of order to which I have referred. I have checked some of the records which are available. On 2 September Samsons Meat Co. (Victoria) Pty Ltd lost its licence over evidence of horse meat being included in meat for which it was responsible for exporting. On 3 September Mr Leslie J. Harrison, company secretary of Samsons Meat was interviewed on the program AM. I

1090 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

will quote a short extract of the transcript. It reads:
WALTER PEARSON: Is Samson Meats in any way related to Protean Holdings?
Mr HARRISON: Samsons Meat Company was acquired by Protean in May-approximately the middle of May this year.
On the basis of that evidence the substance of my question stands. It is verified by the record. In two places in the question I referred to Protean (Holdings) Ltd and its subsidiaries. A subsidiary, Samsons Meat Co. (Victoria) Pty Ltd, certainly had its licence suspended in relation to the meat scandal.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1981-82
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed.
Mr JULL (Bowman) (S.I)-In speaking to the Appropriation Bill (No. I) 1981-82 I am sure that most honourable members who were listening to the speech by the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) could not fail to be impressed with some of the points he raised. I was going to reiterate the need for a definite shift in the whole form of the collection of taxation in Australia in coming years. He pointed the finger at the very real need for a review of the tax collecting techniques in this country.
The comments he made regarding the provision of social services to the people of Australia were also very telling. When we look through the Budget Papers and see that social security payments are such an incredibly high percentage of our national outlays we can obviously see that there is a very real need to overhaul these payments. The allocation of social security payments on a needs basis rather than under the free for all system that seems to operate in Australia now is something that needs very close attention. It is true that there are many recipients of social security payments in Australia who, quite frankly, do not need to have that sort of money: Many large families who will benefit quite substantially from the increase in family allowances, frankly, have no need for that extra cash. If we do nothing else in the next 12 months an exercise that could be undertaken to make sure that social security payments go to the areas of most need would certainly be well worth our while. It would be well worth a review in order to reach the objective of cutting government expenditure and making our social security payments more telling than they are at the moment.
Obviously, the Government is looking towards a shift in the collection of taxes. We have seen in

this Budget for the first time the implementation of a broader spectrum of sales taxes. I acknowledge that this measure is not without its problems. Some people in our community will be affected in a very real way by these changes in taxation. But I am sure that we can see exactly where they will lead us. There will be a shift in the collection of taxes. We will move more and more towards sales taxes. Obviously, if we have a Budget surplus there will be room to move in future months to provide some sort of personal income tax relief. That, I believe, is the desire of every honourable member on the Government side of the House. There is a very real acknowledgment
that there must be a form of income tax relief if we are to allow people to reach their full maturity and govern their own lives to a very great extent. That philosophy comes through to me in very strong terms in the Budget Papers that have been delivered to this House.
I express some concern at the way in which some aspects of the sales tax measures have been implemented. I was interested earlier in the day to hear matters raised in the House by the honourable member for Griffith (Mr Humphreys) and the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown). They spoke of the effect that the sales tax measures will have on the boat building industry. My electorate joins that of the honourable member for Griffith. It is quite easy for us to see
the very real effects in those electorates. It is true that by virtue of the allowances made by the Government last year there has been somewhat of a boom in boat building in Australia. It is true that some unscrupulous people have claimed that they are buying charter vessels, have applied for the 27t per cent reduction but perhaps will not use those vessels for completely legitimate purposes.
The effect on the boat building industry throughout Australia, especially in Queensland, will be rather drastic. The fact that the extra 2-1per cent sales tax has been put on boat building, which was previously exempt, means that most of the boats being built today will attract a sales tax rate of about 17-1per cent. The effect has already been seen in Brisbane. In one shipyard alone two contracts worth $2.Sm each have been cancelled in the last week. Another contract worth $3m in another yard is now in jeopardy, and two boat building yards are already threatening to close down. Obviously the full effect of the implementation of the sales tax is not going to be seen, but people who have already put in a legitimate order need some room to move to get some sort of exemption from this sales tax slug. That is not to say that I am against the prospect of .having a broad-based tax in the form of sales tax across the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1091

whole spectrum. For reasons that have already been propounded in the House this afternoon, I believe it is a fairer form of taxation. It is a means by which people who tend to avoid tax can be caught up. It is a tax which is paid as one spends. Obviously many people are going to pay a fairer amount of tax than perhaps they are now paying by virtue of the broad-based nature of the tax.
The situation of the boat building industry in Brisbane is serious. Directly hundreds of jobs are in the balance and indirectly, if we take the situation to the nth degree, quite a number of sections of the community will be very badly affected. I sincerely hope that the appeals being made by various honourable members in this House will reach the ears of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) so that something may be done in the short term to overcome this problem. There is no doubt, as' was mentioned previously in the House, that a very real boom is happening in the tourist industry in Australia. Part of that tourist industry is the operation of launches, pleasure boats and cruise boats, especially in the waters of Queensland.
I have spoken on a number of occasions in the House on the effect of tourism in Australia over the last few years. As I have just mentioned, the boating industry is a very real contributor to that industry. However, some speeches made in this House in the last couple of weeks, following the announcement of the Budget provisions, have worried me. There would seem to be abroad in the community a fear that the tourist industry will be adversely affected by some of the moves that have been made in the Budget. Obviously I would reject some of those implications. In a speech earlier this session, dealing with the increase in departure tax, it was suggested that there should be a different method of collecting departure tax. it has been interesting to see the reaction from the industry in the last few weeks. Telegrams have been received saying that the $20 departure tax applied to people leaving Australia is one of the highest in the world. In fact, in terms of its direct method of collection, it is the highest. I sincerely hope that the appeals to the appropriate Minister asking that there be reconsideration of the collection of departure tax will be heeded. It still seems to me to be a rather silly system of collecting departure tax to employ people to sit in airports around Australia to take in the money when we know that the collection procedures cost in excess of $880,000 a year.
Let us really look at where tourism is headed in Australia. There is no doubt that it is a giant. It is almost like a volcano ready to explode. We are reaping the benefits of what tourism can provide-more than $l billion spent on tourism

this year in this country and one million visitors expected to come to this country this year, both of those factors contributing to employment. It was pointed out in a speech last night that in Queensland alone some 3,500 new jobs were created in the industry in the past 12 months. I do not really think many honourable members in this House realise the enormity of the industry. It is huge. It is as big as the motor vehicle industry in Australia and, in terms of the income it provides, it is almost as big as the mining industry.
When we look at the provisions made by government for the tourist industry, I suppose we can be thankful for small mercies. There have been rather major increases, but when we look at the protection, assistance and depreciation allowances provided to the motor vehicle and mining industries we really wonder just how much recognition there is of tourism and of what it is providing for Australia. Estimates show that between 2,000 million and 5,000 million people will be touring the world by the turn of the century. Australia obviously can have a very real part of the wealth and benefits that those people will provide. In Australia in the next five years between $5,000m and $7,000m will be invested in travelrelated facilities. I suppose that really is an indication of just how huge the industry is.
I suppose the question we should all be asking is: How much of that money will be wasted in Australia because it will be applied in the wrong places at the wrong time? The growth in the number of Australians holidaying overseas is slowing down and by far the majority of Australians-about 80 per cent-will be holidaying in Australia this year. As I said, we hope to have one million overseas visitors coming to this country this year and between 1.5 million and 2 million by the year 1985. Provided strikes do not scare them away, that will mean a very real increase in employment in this country. If we look round the industry in Australia at the moment we can see that 20 first-class hotels are under construction in our major cities. They are going to attract a great deal of the business traffic over the next few years.
When looking at some of the very real tourist attractions in Australia, I wonder just what provisions are being made for some decent accommodation in those areas. For instance, touring by car and coach in the Northern Territory is very popular but there has been very little development of hotels and motels on the Darwin to Alice Springs stretch. In places such as the Kakadu National Park, the attraction of which to visitors is almost unlimited, we are providing virtually nothing at all. It is true that not all holidaymakers want to

1092 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

take their tents and go camping. We really must take stock of the development that is happening in Australian tourism to make sure that we have the right infrastructure to handle the incredible increase not only in the number of visitors coming to this country but also in the number of Australians touring around it.
The Government has already made some quite generous gestures to the industry by providing export market development schemes. We have seen increases in the amount of money spent on the promotion of internal tourism in Australia and some massive increases in the amount of money spent overseas. In the overseas offices of the Australian Tourist Commission at the moment we employ 29 staff, out of a total staff of about 76 on the Australian Tourist Commission. One could ask: Should the Government be providing. all that infrastructure for promotion of Australia overseas? I suppose that really the answer is no, that the Government in many respects has taken the lead in getting tourism off the decks overseas but that now we must really look to the Australian tourist industry to start providing some of the leadership which is obviously so necessary and which will be required so much in the years to come.
This is one area that worries me because there are a number of industry organisations that we in this House virtually never hear of. I suppose that the Australian Federation of Travel Agents would be the most effective tourist-related body. In fact I believe it is coming to Canberra next week for its annual meeting and to meet with Government and Opposition members to let them know what is happening in its part of the industry. But the rest of the industry is still fairly scattered. It is a conglomerate of a great number of areas and, asyet, these different factions have been unable to get together to provide a really united industry voice. While I will always preach in this House the gospel of tourism and the benefits it can provide, it really is about time that we looked to the industry itself to provide some of the leadership and some of the plans that will be necessary during the next decade.
The plain facts are that Australian tourism does not really know where it is going. I do not think it is necessarily up to the Government to provide leadership forever. It is about time that a number of tourist organisations started telling the Government in which direction the industry should go. If nothing further happens in the next 12 months, I am not quite sure where We will be and whether or not we will be able to handle the tremendous tourist boom that is starting in Australia. I appeal to all sections of the tourist industry to get

together, to unite, and to start working out a very real tourist plan so that we can take advantage of the employment prospects, and indeed the money, that will be provided by visiting tourists and by Australians travelling around their own country. We must have an industry that is prepared to contribute towards its own well-being. More and more we sh6uld see governmentsFederal, State and local-pulling out of the whole business of tourist promotion and making sure that the industry is prepared to support itself. With the work the Government has done over the last four years, the infrastructure is probably there now. We have created a situation in which the industry can boom. It is up to the industry to take very great advantage of the situation we have created.
Referring to the cessation of the Community Youth Support Scheme, which has been mentioned this afternoon, there is no doubt that a lot of feeling exists within the community that the CYSS provided a very real service to the young unemployed. I do not think there is any doubt that some CYSS schemes were not as effective as others. I suppose every Federal member could stand up in this House and tell the world that the schemes in his area were ideal, and served a very real purpose and there was nothing wrong with them. I would join that group in relation to one of the schemes in my electorate, but I am the first to admit that we closed down a second scheme because it was not really reaching the needs of the people. The people about whom I am most concerned, and I sincerely hope that the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) will come forward with a scheme, are those who could be loosely described as unemployable, and there are large numbers of them in our community.
The retraining programs, which will provide 90,000 positions during the next 12 months, are to be commended. I believe they have quite a lot going for them. Nevertheless, in the next six weeks or so some scheme must be provided-I think we can do it now with a lot of community support-to make sure that those people who may not fit into the training schemes, who could be loosely described as unemployable, are not thrown out on the streets. We must make some very real provision for their welfare in the coming months. No doubt a lot more criticism will be heaped on the Government, but I think it will be some time before the full ramifications of the closure of the CYSS scheme around Australia are realised and we have a real indication of just how many people must be picked up in some other scheme.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1093

I close by paying a very high tribute to the people who have been involved in the CYSS schemes, to the local committees and the project officers who were prepared to do a real job. They have made a contribution, and I do not believe that that contribution will be fully lost. I believe that they can still make a contribution by providing some alternative that will pick up and provide facilities for those young people who may be displaced from the new retraining schemes.
Mr KENT (Hotham) (5.20)-The honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull) had the temerity to say what a good job the Community Youth Support Scheme had done. At the same time he applauded its closure. No comfort is ,offered to the families of Hotham in the sixth Fraser Budget. Very few families in my electorate will gain from increased family assistance for the third, fourth and fifth child as the Government will take this away with increased taxes on shoes, clothing, school books, stationery and school requisites. In fact, there will be increased sales tax on every item that a family needs. The sixth Fraser Budget, like the previous five, is calculated to reduce family living standards and to increase unemployment. It is a long-standing belief of this Government that by increasing unemployment it can reduce inflation. It has certainly managed to increase unemployment to a record level since it grabbed power in 1975. At the same time, inflation is still high. As a matter of fact inflation is again on the increase and is likely to reach 12 per cent.
As I said at the outset, this Budget has nothing to offer the people in my electorate. It has nothing to offer pensioners, wage and salary earners, the sick or the healthy. The sixth Fraser Budget. I am sure we cannot afford many more-will harm most people. Income tax paid by wage and salary earners will be at a record level of $21,000m. If that is compared with the $5,000m paid by companies, honourable members will come to the conclusion that in this country, under this Government, the poor and the employed pay taxes while the rich please themselves.
Many people use every loophole to avoid paying taxes. The big foreign companies use transfer pricing and other methods to cook their books. Family trusts and other perks are available to the rich, while the rest of the community is taxed more and more every year by this Government to make up for the tax avoiders. Income tax collected from wage and salary earners will rise by 22 per cent. The Fraser Government has abandoned tax indexation, despite its election promises. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcom Fraser) pledged to bring in tax indexation 'to keep the Government

honest'. We all know the value of the Prime Minister's promises. As recently as 31 August, in his weekly electorate broadcast Mr Fraser stated in relation to health insurance:
The new arrangements reflect the Commonwealth Government's commitment to small government. This is important if people are to be free to decide how they will spend their money rather than having the Government take the decisions for them through heavier taxation burdens.
What a hypocrite! The Prime Minister has the temerity to say that people should be free to decide what to do with their money after he has made damn sure, through this Budget, that most people have no money left to decide what to do with. There is no doubt about it, this is the highest taxing Government in our history. It even wanted to tax the Bible. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) had to issue a Press statement three days after the Budget saying that he did not intend it to do this. It is a lean consolation to people, after being taxed on school books, to find that they can still buy a new prayer book exempt from tax. At least we can still pray that this Government will be thrown out of office so that Australia can prosper. Members of the Liberal Party of Australia did not mention in their election campaign last October that only 10 months later they would introduce sales tax on scores of new items and increase the existing tax significantly. They did not seek, nor did they get, a mandate from the Australian people for the imposition of such an unjust and inequitable tax.
The Australian Labor Party will oppose this new burden placed on Australian families. Those who canvassed the people's votes under false pretences 'to keep the bastards honest' went to water at the first test. No amount of rationalisation by the Australian Democrats about their duplicity will lessen the voters' feeling that they have be,en short changed. People who do not keep their promises will not keep any bastard honest, least of all the big bastard.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! I warn the honourable member not to apply lurid language to an individual. If he refers to the Government in a generic sense I have no complaint.
Mr KENTI was quoting the late Honourable Eric Robinson.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I know who the honourable member was quoting. I am just warninghim.
Mr KENT-Mr Deputy Speaker, I apologise for his language. When we add together the income tax and sales tax slug, the petrol tax, the compulsory health insurance with increased rates

1094 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

and the increase in home loan interest rates, which at present are at the record level of 15 per cent, we understand the predicament of the ordinary Australian families that I represent. The latest round of home loan interest rate rises caused by the policies of the Fraser Government will prevent most young people from acquiring new homes and will force many householders to sell their homes as they will not be able to afford the high repayments. When this Budget was formulated by the Treasurer it was based on an optimistic assumption that our economic situation is approving. However, our economy is now in decline and this contractionary Budget will damage it further. Besides the threat to our living standards by this Budget there is an even more sinister move to endanger the livelihood of the people of Australia. Moves are afoot by the FraserAnthony Government to open the flood gates to foreign imports and to dismantle our manufacturing industry. Unless this Government is stopped, it will add hundreds of thousands of unemployed to those already out of work by lowering the protection of our industries. In my first speech in this House last year I warned that this Government intends to abandon our manufacturing sector. In that speech, on 4 December 1980, I stated:
This Government is culpable For allowing the unbridled exploitation of our resources by foreign interests and For neglecting to protect our manuFacturing industry . . . The Government has bowed to transnational companies whose plan is to turn this continent into their quarry and to supply raw material and energy resources For their investment in cheap-labour Asian countries. There is no room in their master plan for Australia's manuFacturing industry.
Since my first speech it is becoming more and more obvious that it is the intention of this Government to abandon our manufacturing industry. Only recently both the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister (MrAnthony) were advocating tariff reductions. Also, the Industries Assistance Commission is recommending in its draft report the halving of tariffs, the abandonment of import quotas and an 85 per cent local content requirement for the vehicle industry.
I represent an electorate that has more than 1,800 industrial undertakings, mainly small industry, owned and managed by Australians. Many of these undertakings are manufacturers of automotive parts that are threatened by the lAC draft report. I have visited a number of these industries that employ, directly or indirectly, thousands of people from my electorate. During the last few weeks I have spoken to hundreds of workers, technicians and managers. They all agree that if the draft report is accepted by the Government our motor vehicle and components industry will be killed by foreign imports. By foreign imports I

mean mainly those from Japanese makers, who have not only made heavy inroads into our markets but also are threatening local producers in both Europe and the United States of America. Many countries have had bitter experience with Japanese competition and are now protecting their local manufacturers to save their industry. We all know from experience that prices will not be cheaper because of such competition. Once our industries are dismantled and our jobs lost, the foreign car makers will screw as much as they can from the Australian public. They will be in a monopoly position and we will be at their mercy. I remind the House that Japanese businessmen are not known to be charitable. I am not alone in forecasting what will happen to our motor industry. Let me quote from the submission by General Motors-Holden's Ltd to the lAC inquiry. It reads:
IF the l.A.c. 's draFt recommendations were implemented, G.M.H. would take the necessary decisions to concentrate totally on completely built unit imports. This would result in:
I. The cessation of future investments and ultimately the dismantling of our existing Facilities.
2. A reduction in G.M.H.'s total employment from the current level of about 17,500 to less than 1,000. Under c.B.U. imports and no change in the level of market, employment in vehicle distribution will not increase. With market growth, any increase in distribution employment would not be commensurate with the reduction in manuFacturing employment.
3. A massive reduction in our business with local original equipment components producers and raw material suppliers. As about 60 per cent of our expenditures are payments to suppliers for materials, components and services, there would be a substantial rundown of production and employment in the local components manufacturing industry.
In addition to the effects on our business and our suppliers, we believe that the implementation of the I.A.C. 's draft recomendations would lead to a rapid decline and the likely cessation of components manufacture and automobile assembly in Australia.
The question at issue is: Does Australia want a motor vehicle manufacturing
industry?
There is no doubt in my mind that Australians want to maintain their motor industry. The question is whether the Fraser-Anthony Government wants one. I have often been asked by workers why the Government would sacrifice the motor industry that took us over 30 years to build, that has so many million dollars of our investment and that employs so many of our workers. The answer to this question is not so difficult if we take into account the fact that foreign capital, exploiting and exporting our mineral resources, is exerting pressure on the Government to increase and facilitate the importation of manufactured products to balance the export of our raw materials and energy resources. I can tell you, Mr Deputy Speaker, that such a proposal is bad business for Australia.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1095

Of course, in addition, knowing that the coffers of the coalition parties are filled by the mining companies' donations, the Government's desire to oblige is understandable.
Added to this, the pressures of export oriented big grazing wool and wheat interests certainly convince our National Country Party members. They do not care for the families of city workers, nor do they care about electorally unpopular measures. They are not elected by popular vote. Their re-election is ensured by the gerrymander of the electorate. The same goes for types such as Mr Bjelke-Petersen in Queensland and Sir Charles Court in Western Australia. The Liberal partners, on the other hand, who have to face the consequences of their unpopular decisions, are powerless to resist the pressures as the National CO).lntry Party dominates the decision making. Only last session it was revealed to us by the former Minister for Industrial Relations, the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock), that the Coordination Committee, dominated by the Prime Minister and his powerful National Country Party colleagues, is superimposed over the Cabinet. It is very much the case of ,the National Country Party tailwagging the Liberal dog. The Deputy Prime Minister complained in a recent speech that too much noise is made about the tariff debate. He is surprised that the people working in the motor industry are fighting to retain their jobs. I wonder how loudly he would squeal if his farm were being taken away from him.
Mr Milton-He would squeal like a pig.
Mr KENT-As the honourable member for La Trobe has said, he would squeal like a National Country Party pig.
Mr O'Keefe-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take objection to that remark. We are not National Country Party pigs. We are valued members of the House of Representatives.
Mr KENT-I withdraw.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-The honourable member has withdrawn.
Mr KENT-The free marketeers of the Liberal Party are also squealing-not like pigs. They attacked the joint advertisement of General Motors-Holden and the Vehicle Builders Employees Federation of Australia. They are unhappy to see labour and capital on the same side. They accused the industry of misleading advertising. I ask: Who are they to object to misleading advertisements? Do they not remember the election advertising of their own party last October? The Liberal Party's ,election advertisement was a

blatant example of misleading advertising if ever there was one. Do the pious members opposite, who pontificate about the GMH advertisement, not remember their own party's election advertisement in 1977 showing the fist with the $5 notes? We have never seen those five dollar bills which were promised by the Liberal Party but the Liberal Party's hand is still around digging deep into the workers' pay packets. I can assure honourable members opposite that the people working in the motor industry will not remain silent. I emphasise that this time, on this issue, labour and capital, workers and management, are united. They are mounting a strong campaign to defend their industry and, with it, their jobs. They are bitter about the lAC draft report, bitter to the extent that they call the Industries Assistance Commission the 'Industries Assassination Commission' .
I also make the point that even without a reduction of tariffs imports into Australia are becoming cheaper as our dollar appreciates. As yet we have not received any benefit. The importers have not reduced their prices as their intenti6n is to squeeze every dollar that they can out of Australian consumers. At a time when most countries are protecting their motor industries there is a great danger that the Fraser Government may reduce the level of protection to our industries in general and to the motor industry in particular. Such moves not only would endanger the jobs of tens of thousands of Australian workers but also would result in loss of skills and weaken greatly our defence capacity. If this is the price that we have to pay for our so-called mineral resources boom then this nation might as well be without it.
Dr Theophanous-There is no boom.
Mr KENT-Of course there is no boom, but last October the Government told us there was. The members opposite have yet to realise that our workers do not have shares in mining companies but they rely on theit'muscles and skills to earn a living and they have every right to defend their livelihood.
As I said previously, I have visited several automotive parts manufacturing plants in my electorate. I have seen the resolution of the workers and the managers to defend their industry. They are sending thousands of letters to their local members stating:
'I am concerned that I might lose my job in the Australian automotive parts industry. I want you to ask the Government to adopt policies thilt will keep the Australian motor industry strong and viable, safeguard job opportunities for Australians and encourage new investment in the industry. Please take Australia's part and help save my job.'

1096 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

I strongly support the campaign to save their jobs. I wish to deliver the letters written by scores of my constituents to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown), who is at the table, so that he can inform his colleagues, the Government members, who are absent from the chamber most of the time, that the workers and the management of the Australian automotive parts manufacturing industry request that the lAC report be rejected. Now I have the pleasure to take the thousands of letters written by workers in my electorate and give them to the Minister.

An incident having occurred-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! The honourable member for Hotham will resume his seat. I warn the honourable member.

Mr KENT-They have just ignored these letters in the past.

Mr N. A. Brown-The honourable member

should be ashamed of himself, Mr Peputy

Speaker.

.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member.

Mr KENT-There was no one listening.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member did not obey the orders of the Chair not to behave in that fashion. If that happens again he will be named and I will have to deal with him.

Mr KENT-I apologise to you, Mr Deputy Speaker.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-It is a little bit late, is it not? I presume that the honourable member
has completed what he calls his speech by that last action. I call the honourable member for Paterson.

Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (5.39)-Mr Deputy Speaker, the Budget brought down--

Mr N. A. Brown-Mr Deputy Speaker, I understand that you are going to ask the honourable member for Hotham to clean up this mess that he has distributed around the chamber.

Mr Kent-It's about time they listened instead of taking the workers for a ride.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Hotham.

Mr Scott-The Minister has been ignoring that campaign.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The House will come to order and listen to the Chair. I call the honourable member for Paterson.

Mr O'KEEFE -The Budget brought down by this Government on 18 August gives high priority' to containing and reducing inflation and at the

same time sustaining private sector growth. The year 1980-81 was a year of achievement for the Australian economy. When we examine the figures for the June quarter of 1981 we find that excellent results have been achieved. The consumer price index increased by 2.2 per cent in the June quarter and by 8.8 per cent over the year. This must surely be one of the best records in the Western world in containing the inflation rate. Consumer spending rose strongly for 12 monthsthe 14 per cent increase far exceeding the increase in the CPI. Private dwelling approvals increased by 9.4 per cent in 1980-8l. Employment rose by 2.3 per cent over the year. Unemployment fell from 5.8 per cent to 5.5 per cent in 1981. Motor vehicle registrations increased in 1980-81 by 4.5 per cent. This was the greatest increase in motor vehicle registrations for some considerable time. Any fair-minded person, irrespective of politics, must surely applaud that excellent performance. Evidence of the strong economic situation can be gauged by the fact that overseas countries, such as the United States of America,the United Kingdom and West Germany, are prepared to invest millions of dollars in this country in resources and agricultural. Indeed, as one travels around the countryside in New South Wales this is. very evident.
The Budget provides for the expenditure of $40,862m-an increase of 12.6 per cent over the previous year. Priority is given to social security payments, payments to the States, defence and foreign aid. The defence provision of $4,1l2m represents an increase of 16.3 per cent in current prices or 5.3 per cent in real terms. Social security expenditure is $1l,357m, an increase of 14.5 per cent. Who states that this Government is not a compassionate government when the social security field takes a major share of the Budget funds?
The speech by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) supported deficit budgeting and took us back to the Whitlam era, when irresponsible spending produced a deficit of $4 billion and inflation was running at the rate of 17 per cent. In the Australian Labor Party's last Budget expenditure rose from $16 billion to $22 billion, the greatest percentage increase in the history of Australian Federal politics. No wonder the people of Australia {ejected the Whitlam Labor Government at the polls. Its efforts to balance the Budget by borrowing $4 billion from outside the normal financial system were disastrous. We have heard in the past few weeks about that gentleman, Khemlani-an Arab sitting in a dingy office in London-getting into financial problems in the United States and in other countries. This is the character from whom the Whitlam Government

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1097

was trying to borrow $4 billion instead of going through normal banking channels. The present Leader of the Opposition was the Treasurer in the Labor Government. After listening to his speech in the Budget debate in this House I feel that his policy and that of the Opposition has not changed.
I repeat: Deficit budgeting as recommended by him is the last thing that Australia needs. It would be disastrous and would ruin the great efforts made by the Fraser-Anthony Administration to bring back sound economic measures which have achieved excellent results. It has taken five years to bring back sound conditions and restore confidence to the people of Australia and to our overseas trading partners. This is extremely important. Australia does not want socialism as espoused by the Leader of the Opposition. I feel sure' that the public does not want it either. The public wants good, solid and sound administration, of the economy. The Fraser-Anthony Government is giving them that.
Australia is on the verge of tremendous resource development in coal, liquefied petroleum gas, iron ore, uranium and petroleum-a vast number of diversified minerals-apart from recording increases in the production of sheep, cattle, grain, cotton and other products. One of the greatest resource projects in history is commencing on the North West Shelf and will result in the production of liquefied petroleum gas. It is a tremendous arid magnificent project. It will bring liquefied petroleum gas 132 kilometres from the seabed and distribute it throughout Australia. What a magnificent project. Huge amounts of capital are required. We must expect and encourage overseas participation, not to take over our enterprises completely but to have a minority shareholding. This is taking place today. This is how the great United States of America brought about its development. We have to do the same, and indeed we are doing the same.
One of the present problems with the development of our overseas trade is the very unreliable shipping situation that exists in this country. This is by reason of industrial strife at our ports. Ships loading coal, iron ore, grain, sugar, sorghum and other products often are held up for weeks and sometimes months. When I was travelling to Canberra only this week I fiew over the ports of Newcastle, Sydney and Port Kembla. I suppose 60 or 70 bulk carriers are being held up off these ports because of a strike involving three fellows on a tug who had a fight. One of them was suspended. So the ship workers in those three ports went out for three weeks. How do we overcome that sort of a problem? It is absolutely ridiculous. We are being

held to ransom. Visits to overseas countries highlight the problem of unreliable delivery of Australian goods by reason of these strikes. We rely on our exports for our livelihood. Surely the Australian trade unions must realise this because not only is the economy of this country being penalised but also their wives and children must be affected. It is high time that the trade union movement in this country woke up and realised what a wonderful country we could have if we all pulled together. It is interesting to note that in the United States of America trade unions are on the way out because they became too powerful. Today only 20 per cent of the United States work force belong to trade unions. That ought to be a warning to the trade union movement of this country.
The Opposition, at every opportunity, endeavours to castigate the Government for the unemployment situation. Let me say very definitely that under this Government the unemployment situation receives every careful attention, and it is improving. It is agreed that unemployment can be a problem. However, we have figures which show that there has been an improvement. In July 1979 the level of unemployment was 5.9 per cent, last year it was 5.8 per cent and this year it is 5.6 per cent. Spread over the whole of Australia, those figures represent a grand achievement. During the year to July 1981 the number of unemployed youth dropped by 10,000. It must be remembered that 6,500,000 Australians are in full employment in this country. The Government's policy of stable government will continue to assist in alleviating unemployment. Employment grew by 2.7 per cent in 1981. Some 114,000 new jobs were created and were filled by Australians.
The Budget has an emphasis on manpower and training programs to provide practical and positive help for young unemployed people and to increase the supply of skilled workers needed by industry. The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown), who in the House tonight, brought about this state of affairs. No doubt, when these programs get underway, they will be of great benefit to unemployed youth. Programs with expenditure amounting to $230m in 1981-82 for employment and youth affairs are planned. Expenditure on manpower and training programs will increase over that of last year by nearly $50m, or 31 per cent, to $197m. The Government has brought about a great increase in regard to manpower and training programs. It should be of great help to young Australians. Work experience programs will be provided with an expenditure of $65.1m, a 58 per cent increase over the figure for the last financial year. This will

1098 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

assist long term unemployed young people to obtain work experience over a 34-week period. Twelve thousand young people will benefit this year. Technical and further education expenditure is to be increased. An estimated 16,000 young people can take advantage of this program. It can be seen that the Government is doing everything possible to train and assistyoung people.
Members on the Opposition side of the House have castigated the Government because on 31 October-that is next month-the Community Youth Support Scheme will cease. In the electorate of Paterson only two CYSS projects succeeded-one in the city of Maitland and one in the city of Mudgee-otherwise they were disastrous. Their success depended entirely on the person who had control of the project. The same situation applied to Labor's Regional Employment Development scheme which was brought in years ago. For political reasons, Opposition members have condemned the CYSS until now, but because it is to be done away with and a better scheme is being brought in, they are condemning the Government. The honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) stated:
The scheme-
That is CYSS-
is no more than tokenism, confined to creating drop-in centres, providing cuddle therapy rather than the jobs young people really need. The guidelines even limit training, preventing formal educational classes or instruction in job skills as normally provided by educational or training institutions. The $12.6m would be better spent on genuine job creation and training programs.
That is just what is happening today. It is a remarkable thing that, for political expedience, Opposition members can change their attitudes overnight. Interest rates are causing great concern at present, particularly in the housing area. The present level of interest rates results from the fact that the current level of demand for money in the community considerably exceeds its availability. In such circumstances interest rate rises are unavoidable unless the Government increases the availability of money. This would have inflationary consequences and would be disastrous. Unless savings banks are able to offer attractive rates to the depositing public they will not have funds to lend. That is the situation that exists. If interest rates in certain areas-for example, housing-are held down too far and for too long investors will take their dollars away from institutions which traditionally lend, and the capacity of those institutions to provide housing loans will be reduced. The experience of savings banks and permanent building societies bears testimony to this fact.

The best contribution the Government can make towards a case for lower interest rates is to act in aU possible ways to reduce the Government demand for money. That is why the Government
acted as it did at the June Loan Council meeting-only a couple of months ago-arid why in recent years emphasis has been placed on reducing the Budget deficit. We will not print notes. We are a responsible government. That can be seen from those facts which have just been enun-
ciated. It is realised that recent events in the interest rate field have been unpopular, but economic responsibility has made it necessary for such decisions to be made, and the banking institutions made statements to this effect earlier this week. If these decisions had not been put off the pressure of adjustment would have been much greater, the economicpain more intense and the political fallout all the greater.
As usual, the Government has considerably increased funds for pensions, benefits and other welfare payments and services to the order of $1,265m to $9,865m for 1981-82. This represents
an increase of 14.7 per cent on the 1980-81 figures. The indexation of pensions is still a policy of the Government. It will cost an extra $716m for pension rises based on the consumer price index in November 1981 and November 1982. This is a compassionate government, one which is
prepared to look after the funds of the pensioners of this country. The area of pensions is growing and'is a major item in Budget considerations. A total of 1.9 million pensioners in this country will receive a pension rise. The standard single rate will be $69.70 a week; an increase of $3.05 a week: The married rate will be $116.20 a week, an increase of $5.10 a week. Further, pensioner rental allowances will rise by $3 to $8 a week. Family allowance payments for the third and fourth child have increased by 50 per cent to $39 a month. Altogether, 540,000 families in this country will benefit this year. This will cost $62m, and $124m in a fu 11 year.
Crisis accommodation will be assisted by this Government. That has been clearly set out in the Budget Papers. There will be quality and effectiveness in existing services for the handicapped. This is the year of the handicapped and funds are being made available in that area. There will be funds for production of braille and audio books for the print handicapped. Gifts this financial year to Commonwealth and State committees for the International Year of Disabled Persons will be deductible for income tax purposes. There is no doubt the Government is looking after the needy, despite remarks from honourable members opposite.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1099

At present we have a great resources boom and with the development of the North West Shelf gas project and coal mining in Queensland and New South Wales the demand for funds is of a very high order. Overseas capital must be welcomed to overcome this shortage. We must be very careful to see that this capital does not take over completely. The Foreign Investment Review Board vets all overseas capital propositions and has strict guidelines set down by the Government. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) is responsible for the actual decision in this field. Far too much capital is coming into Australia-mainly from West Germany, United States of America and Great Britain-for complete acquisition of farming properties. Overseas investors are being helped by the favourable exchange rates. They are, in many instances, forcing land values up. Representations have been made to the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) and the Treasurer to have a look at this situation as it could stop fine young Australians from financing agricultural properties.
In education, the Commonwealth role in funding for schools is primarily a supplementary one in various States. It is a role which has grown remarkably in a relatively short period. It has achieved dramatic results in the improvement of the overall quality of education available for Australian children. The extent of this commitment has been maintained generally even though there are statistical indications of a growing reduction in overall numbers of school children-an estimated 23,000 fewer this year in government schools. Despite this trend the Commonwealth has maintained its direct contribution to recurrent spending.
The role of the Commonwealth Government is to finance universities and colleges of advance education, the responsibility for primary and secondary schools being the responsibility of the various States. The Federal role is one of topping up funds in this area. An amount of $1,008m has been set aside for education in 1982, which is an increase of $48,295m over the 1981 level. There has been a falling off in the number of students attending government schools, and private schools which receive financial assistance only from federal sources have been allocated $489.3m.
, This is a splendid Budget. I have been a member of parliament for some 20-odd years and I have never seen a Budget brought down that does not attract some criticism, but this is an excellent Budget, for the benefit of this country, the greatest country in the world. Let us keep it that way.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Glles)-Before the suspension of the sitting I want to apologise to the House for the fact that the honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent) Was too quick for me in creating the mess honourable members see before them. In retrospect, I should have acted to name him after the event, quite apart from at the time. His action, I believe, was premeditated, judging by the unexpectedly large audience that was here at the time. He and those honourable members who knew of his action have brought this House and themselves into disrepute. I intend to report the incident to Mr Speaker. In the meantime, I hope the honourable member for Hotham has the decency to apologise to the House and to those who have to clear up after him.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (8.0)-The Appropriation Bills which we are debating tonight constitute the major economic statement for the year by a government. It is not the only economic statement for the year. Of course, it would be absurd to imagine that a government could run a country by making only one economic statement. But nonetheless this is its major economic statement. I guess that through the year the causes of many of the changes and various economic variables which take place, such as the alterations to interest rates and to the money supply and these sorts of things, are never really stated by a government. They are simplymatters of day to day economic management. No matter how importantly or how hard they affect the ordinary people, these matters are never adequately debated or the causes ever properly understood.' That is the reason why some of the debates in this House on such economic matters seem to have a happy knack of repeating themselves year after year.
Of course, the Government sets the agenda for what is and what is not to be discussed in the Parliament. I guess that some of the very real and very large questions facing Australia today include technology and technology transfer, the so called resources boom, manpower policies and protectio.n to industry a,nd how a small economy can cope with the multinational giants. All of these very large and real issues are never adequately or properly discussed in the Parliament. In effect, we have rather piecemeal debates and give piecemeal attention to these matters. I guess that the information that the media filters out to the general public relates largely to the more immediate things rather than longer term things. It is the longer term things that we should make some mention of so that we can debate them more adequately.

1100 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

From that sort of background I regard this Budget document as being rather depressing and cynical. I say it is depressing because there is nothing in it for the people of an electorate such as Werriwa. I say it is cynical because the Government can always assume that it can follow a threeBudget strategy-a pretty tough Budget in its first year, a moderately tough budget the next year and, come election year, all manna can flow from heaven. This Budget comes on top of quite a few imposts on the ordinary people living in electorates such as Werriwa and people living in big cities. From 1 September there will be increased payments for health insurance due to the Government's fifth change to the health insurance arrangements since it came to office. Already interest rates have gone up and housing interest rates are going up again. The people will have to pay for that. The Budget document states that income tax collections will go up by 22 per cent this year. Housing interest rates will go up. On top of all that there has been a 2t per cent sales tax imposed. Nothing much is spared from sales tax. Today I received a letter from the local newspapers in my electorate. They take particular offence at the fact that the Government is virtually putting a tax on information.
By and large the ordinary people cannot win when one considers some of these big changes and economic variables. Interest rates went up before because the Government had a tight money supply policy. In other words, there would not be enough money to service all of the demands in the economy. Of course, Government spokesmen always said that interest rates would not go up knowing full well that the money supply targets which the Government was setting predicted the fact that they must go up. Now we are awash with funds. Instead of $l,500m coming into the economy with the so-called energy development boom some $6.5 billion was received. Suddenly we are awash with money. So what happens? The Government has to put up the .bond rate to mop up some of the surplus funds and interest rates go up. It does not matter if the money supply is short or the money supply is long, interest rates go up. Ordinary people cannot win. That is the sort of thing that they do not understand.
Consider some of the other ideas in the Budget expressed in monetary terms, such as the social welfare policy and the family allowance and relate them to an electorate such as mine. The change to the family allowance did not consider the needs and priorities of ordinary people. My electorate has many, many single parent families. Some of the suburbs in my electorate have 30 per cent to 40 per cent of single parent families. These

suburbs have populations of 3,000,4,000, 5,OOOor 6,000 people. Most of those families have less than three children. I suggest that a single parent family with two children is in a far worse situation than a family with three or four children and where the so-called breadwinner in that household actually holds a job. I guess that there is some benefit to people who receive the supporting parent benefit if they have more than three children. But even so, no measure in that welfare benefit actually advantages the bulk of the people in an electorate such as mine. Never is any priority given to the people actually in need.
The poorest people in our society are those who depend on social security payments for their only income and have to pay rent. To lift the rental allowance from $5 to $8 by some complicated formula, is so ludicrous that it is laughable. It is an absolute nonsense. Surely to God, if we are going to fiddle around with the rental allowance it could be doubled, after all the time that it has remained at this level. If we look at the fringe benefits which attach to pensions and look at all of the various provisions that attach to the unemployment benefit for example, we see that the criteria required for people to receive them go back to 1969. They have not been changed since. Again, in this Budget, the unemployment benefit for people 18 years of age and under still remains at $36. It has remained at that rate since 1975. Consider the amount that widows are allowed to earn before their pension entitlement is touched. That figure was fixed far earlier. The allowable income before the pension is touched should be something like four times as high as it is now.
Members of the Government are quite right in saying that Australian Labor Party members said at the time that the Community Youth Support Scheme was introduced that it was a bandaid or a mollycoddling, child-minding sort of thing. That is true; it was a bandaid scheme. It was set up by the Government to try to convince the people that it was trying to do something about youth unemployment. But the fact is that as that scheme developed, due to the enthusiasm of project officers it actually became meaningful. I have said when I am required to in my electorate, each six months when the scheme comes up for funding, that by and large I think the scheme is a nonsense. I have said that the guidelines should be expanded but the scheme is doing good fpr some young people in the electorate. I have tried to set up one scheme and I am on the board of the committee that runs the Liverpool Community Youth Support Scheme. Anyhow, that scheme is to be folded up.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1101

In my electorate, which is part of the Sydney metropolitan area, there are other avenues for some young people to obtain some sort of training. But the Government has not addressed itself to the sorts of transition programs that it expects these people to go through. Recently, I campaigned in the New South Wales State election. There are many isolated communities in country areas. For example, Kyogle is an isolated area which has no Technical and FurtherEducation college. There is nothing else for young unemployed people in that town bar the Community Youth Support Scheme. But Tamworth, for instance, has an excellent scheme. I can name many country towns in New South Wales which have no facility to pick up the gap and others which might have something but there is no time left to develop programs. In other words, unless the Government accepts the fact that there must be, say, a six months transition period it will certainly hurt many, many, young people.
There is nothing in the Budget for the people of Werriwa. An extra dollar levy has been placed on coal. Coal mining is an industry of my electorate. The 2t per cent sales tax placed on furniture mak. ing will affect small firms in my electorate. The 2t per cent sales tax on building materials will hurt not only people trying to build a house in my electorate but will hurt the building industry as a whole. It seems that no matter what sort of economic circumstance we have in this country; no matter whether we are in a boom, a bust or just doing fair to middling, the less advantaged never win. The Fraser Government in the years since it came into power has massively redistributed wealth away from the poor or less advantaged.
In macro-economic terms, what worries me evell more is that this Budget is designed to make room for the boom. It is the Budget strategy, as it has been for the past five years, that has the public sector standing back and making room for private sector expansion. But the Budget is somewhat negative even; it just says: 'Stand back'. It provides no guide. It contains no profession of the direction in which the Government would like to see the economy go. It simply states: 'We are standing back to make room for this boom'. The Budget really does little actively to promote growth. The Government claims that its strategy will allow the private sector to push growth along without increasing inflationary pressures. At least, that is what the Government says will happen. But within days of the Budget being brought down the Government was talking the boom down. I give as an instance of that a speech delivered by the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony),

presently the Acting Prime Minister, to a conference on resource development and the future of Australian society, one of the things we should be talking about more in this place rather than outside it. He said that Australians should not be over-optimistic about the benefits flowing from resource development. He even objected to the use of the word 'boom'. When he is at counterpurpose to the Government it is nothing new; it is always an occasion for honourable members on this side of the House to think: 'Just what is he getting at?' On one occasion he was running around proclaiming a flat tax proposal, knowing full well that it would never be adopted by the government. So we have to be a bit puzzled about his latest statements.
What is the likely outcome of a Budget designed for a boom, a boom which the Government only five days after presenting the Budget maintained that Australians had unreal perceptions of? What is the reason for the Acting Prime Minister adopting the line he has? After all, the boom is trotted out at every election. At the time of the last election it was claimed of the order of $33 pillion. Do we talk about a boom only during election campaigns? What is the reason for the statement? Was the reason the fact that the Treasury -quite properly had to rein in some of the infrastructure borrowings of the States? Is it the case that the inflow of capital is pushing up interest rates and we have to pull back? Was he concerned about the impact of the boom on manufacturing? After all, the mining sector of the economy employs only about 1.4 per cent of the work force, so perhaps he is worried that the boom could double the work force in the mining sector and at the same time put tens of thousands of people out of work in the manufacturing sector or force them off farms. At this stage I am not quite sure what he is getting at. Perhaps he is just trying to have a bit all ways.
I think we should say that the current wave of resource development, irrespective of whether it constitutes a boom, represents substantial potential benefit for most Australians. The Government strategy of holding down growth will result in the level of unemployment rising in absolute terms. The Budget documents predict a rise in the level of unemployment, but I do not think anyone can make predictions a year ahead; the rise might be quite a lot greater than predicted or maybe the level will just hold. It is not certain that the slow growth policy will be particularly successful in restraining the inflation rate. Any success will be achieved at the expense of higher living standards and will be accompanied by even higher levels of unemployment.

1102 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

The sales tax increases announced in the Budget will alone add at least 0.75 per cent to the inflation rate. Of course, the increased health charges will add further to that figure. The Budget gave no real indication that the Government intends to accommodate rather than suppress the effects of resource development elsewhere in the economy. The Government is increasingly adopting a position of being seen to be doing something on the protection issue-for example, the reference to the Industries Assistance Commission on protection and all forms of budgetary assistance. But I doubt whether that heralds a new era in terms of the hard political decisions the Government needs to make in that area. In fact, whilst the ~qsturing undoubtedly will continue the Gov~ment 's approach really is a recipe for doing nothing for at least another 12 months.
What concerns me most is not only that the manufacturing sector probably will unfairly feel the impact of the resol.!rce development because the Government is not planning for growth and is not taking into account or establishing a whole set of policies that will take into account the resources boom but it is simply making way for it. I am concerned also that, unfortunately, the agricultural sector is likely again to bear the brunt of the impact of the resources development. By far the most significant impact will come through the strengthening of the balance of payments. That will occur as a result of high levels of capital inflow and increased mineral exports. But the resultant appreciation of the Australian dollar relative to the currency of major importers of our agricultural produce will affect agricultural adversely. Agriculture will be affected also by increased levels of domestic activity adding to existing inflationary pressures. In other words, we will get less for our goods overseas and the costs will be higher because of the boom that will not employ many people.
It is important to acknowledge the tremendous adjustment which has been undertaken by the agricultural sector in the past. Since 1960-61 the number of farms in Australia has fallen by over 30,000 or by 15 per cent. The structure of the remaining farm businesses has changed markedly. Those adjustments have largely been forced on agriculture because, unlike parts of the manufacturing industry, it is largely exposed to the economic environment in which it operates. The adjustment that takes place in manufacturing industry is not sufficiently noted but, even more so, the adjustment that takes place in agricultural industries have never been properly taken in by those people who make pronouncements in public

life, particularly people from other sectors pleading for more government benefits. It is a bit ironic that one increase in the Budget is likely to apply to the manufacturing sector. Manufacturing assistance through direct payments and taxation expenditures will actually rise. A lot of that will go to extra perks for BHP.

In recent times the farmers' representative

groups have fought to draw attention to the losses

created for agriculture because of the high levels

of protection. For example, it has been estimated

that an appreciation by one per cent in Australia's

real exchange rate relative to the major overseas

markets for rural exports would reduce the value

added in the rural sector by about $100m a year.

The costs to farmers of manufacturing industry

protection are difficult to quantify, but they are

massive. I do not have time to go into all the

aspects of the protection issue with respect to the

agricultural sector, but point to the fact that it is

the resources boom that is causing such matters to

be discussed by the farm leaders and they will

have to put in a very high bid to lower the levels of

protection which, in turn, will affect the manufac-

turing industries. That is one of the biggest crunch

issues that this Parliament will have to face in the

coming months.

'

Quite frankly, what is recognised by the Australian Labor Party is that the immediate political, social and economic costs of substantially re-
ducing protection are enormous. The cold economic judgment that we will be better off in the longer term by cutting protection ignores the immediate economic and social costs of' the adjustments made necessary by that decision. In the medium term, what the rural sector should expect is careful but positive use of compensatory measures aimed directly at compensating for the cost to Australia of Australia's protection policies and, at the same time, at gradual, selective reductions in the levels of protection afforded individual industries, determined by their capacity to adjust within acceptable levels of social cost. But I do not think that will take place. I think the manufacturing sector and the agricultural sector will bear the brunt, because the resources development will increase the economic and social cost of protection. Imports will become greater and the opportunity costs of not importing will become greater also and the pattern of resource use within Australia will become increasingly distorted. As I said, as a result of that the distribution of income and wealth in the community will change substantially. Significantly, the incidence of hardship may occur differently. I draw the conclusion that the existing set of protective measures

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1103

will be less appropriate to their objectives than they have been in the past.
In specific commodity terms, the Budget does nothing for the rural sector and contains reductions in real terms for most continuing programs. In real terms, government payments to rural industries outlined in this Budget are down by over 10 per cent. No new programs have been announced. In real terms, the only place in which funding for programs is actually up in money terms is in the National Water Resources Program. But even there the allocation of $35m means that only $109.4m of the $200m promised over the five years from 1978 will be spent in the first four years of the Program. That means that somehow, magically, we will have to spend $90m next year. The main reason that the total level of assistance is up in monetary terms is that the Government will be receiving less by way of repayments from the wheat industry. It is very curious to read the relevant document and to see the Treasury's calculation in that regard. Perhaps in Estimates committee hearings we will have a chance to explore that.
With the exception of the fruit industry, the amounts allocated for rural research and promotion are down in real terms. The amount allocated for rural adjustment is down in real terms, yet rural research and adjustment were the only highlights in the speech of the Treasurer (Mr Howard). They were referred to in three lines out of 27 pages. There is to be no increase in the 7 per cent interest rate paid on income equalisation deposits. There is no reference to the need for agricultural finance such as an increase in funding for the Commonwealth Development Bank. There is no reference to the problems of the meat industry.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr GROOM (Braddon) (8.20)-1 will start my comments on this year's Budget with some words of praise for the Government and make some other comments later which perhaps are not as complimentary of the Government's actions. I believe that stability and consistency in economic policy are very important ingredients in the overall approach of a government. To this Government's credit, it has been very consistent in applying its economic policy since it took office in 1975. This year's Budget is at least consistent. It continues to fight inflation, which I believe is very important. It is most damaging to the economy and to individuals if inflation is out of control. It is fair to say that the Government's record in controlling inflation has been admirable. The rate of inflation

in the last financial year was only 8.8 per cent. By international standards that is a very good record. The Government is attempting to control government expenditure as best it can and generally to keep price increases to what it sees as a reasonable level.
That sort of stability and consistency is welcomed by the community. People like consistent policies. They like to be able to look ahead with some certainty, to plan ahead and to know generally where they are going. I believe that the Government has certainly helped in that way. I commend the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and the Ministry generally for consistency in their approach to our economic problems. It is so easy for a government to be a big spender and to seek popularity by handing out big cheques to help people in the hope of gaining a few votes. That does not help the economy in the long run. It is a sure way of destroying it. We saw that kind of approach between 1972 and 1975. That is one reason, I believe, why the then Government lost office. People lost confidence in it because of that kind of approach. We are now seeing consistency which I certainly welcome.
I think the Government is facing a difficult time. We need to watch our policies most carefully. If we do not do so and make sure that we have the right kinds of policies to satisfy the bulk of the Australian community We will be lucky if we continue to receive the kind of support we have received in recent times from the Australian community. These are not easy times for the average person. A number of problems are emerging. One is interest rates. There have been increases of som~ significance in interest rates paid by people, particularly those who are buying homes. So many young people are heavily committed to mortgage repayments. I know of many young families in Tasmania who are struggling to pay off their home loans. The position must be very much worse in the larger cities. The average home price in Tasmania is probably $30,000. In Sydney it may be $40,000 or $50,000. I am not sure of the exact figure. It is also very high in Melbourne. Young couples perhaps overcommit themselves. They tend to buy the best homes they can afford on their incomes. They borrow heavily. They may borrow 90 per cent of the value of their homes. When interest rates go up by one per cent or so it places a great strain on those families.
We have probably kept interest rates under control for too long. If we keep the lid on interest rates eventually the pressure builds up and we have to increase them. It is much better for families if interest rates go up very gradually so that

1104 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

they can plan ahead. If we keep the lid on for too People in Tasmania have had rate increases.

long they will not be able to plan ahead. Suddenly They have been shocked by the size of those in-

there will be very large increases in the amounts creases. I see that the honourable member for

they are paying to the banks or the building socieFranklin (Mr Good luck) is in the House at

ties and they cannot budget for them. They canpresent. He is a former warden of a municipality.

not cope. That position is developing at present. I He will understand what I am saying. For some

do not think that governments can control people their rate bills have increased by 20 per

interest rates. It is stupid of people to say that they cent or 25 per cent. Again, this is affecting the

can. There is a big, competitive money market. As family budget. Over recent months a real strain

the Treasurer has said many times and as the has been placed on the family budget of the aver-

present Minister for Housing and Construction age person. He is looking for some kind of relief.

(Mr McVeigh) has said, if interest rates are kept The Government needs to look at a way of direct-

down the money available for housing dries up. ing a little more assistance to the average family in

Governments certainly cannot artificially control the community. I trust that that can be achieved

interest rates. My plea to the Government, parbefore too long. We cannot afford to wait very

ticularly the Treasurer, is that if incre\lses cannot much longer.

be avoided-we wish they could be--11et them be applied gradually, sensibly and steadily, not in one lump sum so that families are placed in a position where they cannot effectively budget to meet their commitments.

I want to mention some specific things in my speech tonight. The Government is increasing sales tax collections by $890m. That is not a small amount. It is about equivalent to the amount we receivt} as a nation for our beef exports. The beef

I do not normally support subsidies although, of industry has been mentioned often recently. It is

course, it depends upon the nature oj the subsidy. quite a large amount of money. I generally sup-

In this place we have a number of theorists. Some port the idea that we should move from direct

people call them the drys. They believe that the taxes to more indirect taxes. I think direct taxes

Government should not provide subsidies or suptend to take away incentive, which is a very bad

port for individuals, companies or groups in the thing. They sap incentive and they deter people

community, unless they are in great need. That is from being involved in a little hard work-

theory. In the real world we sometimes have to opening a business, maintaining a farm, or what-

provide some support for groups in the comever, and thus employing people. I think a move

munity. If further significant increases in interest to more indirect taxes will provide more incentive

rates for home buyers occur the Government will for people; they will be able to decide how they

have no alternative but to give very careful conwill spend their money. I will support this general

sideration to providing direct help to home buyers measure of an increase in sales tax only if there is

to overcome this problem. That might be by way a clear assurance that there will be cuts in direct

of tax deductibility on their interest repayments taxes. I gather from the Treasurer's Budget

or some more direct form of assistance. I certainly , Speech that the Government certainly has that in

think that there is a need to provide some assistmind, that it intends to bring down at a fairly early

ance for these people.

time some cuts in direct taxes. I heard the

A Budget is a good Budget if it achieves two things: Firstly, if it makes economic sense and, secondly, if it keeps the general community reasonably happy. I think we have a problem with the second of those tests. There are people in the community who are not very happy at the moment. Not enough is being done for Mr and Mrs

Treasurer deliver his Budget Speech and I gathered that included in it was an assurance that the
Government was closely considering cuts in direct income tax and that at the earliest possible oppor-
tunity we would see cuts in direct taxes. If we have a clear assurance that that will occur, I will be pleased to support this measure.

Average. As I have said, they have been hit by I am concerned about the sales tax on building

interest rates. Some have to pay a little more for materials. There are so many increases in costs for

health costs this financial year. There have been young home buyers. I have just mentioned the in-

petrol price increases, although not very recently. crease in interest rates. This is a further burden

The trouble is that the average wage or salary that they must carry. It is not the builder who

earner does not have the advantage of a tax demust pay the bill; it is the home buyer who has to

duction. He does not get his petrol from his pay it. This will increase the cost of a home, I am

company as a business or professional person can told by the building industry, by about $500,

do. He has to pay the full increase himself. This is which really eats into the home savings grant pay-

hitting many families, especially those with chilment that first home buyers receive. Most people

dren to maintain. It is not easy for them.

who build a home are first home buyers, and most

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1105

of them ar~ young people. So that measure does concern me, and I would want to give very careful consideration to it when it returns to this House, as I believe it is likely to do.
I want to mention pensioners quickly. I am concerned that pensioners have a problem with pensioner health benefits cards. A very strict income test applies in relation to PHB cards-$40 for a single person and $68 for a married couple. The cut-off point has not altered for many years, and we have a problem developing there. Very many decent people who have worked hard in their lives are missing out on a PHB card because they are receiving a few more' cents-quite small amounts-in income from dividends or as a result of increased interest rates. That card is very important to pensioners, and I would like the Government to look at that problem very carefully and to try to do something about it. There is a risk that we may be alienating some people in that area. We must be very careful about it.
I mention briefly the Community Youth Support Scheme. There is a problem there, as the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown), who is in the House, knows. He has done a good job. He has certainly argued his point forcibly. The decision has not come about through lack of a genuine concern for the young unemployed people, but there are many in the community who rely on that scheme. I would like to see the Government look at the vacuum that has been created to see whether it can create an appropriate scheme in which there will be support for young people who cannot find jobs. We say that we have training schemes, but the young people will not be totally satisfied with those training schemes because many of them will finish up back in the pool of unemployed after they have been through their training schemes. They need some support, help, guidance and advice.
Mr Good luck-He can understand Tasmania too.
Mr GROOM-That is true. I note the point made by the honourable member for Franklin. The Minister has recently been to Tasmania and he does understand our problems there.
I now make an important point concerning sport and politics. I am most concerned at the threats posed by increasing political interference in the sport of Australians. If the present trend continues, I believe sport will be destroyed. It worries me that governments, including our own, are so often telling our sports men and women when and where they should play sport. They tell us that we should not play sport in this or that country or against this or that team. In my view

this is wrong. Wherever possible, sport and politics should be kept apart. One should not influence the other. Our sporting teams are told that they must not go to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics or South Africa and they must be careful about competing with New Zealand. Ministers, including even the Prime Minister, write to sporting associations explaining the Government's attitude and asking for full cooperation. The Government seems to be overstepping the mark. It needs to treat this whole issue with great care.
Our freedoms are very sacred and must be respected by all governments in this country, whether State or Commonwealth. Australians should be completely free to play sport whenever and wherever they choose, subject to only one qualification, in my view; that is, where national security is genuinely placed at risk. Our present attitude is wrong. We are using young sports men and women as front line troops in our political wars and squabbles. Why are sportsmen such easy prey? Because they can be used as a very effective weapon without pockets being hurt and without major domestic political repercussions. The Government, of course, said that we should boycott the Moscow Games. I supported that policy. However, there must be serious doubt as to whether our official posturing was correct when we look at the issue in retrospect. Before the Games we heard so much about Afghanistan and the terrible things that were happening there. It was described as the greatest crisis since the Second World War. We said our sportsmen must not go. We really applied pressure to individual sportsmen and sporting associations. Of course, t~ade continued.
Despite the tragic crisis, we were not prepared to provide direct assistance to the Afghans who were involved in the struggle following that invasion. Since the Moscow Games what have we ~eard? It is no longer an issue? Has the war there ended? Have the troops withdrawn? I think not. U not, what further action should we take? I must honestly say that I now doubt whether the pressure we applied should have been applied as it was. I am sorry to say that, but it is my honest view. Sports men and women have been used in this way for reasons of international political expediency.
We are horrified by apartheid and we oppose sporting contact, but what action has been taken to object to the terrible human atrocities committed in Iran, Kampuchea and Uganda? Maybe some action was taken, but we do not appear, in terms of policy, to have been concerned about those problems. Our approach has not been even

11 06 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No. /)

handed. It has been dishonest, in my view, and artificial. No credit is given in our policies for the good that can come out of genuine, honest and friendly sporting contacts with the men and women of other nations. If sport continues to be used for political purposes, where will al1 of this end? Perhaps a State will not send its representative teams to Canberra because it is dissatisfied with its share of tax revenue.
I heard on the AM program this morning a gentleman making a comment about the Commonwealth Games to be held in Brisbane. He said that there were going to be protests at the Commonwealth Games and attempts to boycott them. In our domestic scene sportsmen, sportswomen and sporting events are being used to apply political pressure. I think that is a very unfortunate thing for sport in our country. We love our sport. We want to see it continue to be played in al1 its forms. I believe that this sort of approach, whereby our sportsmen are real1y being used as politicians, is undermining the real value of sport and doing great harm to it and our way of life. The Government must look again at its policy and consider whether it is intruding in the peaceful and lawful activities of its citizens at home in Australia and abroad. When these people go to other countries they are involved in legitimate activity, they are obeying their domestic law and al1 they may be doing is offending against the foreign policy of this country.
I say that our policy is wrong and that we should revise it as soon as possible. Sportsmen and sportswomen around Australia will begin to oppose the Government's approach if the present trend continues. In my contact with sporting associations I detect a real concern about this policy being felt by those people who are charged with the administration of sporting associations around this country. They are looking for some change in attitude and change in approach. I hope that we will see some change in the not too distant future.
Mr KENT (Hotham) (8.40)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I think lowe the Chair an apology.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!
Mr KENT-I hear: 'Hear, hear!' I will explain why earlier this evening I offended against the forms of the House. I did not intenc\ to do this. At the conclusion of my speech on the Budget, when talking about tariff protection, I took a couple of thousand letters written by my constituents, who are in fear of losing their jobs in the automotive industry, and flung them across the empty Government benches. I very much regret offending against the forms of the House, but I want to make an explanation in my favour. I came to this

country 28 years ago, and I worked for a firm which built General Motors-Holden's Ltd in Dandenong. I drilled every hole in that steel construction, and I still remember working 14 hard days a fortnight doing that job. I feel highly emotional when I think that today people who come to this country or those who are born here will not have that opportunity if tariff reductions are imposed. I am sorry and I apologise. I regret causing any inconvenience to the cleaners in this House, who had to col1ect the thousands of letters which tried to convey what the workers in my electorate feel about the Industries Assistance Commission proposal. Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-I thank the honourable member for Hotham for his apology. No doubt the House will take note of it.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (8.42)-Any single Budget should be part of an overall economic strategy and that strategy should be based on directing our economic, material and labour resources to the benefit of the Australian people and creating the best possible living standards and life satisfaction for them. By any standard this Budget fails that test. Even on its own explanatory analysis, it stands to create greater poverty. At the present time at least three million people in Australia are living below the poverty line. The Budget stands to create higher inflation, further unemployment, grosser inequality, higher taxes, higher interest rates, and reduced living standards. There is no question about these matters.
As a preliminary to my remarks tonight I will deal with some of the parameters outlined in the Budget Papers to prove that what I am saying is correct. The Budget provides for a domestic sur-. plus of $1.5 billion, compared with a domestic deficit just three years ago of $2.3 billion. By any standards, that means that in real terms much more than $3.8 billion is being withdrawn from the spending power of Australian workers. The Budget expects only a 2 per cent increase in total employment of wage and salary earners, down 0.6 per cent on the last financial year. Yet the Budget Papers say that this increase stands to create still more inflation-II per cent. At least 1.7 per cent of that will be a result of the sales tax increases, which ought to be rejected in the Senate. We hope that the Australian Democrats will pluck up the fortitude to join us in rejecting these increases, for which the Government does not have a mandate.
Receipts are up 15.8 per cent in this Budget. An extra $810m will be collected in sales tax in a full

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1107

financial year, and for the remainder of this finanfrom overseas and $532m from within the dom-

cial year an extra $550m will be collected. I reestic market. This year $806m will be borrowed in

peat: There is no mandate for these increases, this area.

which represent a rise of 38.6 per cent. Similarly, there has been a massive $3.3 billion, or 22 per cent, increase in pay-as-you-earn income taxes. The oil levy is up by 11 per cent to $3.3 billion, but company tax is up by only 10.1 per cent. Those three areas-sales tax, income tax and the oil levy-will provide 61 per cent of total receipts, and they are the areas to which wage and salary earners make the most substantial contribution. Yet company tax is up only by 10 per cent.

Is it the policy of this Government to reduce the general purpose capital grants for schools and hospitals, and local government borrowing programs, and to increase the borrowing capacity given to State authorities to provide infrastructure for developing minerals processing industries? The answer must be yes because the general purpose capital grants in this Budget are down by 24.5 per cent in real terms over what they were only three years ago. Similarly, local government

borrowing programs are down from $479m to

In the balance of payments area, the current $597m, or 4 per cent in real terms over the last

account deficit of $5.4 billion is caused mainly by three years. Yet for the larger State authorities,

the decline in exports and the rise in imports. the combined infrastructure borrowing program

Exports are up by only 2 per cent and imports by and the normal borrowing program are up from

20 per cent. There was a massive $6.5 billion capi- $1 ,444m to $2,098m, or 11.7 per cent in real terms tal inflow into this country in the last financial over the last three years.

year, 75 per cent of which has been used to take The point is that the losers in the Loan Council

over existing industries and to speculate in real esprogram are the general purpose capital grants

tate. The other 25 per cent has been invested in reand the local government borrowing programs

source development. The capital account has and the winners, despite the restraint of the Loan

been transformed from a $5.4 billion deficit on the Council at its last meeting, when it did not ap-

current account to a $1.15 billion surplus on the . prove any new infrastructure borrowing projects,

capital account. Despite the current account are still the larger State authorities-the State

deficit, the dollar still revalued as a result of this electricity commissions and so on. What is emerg-

capital inflow against the trade weighted index of ing is the fact that these funds are still insufficient

9.3 per cent. One notes that this capital inflow will because of the ad hoc nature of resource develop-

continue over the next year, with an estimated $7 ment in this country and-the competitive atmos-

billion expected to come into the country. As phere that exists among the States at the moment

capital inflow continues and export earnings reas a result of the lack of Federal cohesion in this

cover, as they must when some of these new projarea. Despite the increases in the funds provided

ects come on stream, there will be a great deal of through the normal Loan Council semi-

pressure to reduce protection in the car, textile government program and the infrastructure bor-

and manufacturing industries generally in this rowing program to the larger State authorities, we

country. I fear that may happen, and it is already can still expect State power charge increases to

being seen in the pressure to reduce protection in consumers~that is, families and small

the motor car industry, which at least in the short industries~and further cuts to the States in the

and intermediate terms must be resisted in the general purpose capital programs, specific pur-

interests of protecting employment.

pose programs and local government borrowing

programs in the interests of providing infrastruc-

Let us look at general purpose capital grants, ture for resource development.

because herein lies a story. It is in the Loan CounLast year I predicted that as a result of the fail-

cil capital grants area that the States receive most ure to control and rationalise resources develop-

of their capital expenditure to provide general ment and capital inflow~this has been outlined

capital development in schools, hospitals, and so by many members of the Opposition over the last

on. This year the amount provided is only 12 months~there would be increasing inflation

$1,307m, which is the same in monetary terms as and a blowout in the money supply. That has

last year. The State and larger semi-government already occurred. There has been' an increase in

authorities have got $1,291m, which is down the money supply of 2.7 per cent over what was

slightly but it is the area of additional borrowing predicted in the last Budget. We said that interest

for infrastructure that has blown out considerrates would blowout and they did ... They have

ably. Already $4.9 billion has been authorised gone up by 3 per cent since February 1980. We

through the Loan Council. So far, $I,229m has predicted a revaluation of the dollar and that has

already been borrowed, $697m of which has come occurred. We predicted an increase in imports

11 08 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

and an increase in taxation. All of these things another one per cent. All this means is that repay-

have occurred. We predicted cuts in funds to the ments on a standard $30,000 loan over 25 years

States, cuts to the Federal social welfare programs from a bank have jumped from about $280 a

and reductions in employment, particularly in the month to $327 a month and that the repayments

area of manufacturing industry. Sadly, all of these on such a loan over 30 years from a building so-

predictions were correct. All of our worst fears ciety have jumped from about $300 a month to

have been justified. Now the Government says $344 a month.

that it is worried about an increasing money
supply spilling into inflation and about the lack of a cohesive wages policy. I point out to the Government that it has steadfastly refused to control capital inflow. It has destroyed what little wages policy it had by destroying wages indexation. Because the Government has no cohesive policies in these areas, because it refuses to control capital inflow, in this budget it is seeking instead to impose these controls indirectly by budgetting. for a huge' domestic surplus and by imposing higher interest rates.

As I have said, the Government is using another measure to control the money supply. It has budgeted for a huge domestic surplus. It has effected this by cutting grants to the States, particularly in the area of health and public housing, by inflicting cuts in the real value of the Federal social welfare program, particularly as it relates to the people who are least able to defend themselves-the unemployed and the pensioners-and, lastly, by increasing taxes. Let us look quickly at a few of the areas in which the cuts have been imposed. In the area of employment, the Government to its

Let us look at the effect of this refusal to apply everlasting shame, has destroyed the Community

correct economic policies. In the area of interest Youth Support Scheme. That program was of

rates, capital inflow over the last financial year benefit to the hard-core unemployed youth. In the

amounted to $6.5 billion. That should have made last financial year there were 52,000 participants

interest rates easier but it has not done so, simply in that scheme. We are are told that in this Budget

because in the interests of controlling the money only 20,000 will benefit from the so-called

supply the Government has resorted to increasing alternative programs that Ministers skite about. I

interest rates and imposing a credit squeeze. Thus, refer to increased provisions for the Common-

we have a paradox. We have had a blowout of wealth Rebate for Apprentice Full-time Training

capital inflow and we have had a tightening of Scheme and for school to work assistance

interest rates. Semi-government authorities are programs. The Government still persists with the

now offering up to 15.5 per cent and banks and myth that the unemployed person under 18 years

building societies are offering housing loans which of age who lives away from home can exist on $36

people cannot afford at 13.5 per cent or 14 per a week.

cent, simply because the Government will not control capital inflow into this country.

I turn to the area of pensions. The Budget has done very little indeed for pensioners. It has not

The Government's policies have attacked houslifted, as it should have, the threshold at which

ing with unrealistic savagery. Australians have pensions are reduced with regard to income. That

never been further away from realising the dream threshold has remained unindexed for about eight

of owning their own home. The Government years. It is $20 for single people and $34.50 for

promised to reduce interest rates by 2 per cent. Inmarried couples. There should have been an in-

stead they have risen. There has been a 2 per cent crease in the threshold income levels for

increase since the beginning of this year. Whether entitlement to pensioner health benefit cards.

people have a building society loan or a bank loan, They were not increased from $40 for single

and however favourable the rates were, there is no people and $68 for married couples, even though

escaping the fact that since January this year rethe private health insurance subsidies from the

payments on a standard $30,000 housing loan Federal Government have now been terminated.

have risen by $44.50 a month. As a rough guide, I am thankful that the New South Wales Govern-

each one per cent increase in interest rates means ment has moved into the gap and has offered free

a $22 a month rise in repayments. When interest hospital and associated medical treatment for

rate increases of 1 per cent were announced last various classes of pensioners and disadvantaged

December, bank interest rates jumped in January people, particularly those who miss out under the

from 10 per cent or lOt per cent to lIt per cent. Federal scheme-that is, those who do not have

Building society interest rates went from 11 per pensioner health benefit cards. I seek leave to

cent or 11 t per cent to 12 per cent or 12t per cent. have incorporated in Hansard a document show-

Six months later, in June, building society rates ing those classes of disadvantaged people in New

again rose to 12t per cent or 13 per cent. The South Wales who will now receive free treatment

latest rise, announced a few weeks ago, is yet in public hospitals.

Appropriation Bill (No. /)

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1109

Leave granted.

themselves a health risk, that is, if they visit doc-

The document read as follows-
New South Wales has expanded the guidelines for free treatment laid down by the Commonwealth Government.
FREE hospital and associated medical treatment will therefore continue to be available for people in the following

tors rarely; and secondly, if they feel that they have to take out health insurance they should join Medibank Private, which at least is still administered by the Federal Health Insurance Com" mission, not a private health fund, and will pro-

categories (and dependents) in addition to those nominated vide the base for a future national comprehensive

by the Commonwealth, and NOT covered by hospital inhealth insurance scheme under a Labor

surance. They are:

Government.

Social security pensioners (regardless of level of additional income).

1 am particularly concerned also at the cuts in

Veterans' Affairs service pensioners.

public housing finance to the States. Let me just

Recipients of Handicapped Child's Allowances.

given the bare figures and let the matter rest there

Wards of the Minister for Youth and Community Services.
Others the Minister for Youth and Community Services is assisting financially under the Child Welfare Act, including children in the care of voluntary agencies.

and speak for itself because my time is running out. In the 1974 Budget $790m in 1981-82 prices was made available to the States for public housing. This year only $255m was made available.

People requiring inpatient care associated with sexually After we take into account total State repayments

transmitted diseases, TB and sexual assault services. (Existing identification systems such as pensioner entitlement card will be sufficient to qualify for these categories.)
The NSW Government has further decided that the following outpatient services will be free to everyone:
SEXUALLY transmitted diseases clinics; HELP centres for victims of sexual assault;

on loans already made the figure is really only $47m, as compared with $573m seven years ago. This is at a time when interest rates are going up and it is impossible for young families to raise finance through the banks to obtain private housirtg.

SERVICES FOR VICTIMS of domestic violen"ce or child abuse;

The other means that the Government used to achieve a huge domestic surplus was an increase

The following outpatient services will be FREE for the uninsured at public hospitals.
TB services. ANTE-NATAL services. SERVICES for the chronically ill-for example renal dialysis,

in taxes. The Government increased income taxes by $3.1 billion this financial year-up 22 per cent. It broke its pledge not to increase sales taxes and to impose a broadly based consumer tax.

services to children with chronic illnesses.
PREVENTIVE services, such as cancer screening, antismoking, immunisation, diagnostic screening of young children.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hoo. Charles Jooes)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr WEST-I thank the House. What about the situation in other States? Unfortunately, the pensioners in other States who just miss out on their pensioner health benefit cards will have either to join a health scheme and pay $1 0 to $18 a week or run the risk of meeting the cost of catastrophic illness.
The Government is absolutely culpable in terminating specific purpose grants to the States for recurrent expenditure for public hospitals, for community health centres and for the school dental scheme and for incorporating them in general purpose grants. The reason, of course, is that it wishes to inflict disguised cuts on the States and to mask the true extent of the cutbacks in health services. The Government has forced all but the most severely disadvantaged people-that is, the 61 per cent of single persons and 36 per cent of families who were not in private health insurance-now to take out insurance at a cost of $10 to $18 a week. My advice to people who have not previously been covered by health insurance is on two levels: Firstly, they should consider taking out hospital insurance only if they do not consider

Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (9.2)-Having spoken already on the Budget legislation relating to the Australian Capital Territory, I take pleasure in participating in the debate tonight as the Federal member for Denison. It will give me an opportunity later in my speech to refer to a number of Budget initiatives for Tasmania and in particular for the seat of Denison. Like you, Mr Deputy Speaker, 1 appreciate first and foremost that one's prime object in remaining in Parliament is to hold one's seat. If I cease to be the member for Denison it naturally follows that 1 will not be Minister for anything. 1 take very great pride in the fact that 1 have been the member for Denison since 1975. I am particularly pleased that I speak tonight in this chamber, which is graced by the presence of the most distinguished Australian academic, Professor C. H. Miller from the University of Tasmania.
The Budget is particularly good news for the Federal electorate of Denison. 1 am particularly elated that, contrary to all the predictions of gloom, funds have been made available for the

111 0 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

commencement of the $8.6m Commonwealth usually the situation, the loyal support of the Law Courts complex in Davey Street. This very honourable member for Franklin in this and other substantial project is one for which I have fought matters has stood me in very good stead. As I said,

for the past five years. This project went through the Joint Statutory Committee on Public Works last year. I think there were some who believed that it was appropriate for the matter to go to

the tenders will close in just a couple of weeks time. I look forward to the announcement of the successful tenderer. I admit to a bias in expressing the hope that it will be a Tasmanian company. We

tender later this financial year with it being the inall look forward to the commencement of work tent to commence work perhaps in Mayor June on this magnificent complex well before

1982. Because of the urgency of the project, beChristmas.

cause of the fact that the building industry in Tasmania and particularly in Hobart has been going through a very difficult period, I made the strongest possible representations in the hope that this project could be brought forward. I am delighted that the Government accepted that point of view. On 1 August last tenders were called for this magnificent complex, this $8.6m project, which for the first time ever will bring together under the one roof all Commonwealth judicial and legal functions in Hobart. It is a 60 day tender period. I am looking forward, as are we all, to the announcement of the successful tenderer and the commencement of work on the building proper, the excavations having been completed, before the end of this calender year and certainly well be-
fore Christmas.

I refer to the National Marine Science Re-
search Centre which is to be built at Castray Esplanade in Hobart at a cost of $1O.75m. Whilst this is listed in the Civil Works Program for 1981-82, it has still to complete its passage before the Public Works Committee. I place on record my personal tribute to the Chairman of that Committee, the honourable member for Canning (Mr Bungey), the members of his Committee and the hard working staff, in particular Mr Dick Fenton, for bringing forward the Public Works Committee hearing. Most of the evidence was taken before the House rose for the winter recess. I hope that the completion of the Committee's deliberations will occur shortly, that we will see a favourable report and that it will be possible for this project to proceed quickly. It will bring to Hobart on a per-

I place on record my appreciation for the manent basis the Commonwealth Scientific and

efforts of the Attorney-General (Senator Industrial Research Organisation's Division of

Durack), in particular the Minister for Housing Fisheries and Oceanography, which is currently

and Construction (Mr McVeigh), and the other based in Cronulla, New South Wales, but which

Cabinet colleagues who supported the bringing by Cabinet decision of March 1980 is to be trans-

forward of this very important project. Hobart is ferred to Hobart and to become the National

the only State capital city which does not have a Marine Science Research Centre. This will be a

Commonwealth Law Courts complex. I recall complex of world standing. It will employ directly

that in my years of practice at the Bar the Comand indirectly in the course of construction some

monwealth Courts and Commonwealth judicial 250 to 300 people. Upon completion it will be a

functions were conducted .in a variety of $25m complex including the permanent basing of

buildings-some six separate sites throughout the the $9m CSIRO research vessel which is to be

city of Hobart. The Family Court of Australia, as built on behalf of the Commonwealth.

a matter of interest, currently sits in the MLC Building in Hobart. It is on the fourth floor and one has to travel by lift to it. To enter the building one has to pass by a shop which specialises in bridal gowns. This is a matter which has been the subject of some comment. In addition, the litigants are compelled to wait in the passage until the light goes off indicating that the case prior to their case has been completed and they are then ushered in. His Honour Mr Justice Wood of the Family Court has probably been the greatest fighter for the new Commonwealth Law Courts complex of anybody in Tasmania.
Mr Good luck-After you.

It will work in very close co-operation with the University of Tasmania. Might I say in passing that I hope that the University of Tasmania will qualify as one of those universities selected for special funding as a centre of excellence. In particular, I draw attention to the extremely good work being done in the marine science area and also in relation to the growth of poppies and other flowers and vegetables for the production of both drugs and edible vegetable oils in Tasmania. The University of Tasmania stands ready to play its role in ensuring that the National Marine Science Research 'Centre becomes a centre of world standing for international research in marine science.

Mr HODGMAN-My good friend and colHow appropriate it is that tonight I speak on the league, the honourable member for Franklin, is eve of the first meeting in Australia of the del-

very kind in paying tribute to my efforts. As is egates to the Convention on the Conservation of

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1111

Antarctic Marine Living Resources, following the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner),

adoption of the Convention last year. I pay tribute himself a very distinguished barrister. I want to

to the former Minister for Foreign Affairs, the refer to the provisions of the Constitution of the

honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock), Commonwealth of Australia, our most important

who played a vital role in bringing that Conven- . legal document and one which, more often than

tion to the signature table. I place on record also not, is not even looked at, considered or studied.

the fact that Australia was the first nation in the Tonight it is my painful duty to call into question

world to ratify that Convention under Article 13 the status of the oath of allegiance of every Aus-

of which the world headquarters of the Comtralian Labor Party member of the House of Rep-

mission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine resentatives and of the Senate. I refer expressly to

Living Resources will be established in Hobart.

the provisions of section 42 of the Constitution of

All this started many years ago in the course of the Commonwealth of Australia which provides:

discussions with the then Minister for Science, the Honourable Senator James Webster, now Australia's High Commissioner to New Zealand. I must say that successive Ministers for Science,

Every senator and every member of the House of Representatives shall before taking his seat-
That makes it clearly a condition precedent before taking his seat--

and in particular the former Minister for Foreign make and subscribe before the Governor-General, or some

Affairs and his successor, have combined superbly to bring about what is an all-time first for

person authorised by him, an oath or affirmation of allegiance in the form set forth in the schedule to this Constitution.

Australia. It is the first time Australia has been When we turn to the schedule we see that the oath

chosen as host nation for an international convenreads as follows:

tion, and it is singularly appropriate that the place I, A.B., do swear that I will be faithful and bear true al-

in Australia which has been selected as the world legiance to Her Majesty . . .

headquarters is the city of Hobart, the most The words in the original Constitution are 'Queen

beautiful State capital and situated in the Federal Victoria' but one will see from the note that the

electorate of Denison. The former Minister for name of the King or Queen of the United KingForeign Affairs and my colleague the honourable dom of Great Britain and Ireland for the time

member for Franklin (Mr Good luck), who have being is to be substituted from time to time. So it

been actively involved in this matter, would think should read:

it remiss of me if I did not place on record my eternal gratitude to Ambassador Keith Brennan and

Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth the Second, Her heirs and successors according to law, SO IiELP ME GOD!

Mr John Ryan of the Department of Foreign Affairs. Ambassador Brennan played a vital role, and Mr Ryan chaired the Conference in Canberra last year, as a result of which the treaty was brought to the signature table. The ratification process occurred, as I said, in this very building. It is a great tribute to Australia that we were the first

The affirmation is in similar words, but the clear condition precedent to taking a seat in the House of Representatives or in the Senate is that the person--
Mr Holding-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. The statements made by the

nation to ratify the Convention. Six nations have honourable gentleman cast a gross reflection on

now ratified that treaty. When two more nations all members of the Opposition, and I would think ratify it, bringing the total to eight, that treaty will that if he wants to continue with that line of argu-

come into effect. Tomorrow my colleague the ment the proper course for him to follow would

Minister for Science and Technology, the be to move a substantive motion.according to the Honourable David Thomson, M.e., M.P., will forms provided by the House. Certainly, the line officially open the first meeting of the delegates to of argument that the honourable gentleman is

the International Convention on the Conserpursuing is not appropriate to the sorts of comvation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources in ments that can be made in this Budget debate.

Hobart. I am deeply honoured that I will be Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles

present at that ceremony.

Jones)-I doubt whether there is any substance in

I now have to turn to a subject of some weight which will not please some of my colleagues on the other side of the House. Indeed, sir, it may not please you, but, knowing your impartiality in the chair, I am sure you will appreciate that sometimes things have to be said even though they may

the point of order. It might be appropriate if the Minister for the Capital Territory. were to conclude his remarks on the point he is making in order that the honourable member for Melbourne Ports can examine the possibility of raising a point of order.

be painful. It is.a matter of constitutional importMr HODGMAN-Thank you, sir. I accept

ance. I note the presence in the chamber of the your ruling, Mr Deputy Speaker. So the oath

1112 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

taken as a condition precedent to taking one's seat in this House or in the Senate is that 'I, A.B.'- inserting the name-'do swear that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth the Second, Her heirs andsuccessors, according to law, so help me god!' I now doubt the status of the oaths and affirmations of allegiance taken by every ALP senator and member of the House of Representatives in view of the clear and unequivocal objective of the ALP to the establishment of Australia as an independent republic. Let me develop that point further. It is now a basic and fundamental policy objective of the ALP to ensure that Australia becomes a republic. How on earth can Labor members and senators square that with their oath of allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II? The Labor Party's commitment to socialism, whilst couched in terms of reform, also contemplates a change by what is described-I shall quote directly from the ALP biennial national conference report-as union action. Is this Parliament and is this nation to understand from the decisions taken at the thirty-fourth biennial national conference of the ALP at the Southern Cross Hotel, Melbourne from 27 July to 29 July that the objectives of a socialist Australia and a republican Australia are to be obtained by union action? I put that because that is the question which constitutional lawyers are asking at this moment. Is it the fact that following the biennial national conference of the ALP at the Southern Cross Hotel in Melbourne the objectives of a socialist Australia and a republican Australia are to be obtained by union action? There is one way to put this matter to an end: I call on all ALP members immediately to renew their oath of allegiance to Her Majesty the Queen.
Mr West-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. I might be labouring under a delusion but .I thought we were discussing Appropriation Bill (No.1).
Mr HODGMAN-That is a frivolous point of order.
Mr West-It is not a frivolous point of order, with respect. The Minister is talking about the ALP federal conference which was constituted in Melbourne to discuss rule changes in the ALP. This has nothing to do with Appropriation Bill (No.1). Mr Speaker, I ask you to tell him to get back to the legislation.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will speak to those matters about which appropriation is to be provided under the Bill.

Mr HODGMAN-I refer to the appropriation of the Parliament and contend that it is wrong for salaries to be paid to men and women--
Mr Campbell-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. The Minister said quite clearly that the loyalty of every member of the Australian Labor Party was suspect. When I took the affirmation of allegiance J did not consider my loyalties to be in any way suspect and, for my part at least, I demand a withdrawal as J was clearly impugned by what the Minister said.
Mr SPEAKER-If the Minister impugned the loyalty of any member of the House, I ask him to withdraw.
Mr HODGMAN-Mr Speaker, of course I withdraw. I now call upon all members of the ALP, along with the honourable member for Kalgoorlie, to renew their oath of allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.
Mr Campbell-Mr Speaker, J raise a point of order. How can the Minister possibly withdraw and then demand that we renew an oath which we have already taken? How can that be an unequivocal withdrawal?
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister withdrew as I directed. He has not said anything unparliamentarysince.
Mr HODGMAN-To put it beyond doubt, let us have them out in the open. I call upon all Australian Labor Party members both in this place and in the Senate as a sign of their good faith to swear an oath of allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. (Quorum formed) Thosehonourable members of the Labor Party who refuse to renew their oath of allegiance to Her Majesty should no longer be capable of taking their seats.
Mr West-MrSpeaker, I raise a point of order. My point of order is that I understood by your direction to the Minister that you upheld my previous point of order that he should talk to the Bill and not abuse the Labor Party. I draw your attention to the way he has flouted your ruling.
Mr SPEAKER-J uphold the point of order by the honourable member for Cunningham. The Minister will have to satisfy me that what he is saying is relevant to an appropriation under the Bill.
Mr HODGMAN-It is relevant to the appropriation for the Parliament because it was a constitutional crime to pay the salaries of people who will not swear an oath of allegiance to Her Majesty the Queen. Republicans should not be paid.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman's time has expired.

The Australian Melli Industry

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1113

Debate (on motion by Dr Jenkins) adjourned.
ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE AUSTRALIAN MEAT INDUSTRY
Ministerial. Statement
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Acting Prime Mirtister)-by leave-The Government has decided to appoint a royal commission to inquire into the Australian meat industry. As the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) indicated in his statement yesterday, allegations of malpractice have been made about aspects of the meat industry and evidence of malpractice has been produced which gives rise to serious concern on the part of the Australian industry and Australian consumers.
The Commonwealth Government is responsible for the maintenance of standards in the meat export industry, but the problems appear to go wider than this, and into areas of State administration. A Federal royal commission necessarily has powers limited to the area of Commonealth responsibility-the export of meat. The Government therefore has invited all States to issue the royal commission with concurrent powers which would enable it to examine the meat industry iIi relation to human consumption and other uses domestically. The Victorian Government has already indicated its intention to take this action, so the royal commission will cover at least the handling of meat for domestic purposes in that State. His Honour, Mr Justice Albert Edward Woodward, OBE. will head the royal commission. The royal commissioner will inquire into the following matters:
(a) whether administrative arrangements and procedures for the supervision of the handling of meat for export are adequate to ensure that all meat exported from Australia meets the requirements prescribed by law;
(b) whether malpractices are occurring, or have occurred, in the handling of meat for export or the exportation of meat;
(c) allegations made, whether in public or to a Minister, department or authority of the Commonwealth, of malpractices alleged to have occurred during the past 10 years, in the handling of meat for export or in the exportation of meat;
(d) whether such allegations were dealt with in a manner that was adequate and effective;
(e) whether in response to such allegations, any illegality or corruption occurred.

The royal commissioner is directed to make such recommendations arising out of his inquiry as he thinks appropriate, including recommendations regarding the legislative or administrative changes, if any, that are necessary or desirable. He is authorised, at his discretion, to defer his inquiry into any matter tha(is the subject of a police investigation or of criminal proceedings in a court. Further, if the Governor-General so approves, he may conduct his inquiry in combination with any inquiry that he is authorised to make by any commission issued by a State or States.
The royal commission will report notlater than 1 September 1982. The Government is fully seized with the urgency of this matter. However, it is also important that the inquiry be thorough and wideranging. The royal commission will be authorised to make interim reports as appropriate. The royal commission is separate from the management inquiry announced by the Minister for Primary Industry to review practices and procedures in the documentary and physical control of meat destined for export. Measures have already been taken to tighten control of procedures. The management review by independent consultants will check these procedures and report urgently whether anything further needs to be done in this field. The royal commission is not prevented from commenting also on any aspects in this area that seem to it to require remedy; but because a royal commission is necessarily a longer process, this intermediate step is being taken to verify the effectiveness of the control procedures now in place. I do not need to emphasise to the House the urgency and importance of this matter, concerning as it does an industry vital to the prosperity of the country. It is the Government's wish that this inquiry satisfy the Australian public that all available measures are being taken to protect and preserve the Australian meat industry. I present the following paper:
Royal Commission into the Australian Meat IndustryMinisterial Statement, 9 September 1981.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley~Leader of the Opposition) (9.27)-The Opposition declared that there should be a royal commission into this matter. We declared that more than a week ago. We also said, however, that the terms of reference should be comprehensive and should allow a wide-ranging investigation into all matters related to this meat export scandal and also the associated concern in the community relate~ to meat produced for domestic consumption. I note thai the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) has declared in his statement that the Commonwealth

1114 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

The Australian Meat Industry

Government is responsible for the maintenance of standards in the meat export industry. He then went on to say that there are certain areas which are State government responsibilities and that, therefore, the powers of the royal commission will be limited. However, the national Government will seek authority from the State governments to allow the royal commission to extend the ambit of its investigation into those areas which would be otherwise seen as the province of State governments.
It seems to me that this is a somewhat restrictive interpretation of the Commonwealth's authority in this area. Given the gravity of the situation and the very real possibility that some States will oppose co-operaton with the royal commission-I understand that Queensland has already declared that it will not co-operate with the royal commission-it would seem appropriate for the Federal Government to exploit all of the constitutional authority available to it. To do anything less than that would be to fail to ensure the adequacy, the comprehensiveness and the penetration of such an investigation. Section 51' (i) of the Constitution refers to trade and commerce with other countries, arid among the States. So it seems that the authority of the royal commission of inquiry established by the national Government can go beyond merely export markets and reach into intra-State trading. Section 51 (xx) of . the Constitution establishes the authority of the national Government in relation to foreign corporations and trading or financial corporations formed within the limits of the Commonwealth. I presume that abattoirs, even operating at the State level, would largely come within the ambit of that authority. That, therefore, ought to be exploited.
I move on, however, to the terms of reference. The Opposition expresses concern that on one reasonable literal interpretation of the terms of reference they appear unduly restrictive. Terms (a) and (b) refer to administrative arrangements and procedures concerning the supervision and handling of meat for export and malpractices occurring or which might have occurred in the handling of meat for export or the exportation of meat. On a reasonable literal interpretation of. those terms of reference they would seem to be restricted to activity in the area of the physical work which is associated with the processing and the handling and supervision of meat destined for export. That, in itself, is unremarkable as long as that is understood. If that is understood, then, for a comprehensive inquiry to be undertaken, subsequent terms of reference need to be expanded considerably. However, we find that terms (c),

(d) and (e) clearly restrict, on one reasonable interpretation, the authority of the royal commissioner. Terms (d) and (e) flow from term (c).
Term (c) limits, as a term of reference, the authority of the royal commissioner to allegations made. Whether they are made is not important in terms of this point which I wish to make. It limits the authority of the royal commissioner to allegations made. It may well be thatevidence has become available to the Public Service or to a Minister in a form other than allegations. But the royal commissioner is restricted to considering only those matters which are based on allegations which have been made. What we want to establish beyond any doubt is whether, on the basis of the information available to the department and to the Minister, in whatever form, apart from, as well as, allegations, either the Minister or the Public Service or both discharged their duties with a clear display of due diligence and responsibility.
If we accept a reasonable interpretation of term of reference (c) and, therefore, the limitations placedon terms (d) and (e), which obtain their authority flowing from term (c), these terms of reference hobble the royal commissioner. In the circumstances, if the Government asserts that it wants a completely comprehensive inquiry and that it wants no immunity in this matter, not for the top levels of the Public Service, nor for Ministers, and that it wants to come before the Parliament and display clean hands at all levels, it will have no quibble about accepting an amendment which will leave no doubt about the comprehensiveness of the authority which the Parliament wishes to extend to the royal commissioner. I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words: 'tho House is of the opinion that the terms of reference of the proposed Royal Commission should be amended to take account of the following matters'.
(a) Whether legislativc, administrative or other arrangements and procedures for the supervision lind control of all relevant stages leading to the export of meat from Australia are adequllte to ensure that all mellt exported meets legal reo qulrement5and protects Auslrlllia's export murketsj
(b) whether malpractices are occurring, or hllve occurred In the preparation, processing or handling of meat for export or the exportation of melltj
(c) whether investigations in reilltion to informlltion which WIIS availllble or could rellsonobly have been Ilvailable in reo latlon to malpracticcs which occurred or lire occurring or which were alleged to hllve occurred hllve been diligently pursued.
(d) if the answer to 'c' is no, the persons, including Ministers, responsible for that IlIck of diligencej
(e) If there were such persons responsible for lack of diligence whether such lack of diligence constituted illegality, corruption or impropriety.

The Australian Meat Industry

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1115

This is an adequate set of terms of reference. It provides the comprehensiveness which is required in a case such as this. On the basis of what we are putting forward we are talking about not only allegations but also information which was available or which could reasonably have been available in relation to malpractices. Surely there can be no quibbling about such a reasonable proposition as that. The Government should come before the Parliament and be candid in its declaration that it wants to leave no stone unturned in the investigation of this outrageous scandal. If it is not prepared to accept this amendment then I think it quite reasonable for us to conclude that here is a clear case of its reluctantly being forced to accept a royal commission of inquiry. It is clear, by the course of events, by the momentum and force of public opinion, that there was no choice for the Government in that respect. But it is equally clear that it is trying to create an area of immunity, if possible, by a restrictive interpretation of terms (c), (d) and (e), as proposed by the Acting Prime Minister.
If the Government alleges that this is not so, then as a matter of good will and in the pursuit of bipartisanship, which will be forthcoming immediately, it can accept the amendments which we have proposed. The amendment I have moved contains a suitable set of terms of reference for a royal commission of inquiry, terms which would be appropriate from a parliament genuinely concerned about the outrageous disclosures which have been associated with this matter and which, most unfortunately, leave a cloud above the head of the Government and the Public Service, in the most senior positions.
Mr SPEAKER-Is the amendment seconded? Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (9.37)-1 second the amendment. Briefly the issue is one of interpretation of the Government's terms of reference. No matter how the Government tries to argue the situation, the royal commissioner is limited by term (c) to allegations made, as the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) said. The Opposition is asking the Government not to limit the terms of reference to the allegations but to a\1ow the royal commissioner to deal with information because information could have come to the Department on its own initiative. It does not require an a\1egation. Mr Baume~It is covered by term (b). Mr LIONEL BOWEN~1t is not covered by term (b). Term (b) refers to the occurrence of malpractices. Whether malpractices have occurred is to be determined'. There has been no evidence of any malpractice occurring because there

have been no convictions or proceedings. Let me make that clear. Why is the Government anxious to cover up a suggestion that perhaps--
Mr Tuckey-There is no cover up. Mr LIONEL BOWEN-If there is no cover up let us have a look at what term (c) says. Why are Government supporters so anxious to interrupt me? Investigations should be carried out as to whether information was available and whether it was pursued diligently. That is the issue. The matter should not be limited to illegalities. Impropriety should also be investigated. A previous royal commission resulted in a Minister losing his case, not because of an illegality, but because of impropriety. These are the issues that we suggest should be discussed. It is all very well for the Government to walk in here and introduce a set of conditions without having any consultations with the Opposition and say that they must be final. Mr Baume-Is that the objection? Mr LIONEL BOWEN-The objection is reasonable. We should have been given an opportunity to put our views. We have a valid objection and suggest that if the terms of reference outlined by the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) were applied strictly they would relate only to past malpractices. The question is: What about the information which may have led to the uncovering of a malpractice? The big issue is whether' the officials, the public servants, applied themselves diligently to investigating the information. Honourable metnbers must bear in mind that there is prima facie evidence from the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police which suggests that matters were not diligently pursued. He has made a statement to that effect. Honourable members interjec/ingMr SPEAKER~Orderl The Deputy Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. I have permitted some interjection in order to clarify the positions of the Opposition and the Government, but I will not permit any further interjections. Mr LIONEL BOWEN~Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point at issue, as you said, is what needs clarification. The question is whether the royal commissioner will be able to deal with information available to either a department or a Minister and whether it can report to this Parliament on that. That is what this is all about. If he is limited in inquiring into allegations made-that will be the case~we do, not think that is wide enough scope. What we are saying is: Why talk about allegations when we should be talking about information? Without delaying the'House

1116 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

The Australian Meat Industry

unduly, in support of what my Leader has said, I submit it is very clear that if a government is not prepared to investigate information made available there is something wrong with the government or the department concerned. Of course, if every piece of information was properly investigated the Government has nothing to worry about. All that paragraph (.c) of the amendment calls for is an answer to whether there was impropriety by any person. Surely the Government should not run away from determining that. All the amendment does, basically, is agree that we should have the widest ranging investigation.
The other day my Leader said here that the public is very concerned that somebody may not have pursued his duties diligently. It is also concerned about malpractice and corruption. The criminal courts can deal with malpractice or corruption. Criminal proceedings related to such matters could flow from the royal commission inquiry. But this Parliament has to deal with lack of diligence or lack of propriety because they are not criminal matters, they relate to the responsibility of people in office, whether it be ministerial office or an office in a public service area. If there has been impropriety by such people they should be removed from office. That does not require criminal prosecution. That is the distinction I make. I think the Government would be wise enough to accept the amendment moved by the Opposition.
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Acting Prime Minister) (9.43)-1 thought the Opposition would welcome the announcement of the establishment of the royal commission into the Australian meat industry. I thought that in general terms it would accept the terms of reference for that royal commission because they are comprehensive and wide ranging. The request of the Opposition was that they be of that nature. The way Opposition members are going on tonight, it seems to me that it would not matter what terms of reference were brought up. In a pedantic manner they would want to redraft them just to satisfy themselves that they were able to make changes or amendments.
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) dealt with two aspects. Firstly, he seems to believe that we should have drawn up terms of reference that would include inquiring into meat used for domestic consumption and that we should be relying on section 51 (i) of the Constitution, the trade and commerce 'powers, to enable us to do that. I suppose it is a matter of interpretation of the Constitution how far we can go in using that power to enable such. an inquiry to take place. But the advice given is that we do not have the power to investigate all the domestic aspects that it would

be necessary to investigate if we were to have a total examination of the issue. What we have done in the terms of reference and in the statement. I have made is to invite the States to give a commission to the royal commission to allow it to investigate the domestic matters as well as the handling of meat for export. As has been stated, Victoria is prepared to co-operate in such a royal commission inquiry. I hope that other States, particularly'the principal States, such as Queensland and New South Wales, will also participate in the inquiry. I think they will leave themselves in a difficult position if they do not do so, because so many aspects of the handling of meat is a State responsibility. The States will place themselves in a questionable position if they do not join in the inquiry. What fears has a State government about joining in the inquiry unless it has some concern?
Mr Scott-You have the power. Why not use it?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hindmarsh will remain silent.
Mr ANTHONY-I hope that the States see the virtue in hOlding one inquiry, because it is in the interests of this enormous industry that the matter be cleared and settled as quickly as possible. If a Commonwealth inquiry comes up with recommendations that point out the inadequacies of slaughtering at a State level for domestic purposes it will only make the situation more difficult for them.
Mr Scott-You are covering up for your friends.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Shortland will remain silent.
Mr ANTHONY-So I do plead--
MrScott-Hindmarsh.
Mr SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Shortiand.
Mr Scott-I am sorry, Mr Speaker. I said 'Hindmarsh'; you said 'Shortland'.
Mr SPEAKER-I apologise-Hindmarsh.
Mr Scott-I accept your apology.
Mr SPEAKER-I will accept your silence.
Mr Scott-I will try to give it.
Mr ANTHONY-I hope that we can get the co-operation of the States in this inquiry. The second point that the Leader of the Opposition made was that the terms of reference as they are drawn up refer only to allegations concerning and malpractices occurring in the handling of meat for export or in the exportation of meat. I think that both of the words 'allegations' and 'malpractices'

The Australian Meat Industry

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1117

would be interpreted to cover what the honourable member said was lacking. I am sure that there is adequate scope in the terms of reference for the royal commissioner to be able to examine all aspects if he believes that there may be some malpractice and certainly to investigate the allegations. I believe that the allegations that have been made in the course of \0 years-there must have been many-will enable him to examine any aspect of the matter. To imagine that the terms of reference are inadequate is, I believe, to be mistaken.
The Leader of the Opposition and certainly the Deputy Leader of the Opposition made out a case for a need to use the word 'diligent'; it was claimed that there might have been a lack of diligence in handling the allegations or malpractices. Paragraph (d) of the terms of reference reads:
whether such allegations were dealt with in a manner that was adequate and effective;
Mr Lionel Bowen-That is 'allegations'.
Mr ANTHONY-'Allegations' can cover allegations relating to a whole host of matters.
Mr Hayden-Don't talk nonsense. They cannot cover information. They cannot cover information obtained in ways other than through allegations. You are not down on the family pig farm now.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will remain silent.
Mr ANTHONY-If the only way the Leader of the Opposition can argue is by making personal insults, that does not worry me in the least; I am very proud of my profession. What I am saying is that if allegations were made that information had been given, of course the royal commission can look at that. Anybody can make an allegation in the course of the inquiry and the inquiry will be ble to cover any aspect. I reject out of hand the alternative terms of reference put forward by the Opposition. They give one the impression that the Opposition thinks it is in government and that it can draw up its own terms of reference I do not believe that there is a vast difference in essence between the terms of reference proposed by the Government and the alternative, pedantic terms of reference proposed by the Opposition. Therefore, I reject the alternative terms of reference. I believe that what we propose doing will handle the situation in a comprehensive and wideranging manner, which the Leader of the Opposition has suggested he wants.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (9.49)-1 back the amendment moved by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) and seconded by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen). I

point out, for one thing, that allegations do not equal information. One of the things we need to look into is a matter to which I made reference yesterday during the debate on the censure motion. 1 do not have with me the quotation I made from the report of the Committee of Inquiry to examine Commonwealth and State Meat Inspection Systems, the top of page 41 of the so called Kelly report on dual meat inspection. It was a clear recommendation that the issuing of export stamps by abattoirs should cease. I think these things should be investigated. Another thing that should be investigated is that all the terms of reference concentrate on the handling of meat for export. It is very clear that they do not take into account allegations or specific information on meat transferring from one State to another. Meat branded for pet food has been going into the domestic market. Aspects of the domestic market also sought to be investigated. 1do not think the terms of reference cover that aspect.
Mr SPEAKER-Before I put the question 1 point out to the House and the mover and the seconder of the motion that if it were carried in the terms put it would have no executive function because the question is: 'That the House take note of the paper'. The proposal is that all words after That' be omitted for the purpose of putting in other words which state:
(a) whether legislative, administrative
The Leader of the Opposition should use words such as 'all words after "That" be omitted with a view to substituting the following words: The House is of the opinion that the terms of reference of the proposed Royal Commission should be amended to take account of the following matters'. I will permit the Leader of the Opposition and the seconder of the motion to make that adjustment. The original question was: 'That the House take note of the paper'. For the purposes of clarity for the House I think it worth my taking a couple of minutes to draw the distinction between the two proposals. The Acting Prime Minister said:
The Royal Commissioner will inquire into the following mailers:
(a) whether administrative arrangements and procedures for the supervision of the handling of meat for export are adequate to ensure that all meat exported from Australia meets the requirements prescribed by law;
(b) whether malpractices are occurring, or have occurred, in the handling of meat for export or the exportation of meat;

1118 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

The Australian Meat Industry

(c) allegations made, whether in public or to a Minister, department or authority of the Commonwealth, of malpractices alleged to have occurred during the past ten years, in the handling of meat for el(port or in the el(portation of meat;
(d) whether such allegations were dealt with in a manner that was adequate and effective;
(e) whether in response to such allegations, any illegality or corruption occurred.

The purpose of the amendment by the Leader of the Opposition would be to substitute for those terms the following terms:

(a) whether legislative, administrative or other arrangements and procedures for the supervision and control of all relevant stages leading to the el(port of meat from Australia are adequate to ensure that all meat el(ported meets legal requirements and protects Australia's el(port markets;

(b) whether malpractices are occurring, or have occurred in the preparation, processing or handling of meat for el(port or the el(portation of meat;

(c) whether investigations in relation to information which
was available or could reasonably have been available in relation to malpractices which occurred or are occurring or which were alleged to have occurred have been diligently
pursued;

(d) if the answer to (c) is no, the persons, including Ministers, responsible for that lack of diligence;

(e) if there were such persons responsible for lack of diligence whether such lack of diligence constituted illegality, corruption or impropriety.

Question put:

That the words proposed to be omitted (Mr Hayden's amendment) stand part of the question.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-RtHon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

61

Noes

45

Majority

16

AYES
Adermann. A. E. Anthony. J. D. ~aume" M. E. Birney, R. J. Bradfield. J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H.
Burr,M-A. ' C~~mali, A. GO' Caineron, Donald Cameron, Ewch Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowon,D.B. Dean,A.O. Dobie,J, D. M. Drummond, P. H. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall. Steele Harris, G. MeD.

Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Jarman,A. W. Jull,D. F. Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B. lusher, S. A. lynch, Sir Phillip
MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. Mclean,R.M.- McVeigh, D. T. Millar,P.C. Moorc,J.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. Porter,J. R. Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street,A.A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.

Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W.

AYES

Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. I. White, P. N. D.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. C. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, CharleS Kelly, R.J. Kent, L. Kerin,J. C. Klugman, R. E.
McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Ureli, T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. WilIis,R.

PAIRS

Faiconer, P. D. Edwards, H. R. Bourchier,J. W. Robinson, Ian Macphee, I. M.

Young,M. T. Cohen,B, Mcleay,leo Keating, P. J. Innes, V.E.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Amendment negatived.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

ADJOURNMENT
Acupunture: Medical Benefits-Economic Policy-Australian Development Assistance
Bureau-Anti-Budget Rally in Hobart, . Tasmania~Replacement of Military Equipment-New South Wales Election:
Advertising
Mr SPEAKER-It being past \0 p.m., propose the question:
That the House do. now adjourn.
Dr JENKINS (Scullin) (10.2)-1 gues~ this is something of an anticlimax. I have been waiting to speak on the Budget for some time, but I have the feeling that I have had to take second place to kangaroos, horses and even donkeys. In the adjournment debate I want to raise the attitude of the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) and his Department to the practice of acupuncture, The practice of acupuncture does require special skills in the medical field. The Australian Acupuncture

Adjournment

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1119

Society is composed of medical practitioners who practice those skills, all of whom have had at least six months special training and most of whom have had much more than that. I believe the Department suggests that it is not a scientific method of treatment, but this is quite untrue. There is in both Western and Eastern medical literature a wide body of opinion with regard to the scientific basis of acupuncture. It is not just testimonials which are used. I have had experience of it on 'a personal basis, as I suffer from a chronic and painful neuromuscular complaint. Acupuncture has been most effective in controlling pain and muscle spasm in that complaint. I realise that pain is subjective and that only the patient measures it, but certainly muscle vesiculation and muscle spasm are measurable.
The mechanism by which the effects are brought about is suggested to be a humoral mechanism by the release of chemical substances called endorphins from the nerve endings. There is on record research which is attempting to assay and to isolate those endorphins so that they may De used further. The use of acupuncture in pain management is already proven. I would have thought that it was a practice in pain management that would have been encouraged. Its proper use in pain management diminishes the consumption of analgaesic drugs and so is a saving in the pharmacy area. Yet the fee allowable for the skilful practise of acupuncture is only that available for the shortest consultation. I have an idea that the Minister, or someone in his Department who perhaps has an old-fashioned feeling about the practice of this art, believes that medical acupuncturists set up their patients like batteries of laying pullets so that they can go along the line, twiddle acupuncture needles and collect vast fees for a number of patients. I suppose that unethical practice occurrs everywhere, but the majority of acupuncturists are very certain in trying to get properly diagnosis and treatment.
At the Preston and Northcote Community Hospital some ten years ago an acupuncture research clinic was set up. This year, with the agreement of the medical staff association, that is now a normal acupuncture clinic. In other words, it is one of the recognised out-patient clinics where the art is practised. Yet not only has the Minister's Department limited the fee payable but also its directors in the various States have now said that the principal medical officer of the Department has also instructed that including any associated

consultations in the same day in the description for item 980 has a wider connotation than to suggest only those consultations dealing with the same condition are not payable. A person who has acupuncture treatment cannot receive treatment from the same doctor on the same day for any ~ther condition. So a person who is having acupuncture should not cut a hand or break an arm be.~ause he will not get paid medical benefits.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (10.7)-Before we rose for the week back in our electorates the honourable member for' Hunter (Mr Robert
he Brown) made an interesting speech in an adjourn-
ment debate in which claimed, in relation to small government, that probably the most appropriate measure of the extent to which any government becomes involved in the economic affairs of the nation is the proportion of gross domestic product which is absorbed by total Budget receipts. I raise this matter because it seems to me to establish very clearly the difference between the Government and the Opposition in the understanding of what really happens in our economy. ,To suggest that the size ofgovernment receipts as a proportion of gross domestic product underlines the trend to big government seems to me to misunderstand totally the reality of big government and what has happened in the last six Budgets of this Government as compared with the three Budgets of the previous Government.
When determining the appropriate measure of big government it is totally irrelevant to deal with revenue when in fact the bulk of the increase in the revenues of this Government has been to make up for the gap between revenue and expenditure that opened up during the period 1973 to 1975. In other words, the figure the honourable member for Hunter cited was as irrelevant as is possible to establish his case. There is no more irrelevant figure than the one he cited. I seek leave of the House to incorporate in Hansard the relevant measures of big government, the size of government, -as a proportion of gross domestic product. I seek to incorporate the reality rather than the fancy presented by the honourable member for Hunter. I seek leave of the House to incorporate two tables from the latest Budget statements.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

1120 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Adjournment

BUDGET OUTLA YS-SUMMARY
The table below shows increases in both money and real terms in Commonwealth Budget outlays in each year since 1971-72 and the proportions of gross domestic product (GDP) represented by total outlays.

Budget Outlays

Increase on Previous Year

Real Increase (a)

Proportion of GDP

1971-72
1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76
1976-77 1977-78 1978-79
1979-80 1980-81 1981-82(e)

$ million 9047
10190 12229 17 839
21861
24123 26738 29012
31660 36274
40862

Percent
11.7 12.6 20.0 45.9
22.5
10.3 10.8 8.5
9.1 14.6 12.6

Per cent
4.2 5.5 5.6 19.9
5.5 -0.4
2.2
1.1 -0.2
3.5 1.9(b)

Percent 24.0
23.8 23.8 28.9
30.1 29.0
29.6 -. 28.5 27.7 (P)27.9
27.6

(a) Increase in outlays deflated by increase in the implicit price deflator for non-farm GDP. (b) Adjusted to remove payday effects, the underlying real growth implied is 0.9 per cent. (P) Preliminary. (e) Budget estimate.
THE DEFICIT AND FINANCING TRANSACTIONS The following table shows the size of the total deficit in relation to GOP since 1971-72. Also shown are the estimated domestic and overseas deficits and surpluses.
COMMONWEALTH BUDGET RESULTS
(+ Surplus, - Deficit)

Domestic

Overseas

Total

Total as a Proportion
of GDP

1971-72
1972-73 1973-74 1974-75
1975-76
1976-77 1977-78 1978-79
1979-80 1980-81 1981-82(e)

$ million
+ 405
- 215
+ 211
-1949 -2873
-1865 -2361
-2258 - 567
+ 429 + 1542

$ million - 539 - 494 - 504 - 618
- 712
- 875 - 972
-1220 -1467 -1556 ~1 688

$ million
- 134 - 709 - 293 -2566
-3585
-2740 -3333 -3478
-2034 -I 127
- 146

Per cent 0.4
1.7 0.6 4.2
4.9 3.3
3.7 3.4
1.8 (P)0.9
0.1

(P) Preliminary. (e) Budget estimates.

Mr BAUME-I thank the House. The first table shows Budget outlays as a proportion of gross domestic product. There we see the reality of big government, because big government means big spending. In 1975-76, Budget spending represented 30.1 per cent of gross domestic product. It has since been reduced to 27.6 per cent. The reality is that the latest figures in effect overstate the .involvement of Budget spending in gross domestic product because of the increased number of pay days in the Public Service which are included in this year. As the House knows, that has a significant impact of roughly one per cent on Government spending. Clearly, there has been a significant reduction in Government

spending as a proportion of gross domestic product under the present Government. That is sig-. nificant enough, and certainly denies the point made by the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert Brown). Even more significant is the proportion of gross domestic product made up by the deficit, in other words, the amount by which the Government spends mote than it takes in. The previous Government, .and surely this must be dramatised by these figures, managed to fiddle the books. It managed to have a very low increase--
Mr Dawkins-What about Telecom?
Mr BAUME-I hear: 'What about Telecom?' If we include all the statutory authorities that the

Adjournment

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1121

previous Government hived off we will which ADAB officers are highly trained, experi-

nonetheless get a similar result. Our husbandry enced and effective in handling. To suggest trans-

has been so far ahead of the previous Governferring the care of these students to education de-

ment's that it does not matter. Some 4.9 per cent partments which are already overloaded and

of the gross domestic product was made up by the underfinanced and which do not wish to accept

deficit of the previous Government. If we add such a task anyway is to abrogate real responsi-

Telecom, which had a surplus, we would diminish bility for these students. The same problem will be

the amount of that deficit. We can see that the experienced when the specially trained and ex-

deficit has been reduced to only 0.1 per cent of perienced social workers on the ADAB staff are

gross domestic product. There we have an instireplaced or transferred. The continuation of

tution that has a deficit which in fact would student care by these social workers is of grave

benefit the deficit figure here. This organisation concern to ADAB officers. Academic and per-

has a surplus. It would have benefited--

sonal supervision of the needs of overseas students

Mr Dawkins-You have not changed. You are still as shonky as you ever were.
Mr BAUME-We hear this nonsensical interruption from the Opposition, once again demonstrating its monumental incompetence in this area.

has proved a vital need over many years, and ADAB staff have been able to provide this most effectively. To suggest in addition that travel in
this an~a be transferred to private travel agencies is to indicate a serious lack of understanding of the subtleties of internaional relations and the care of people from many different political and econ-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- omic areas who are studying in this country.

Order! The honourable member's time has The recommendations of the razor gang, rather

expired. The honourable member for Fremantle - than reflecting a co-ordinated manpower and

will withdraw the reflection.

efficiency plan, simply suggest a withdrawal from

Mr Dawkins-Which one?

the co-ordinated system of the present and a re-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member will not try the Chair.

turn to the fragmented early days of the scheme. The 25 staff members of the Melbourne ADAB -regional office are each specialised officers per-

Mr Dawkins-I just said that he is still shonky. forming specific tasks within a co-ordinated team.

What is wrong with that?

The co-operation and co-ordination with volun-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member will withdraw the reflection.
Mr Dawkins-In deference to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, I withdraw.

tary community groups which is an integral part of the operation of the scheme would in itself be virtually impossible if the tasks of ADAB are fragmented and dispersed among several other bodies. The record of ADAB in distributing and utilising

Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (10.12)-1 wish to aid money allocated by the Federal Government

draw attention to a matter which is causing conand funding practical projects is a sound one. At a

cern to several church and humanitarian groups time when reviews are in the air, the efficient dis-

in my electorate, namely, the future of the Austribution of such large sums of money would seem

tralian Development Assistance Bureau. The to be an essential priority.

razor gang report states that ADAB will be retained as an entity with its own director. However, officers of ADABare to be integrated into the Department of Foreign Affairs and the State regional offices are to be reviewed with a view to giving the responsibility for supervision of sponsored overseas students to tertiary education institutions. Administration of the overseas student training program will be transferred to the State offices of the Department of Education, and greater use is to be made of private sector travel firms.

It seems appropriate for a centralised and experienced team to be utilised rather than to be fragmented and threatened with dispersal and wastage of its own specific expertise. The foreign aid industry, worth over $500m, would surely seem to warrant professional and specific overseeing. Assistance provided by-our Government to recipient countries in the form of direct grants for specific projects and the care of overseas students has required assessment, appraisal and evaluation - to ensure maximum developmental benefit to the re9ipient country. The dispersal of ADAB func-

What this means in reality is that a cotions, which will mean its virtual abolition, will re-

ordinated, effective team of highly specialised sult in a loss of important expertise and under-

professionals will be shuffled around into other standing which has been built up in the area of

positions where their skills will not be utilised. For developmental issues and relationships with vol-

example, sponsored students have special needs untary agencies and committees working

1122 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Adjournment

together. The razor gang's proposals in relation to ADAB will certainly mean wastage in real terms of manpower, planning and efficiency. In view of the large sums of money involved and the international standing and reputation of our country, I ask the Government to reconsider these proposals.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (10.16)-Very rarely do I go on the attack, but three or four months ago, prior to the Budget, a rally was organised in Hobart to protest against the Budget. I was taught always to respect the cloth, but on this occasion the person who organised the rally was one named Julian Punch, a Catholic priest. So the people of Hobart were subject to a protest rally against the Budget. I agree that probably there is some justification for rallying against the Budget. Of course some things in the Budget do not meet all the requirements of all the people in Tasmania, or in that case Australia. Who do honourable members think was the key speaker at the rally? Have a guess.
Mr McLean-Max Burr.
MrGOODLUCK-No, it was not Max Burr, it was John Halfpenny. Do communists change their spots? I do not think so. Mr Halfpenny spoke to the people of Hobart against this Government, against this Budget. Another person was organised to talk to the pensioners. I feel for the pensioners, and so do honourable members on this side of the House and on the other side. We all feel for them. The person they organised was talking about dog's meat. I have checked up on this person and I believe his qualifications are much the same as those of John Halfpenny. We had a rally in nice, quiet Hobart which was organised by a former Catholic priest, now a public servant and working for the State Government. Mr Halfpenny was brought across to address the rally, and a person in the guise of an age pensioner virtually cried to the people, but I think that his political persuasion is suspect also. That is the sort of rally that was organised against us in Tasmania~nice, quiet Tasmania. He got all the people up-tight. He got all the people there. Another interesting point is that if we had a rally probably one member of the Press would come. Everybody from the media in Hobart was at the rally.
Mr Groom-What is your policy?
. Mr GOODLUCK-Just a minute. The
honourable member for Draddon must stop interrupting me. I have only five minutes in which to speak; he had 20 minutes. All the media was present at the rally and Halfpenny was given a great deal of coverage.

MI' McLean-Short change.
Mr GOODLUCKYes, short change is what his name should be. He addressed the people of Tasmania on this Government. The communists virtually destroyed this country. We all know it but we do not fight against it. Mr Halfpenny is now a member of the Australian Labor Party. He said he is not a communist any more. I do not think they can change their spots. Tasmanians do not change their spots. Why bring across a foreigner to address people in Hobart against the Budget?
Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie) (10.20)-Last night, before my time expired, I was making a case that in light of new evidence the Panavia Tornado aircraft should be included on the short list of suitable replacement aircraft for the Royal Australian Air Force: I said that 800 of these aircraft were already in production for three nations. The price of these aircraft is fully known and firm. What could have been the difficult question of Australian industrial participation presents no real problem because most of the work in this area was done when the Tornado was a contender. This aircraft is particularly suited to the needs of Australian industry, and industrial participation should be made easier because the three largest aerospace companies in Europe, all leaders in their field, would be able to provide work outside the direct scope of the Tornado. So we could end up with the sort of electronics industry which we would have had in this country had the Government in 1963 opted for the TSR2 aircraft instead of the politically expedient Fill aircraft.
I want to refer to the timing of the tactical fighter force decision. Committing Australia to huge financial expenditure at this time when there are still doubts about the capabilities of the two contenders is both rash and unnecessary. It is a decision that should' be made by a Prime Minister in good health, free from the distractions of the Budget and the current .obsession with the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. I do not think that the Parliament should be divided on this issue. What is at stake is the acquisition of the most suitable aircraft for the RAAF-an aircraft that will take the first line of our defences into the decades of the next century. To simply reopen negotiations and include this remarkable aircraft on the short list is a very small step for the Government to take.
Having said that, I wish now to refer to another aspect of defence that is causing me some concern, the replacement of trucks for the Australian Army. The short list for these trucks 'iomprises two vehicles, the Mercedes Benz and the Bedford.

Adjournment

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1123

I do not think anyone seriously believes that the Bedford will be a genuine contender. It is 20 years old and about to be phased out of production in the United Kingdom. The Mercedes Benz is no doubt technically a very advanced truck. It has all sorts of things such as outboard disc brakes and torsion bar suspension. By and large I support the recommendations of the Industries Assistance Commission in its review of the automotive industry in this country. Here we have a clear case of an Australian company, International Harvester Australia Ltd, having available a perfectly adequate vehicle-a vehicle that was designed in conjunction with Army personnel. These trucks have served the Australian Army very well in the past. We will probably be selling them to the New Zealand Army and importing the Mercedes Benz.
One of the attributes of the Mercedes Benz is the torsion bar suspension but in the event of Europe being isolated we would be isolated from the vital parts for these trucks. We understand leaf spring technology. Leaf springs are perfectly adequate for this country. The reasons for the choice of this truck really elude me. It is not a matter of cost saving because the International costs about the same as a Mercedes Benz. I am sure that the performance of the two vehicles is comparable. That leaves us with two reasons for this hasty decision. It is a hasty decision, for nobody really believes that trucks are essential for the defence of Australia. Army vehicles are generally underrated, under-utilised and over-serviced. There are plenty of spare parts and as a rule they do not wear out. They will last for many years to come. I suspect that the cretins from the National Country Party believe that there is some advantage to be gained by buying from the Germans. They seem to be under the illusion that we are going to sell Germany some more agricultural products. Of course, that is not the case. It will not happen. But in this wild dream, the Government is threatening the existence of truck design and manufacture in this country. We are destroying jobs. Jobs would be available for many people. Those jobs would not be compensated for in terms of tariffs, because the cost of the trucks is comparable. The Government is doing this for no real purpose. I ask the Government to have a close look at this matter.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MacKENZIE (Calare) (10.25)-Tonight I wish to refer to some very misleading and, in places, totally irresponsible-indeed, scurrilousadvertisements being undertaken by the New South Wales Minister for Health and the New

South Wales Premier in association with a

number of campaigns for Labor candidates in the

New South Wales election. I refer to the claims

being made in relation to the provision of free

health care services for various groups within the

community. I refer firstly to a pamphlet under the

signature of the Minister for Health, Mr Stewart,

entitled 'New Health Charges 1981 '. In this pam-

phlet Mr Stewart stutes:

.

As u resull of chllnges lo Federul Governmenl legislulion affecling hellllh funding lind hellllh insul'lInce, l1ew health urrangemenls come inlo en'eel on Seplember I.

This mellns free hospilullreulmenl ill New Soulh Willes hus ended for ull, with some exceplions.

The exceptions that he refers to are only those people who qualify for the new Commonwealth health care card, plus a few others that the New South Wales Government will cover. Mr Stewart then goes on to pick up the exact wording of the statement on health care by the Commonwealth Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar). He says that the exceptions include migrants and refugees in their first six months in Australia, those on unemployment or special benefit and those on low incomes. He uses exactly the same figures as the Commonwealth Minister used in an endeavour to gain the credit and the kudos for providing health care cover to those people. At no stage does he mention that all pensioners, whether they be age pensioners or pensioners of othe,' ilks, such as supporting parents, those on sickness benefit, those on invalid pensions and the like, will also continue to be covered. I refer to some of the paid advertising in my local area-paid for incidentally by the New South Wales taxpayer. One such advertisement states:

No-one in NSW will be denied hospital lrealmenl because of financial hardship or inabilily to pay.

All pensioners and dependanls will be lrealed Free.

Eighty per cent of those pensioners are provided
with free health care anyhow through the Commonwealth's program. They, of course, are the people who have a pensioner health benefit card. The advertisement continues:

People on Unemployment or Special Benefit. . . free.

It has nothing to do with the New South Wales Government; it is the policy of this Government. The advertisement goes on to categorise under what circumstances such people are treated free and refers to exactly the same figures as those given by the Commonwealth-$68 for married couples and $40 a week for single people. The candidate concerned then goes on to say:

People earning less than $160 a week . . . or $96 a week for a single person . . . free.

Free treatment is provided by whom? It is provided not by the New South Wales Government,

1124 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Adjournment

but by the Commonwealth Government. The candidate then says:
People with slightly higher income but who cannot afford insurance will be treated free at public hospitals providing they use Hospital Medical Officers.
That situation has existed for a long time. When was the last time that a public hospital took legal action to recoup fees from people who could not pay? Worse still, another advertisement states: .
The Wran Government has decided that free hospital and medical treatment will continue to be provided to uninsured pensioners at Public Hospitals.
As I have pointed out, that treatment relates to a relatively small number of pensioners who are not presently entitled to a pensioner health benefit card.
Mr Baume-Including millionaire pensioners.
Mr MacKENZIE-Including millionaires, as my friend and colleague the honourable member for Macarthur has pointed out-people who may well be able to pay. The advertisement concludes:
The NSW Government will not see sick people denied help because of the Commonwealth's lack of concern for the sick.
I believe that that sort of advertising is entirely misleading. Indeed, it is scurrilQus. I trust that the Commonwealth Minister for Health will take the matter up and point out thllt the claims being made by the New South Wales Minister for Health and some of the Labor candidates in various New South Wales electorates are entirely misleading. They are endeavouring by scurrilous

means to obtain credit for the huge number of people to whom the Commonwealth provides free medical'and hospital services.
Mr Baume-Three million people.
Mr MacKENZIE-Three million people indeed. Yet Mr Stewart has the hide to say that only a few will be provided with free health care by the Commonwealth.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
House adjourned at 10.29 p.m.
NOTICES The following notices were given:
Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act to amend 'laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Mr Nixon to present a Bill for an Act to provide penalties for certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
Mr Nixon to present a Bill for an Act to amend section 50 of the Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Mr Nixon to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.

Answers to Questions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1125 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Treasury: Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons
(Question No. 465)
Mr Holding asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) In view of the fact that 1981 is designated as the International Year of Disabled Persons, what special arrangements has his Department made to assist disabled persons.
(2) Do any special arrangements made include (a) increased employment of disabled persons and (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building or other facility occupied by his Department; if so, what are the details.
(3) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to facilitate any special arrangements for disabled perso'ns in his Department.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given to Question No. 458 (Hansard, 10 June 1981) by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister. I have nothing further to add with respect to my Department.
Petroleum Products: Use by the Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 680)
Mr Bradfield asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 4 March 1981:
What was the total usage of petroleum products (a) by product and (b) by volume by his Department for the years (i) 1978-79 and (ii) 1979-80 and what is the estimated consumption for 1980-81.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed that the Minister for National Development and Energy is providing a co-ordinated answer to this question and similar questions asked of other Ministers.
Bushfires: Commonwealth Expenditure
(Question No. 811)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representingthe Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
What sum was expended by the Commonwealth, either unilaterally or jointly with the States, in (a) the matter of fighting bush fires and (b) compensation paid for loss, damage and destruction occasioned by bush fires in each State for each of the last 10 years.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(a) Details of certain expenditures incurred by the Defence Forces in fighting bushfires sinc.e 1977 are given below. Figures relate to costs associated with equipment running expenses such as fuel and maintenance, and do not lherefore represent full equipment costs or relate to manpower expenses.

1977 1978 1979 1980

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia

$ 10,956
128 120

$ 14 19,800
4,515

$ 76,147
78

$ 34,006
39,476 154 241

11,204 24,329 76,225 73,877

Note: Figures for earlier year are not available.
State expenditure on fighting bushfires is generally not eligible for Commonwealth assistance under the natural disaster relief arrangements. On some isolated occasions in the past, such expenses have been included as a special measure but, for reasons given in previous Answers to Questions on Notice (see part (2) of my reply to Question No. 1001, Hansard, 20 August 1981, p. 676), the Commonwealth's contribution to expenditure on this specific measure can not be readily identified.
(b) The Commonwealth has from time to time paid compensation arising out of common law claims for damage caused by bushfires in the States. While comprehensive information is not readily available, records indicate that the following payments were made, in respect of bushfires occurring in the years shown, over the last 10 years:
YEAR OF BUSH FIRE

1972 1975 1977 1979 1980 1981

$

$

$

$

$

$

New South Wales Victoria Tasmania

1,800

3,631

3,98.6.

1,760 6,317

.. 3,241

238

Queensland

7,000

1,068

Note: The above figures do not include legal costs of claimants which were paid in some cases by the Commonwealth.

Brown Coal
(Question No. 963)
Mr Cunningham asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the substantial export potential of a number of brown coal development proposals currently under investigation for the Latrobe Valley by the Victorian Government and interested private developers.
(2) If so, is the Government prepared to encourage an early start on these nationally significant projects by offering adequate Commonwealth financial assistance to State and local government authorities for the provision of all necessary transport infrastructure associated with these developments, including local roads, railway and port facilities.
(3) If the Government is prepared to offer assistance, ~hat will be the form a_od timin!! of this offer.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's qu()stion is as follows:
(I> Yes.
(2) and (3) The major responsibility for the provision of such infrastructure lies with the State Government which has

1126 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Answers to Questions

large amounts of untied funds available to it under Loan
Council programs and from the Commonwealth ~udget.
However, although some public sector infrastructureis required to complement private development, the Government is of the view that more could b~ provided by the private sector itselF. For example, the private'sector has funded, constructed and owns coal loading facilities in New South Wales and Queensland and indications are that it is prepared to expand in this area.
To the extent that State and local authorities finance infrastructure (such as roads), the Government believes that the respective State Governments should set priilrities for allocating the funds available to them, including the substantial amounts made available by the Commonwealth.
Bauxite Royalty Rates.
(Question No. 1041)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Trade .and Resources, upon notice,on 2 April; 1981:
Is he able to say what is the )r~yalty rate on the production
and/or export of bauxite produced in-
(a) Australia (b) Brazil (c) the Dominican Republic (d) France (e) Ghana (f) Greece (g) Guinea (h) Guyana (i) Haiti (j) India (k) Indonesia (I) Jamaica (m) Malaysia (n) Sierra Leone (0) Suriname (p) The United States of America (q) Turkey
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
BAUXITE ROYALTY PROVISIONS IN MAJOR PRODUCING COUNTRIES
(a) Australia. There is no Commonwealth royalty imposed on the export of bauxite from Australia. Production royalties are a matter for State Governments. The cur-- rent rates are: (i) Queensland (Weipa) Two rates apply: (a) for consumption outside Queensland the royalty is the largest of: (i) $1 per tonne (ii) 10% of the F.O.B. price per tonne including royalty (iii) the rate decided by the formula R=$lxPI
P2 where
R is the rate of royalty expressed in dollars per tonne P I is the weighted average of the Alcan world price converted to $A for the 10 calendar years prior to shipment P2 is as for P I but for the 10 calendar years ended 31 December 1978 At present prices it is understood that the royalty under the formula equals $A 1.33 per tonne

(b) for consumption within Queensland the rate fixed in (a) above is halved
(ii) Northern Territory (Gove). Royalty rates are $AO.50 per long ton for exported bauxite and $A0.40 per long ton for treated bauxite.
(iii) Western Australia. All bauxite currently mined in WA. is refined in that State. Royalties are payable on alumina production rather than on bauxite production. Royalty payable is calculated by the formula R =$0.5 x P
500 where
R is the rate of royalty expressed in dollars per tonne of alumina produced P is the Alcan world aluminium price converted to $A
At current prices this rate is $A 1.52 per tonne of alumina. (b) Brazil. Royalty of 15% for internal consumption and 4% for export, based on mine gate value. (c) The Dominican Republic (i) Production levy per tonne calculated as follows: 7.5% x Alcan world aluminium price (US$) per
short ton
4.8
= US$24.81 per tonne at current metal prices (minimum levy US$15 per tonne)
(ii) Royalty of US$0.60 per long ton of dry bauxite exported. Total to be paid to the Government is reduced by the amount of income tax paid.
(d) France. Bauxite is not exported. Production incurs a royalty of FF43.92 per tonne but payment of the royalty entitles exemption from a considerably higher tax levied on all commercial enterprises.
(e) Ghana. A production levy of a maximum of 6% of gross proceeds, depending on the grade of bauxite.
(f) Greece. None. (g) Guinea. Export levies apply but vary according to proj-
ect. Levies are paid by the purchaser rather than the producing companies. In each case the Government participates directly to bauxite mining. (i) Sangaredi project. Export levy of 0.75% of Alcan's
world aluminium price, adjusted to the quality of the bauxite concerned. This levy currently equals USSJ3.13 per tonne of bauxite. (ii) OBK project. Fully State-owned. Export levy of 0.55% of Alcan's world aluminium price. This levy currently equals US$9.63 per tonne of bauxite. (h) Guyana. All bauxite operations are State-owned. (i) Haiti. A total arrangement as for the Dominican Republic but with a formula divisor of 4.49. Haiti's bauxite prog,uction levy currently equals US$26.10 per tonne. (j) India. Royalty of RS4 ($A0.42) per tonne (due for review soon). (k) Indonesia. No royalty exists as production is carried out by a Government owned company. Export duty of 10% of f.o.b. price of the bauxite. (I) Jamaica. Production levy of US$21.20 per tonne on base level production but under a complicated formula varies depending on production levels and metal prices. (m) Malaysia. No royalty. Export duty of 10% of F.o.b. price of the bauxite. (n) Sierra Leone. Royalty of US$0.30 per tonne.

Answers to Questions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1127

(o) Suriname. Production levy of 6% of Average Realised Price (ARP) of aluminium.

They levy is applied on a mine by mine basis and the

amount payable varies according to the quality of the

bauxite. Current levies are approximately US$23 per

tonne of bauxite.

-

In addition a royalty, ranging From US$0.50 to US$O. 56 per long ton, applies.

Other minor levies also apply.'

They levy is reduced by the amount of income taxes paid each year.

(p) the United States of America. Arkansas is the only producing State to impose any charge. No Federal royalty of any kind applies.

Arkansas applies a severance tax of US$0.15 per short wet ton.

(q) Turkey. A tax of 27 Liras ($AO.24) per tonne transported away From the mine area.

Applications for Discharge from Services
(Question No. 1050)

Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Defence,

upon notice, on 2 April 1981:

.

(I) If a member of the Services applies For a discharge From that Service on the grounds that continued enlistment would jeopardise that person's marriage and iF written confirmation by an authorised social worker accompanies such an application is it the Services' personnel management policy to reject the application For discharge.

(2) Is it the policy of the Services to reFuse applications For honourable discharge to persons who have consistently demonstrated their desire to leave the Service beFore their period of enlistment is completed.
(3) How many applications For honourable discharge have been lodged in the (a) Army, (b) Navy and (c) Air Force For each month since December 1975 and how many have been denied.
(4) What is the earliest age at which a person can enlist in the DeFence Services and what is the maximum period of enlistment.
(5) Based on available statistics, are persons enlisted at the minimum age and For t~e maximum period of service more likely to seek discharge beFore their period of enlistment is completed than older recruits.
Mr Killen-The ansWer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Each application For discharge on request For personal reasons is considered on its merits. Appropriate specialist comment from relevant sources, For example, psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers, welfare bodies, family doctors, chaplains and medical specialists is invariably sought. A secondary consideration is the manning implications and any possible consequential effects such as posting turbulence. The decision reached would be dependent on the relative inHuence of all these Factors.
(2) No.
(3) The table below summarises applications for discharge on request lodged since December 1975:

NAVY, ARMY, AIR FORCE: DISCHARGE AT OWN REQUEST JANUARY 1976-JUNE 1981

Navy

Army

Air Force

Period

lodged denied lodged denied lodged denied

January 76
February March April May
June July
August September October November
December January 77
February
March April May
June July August September October November December January 78 February
March April May June July August September

32

4

n.a.

n.a.

47

16

64

27

66

33

61

27

33

16

40

12

55

25

43

24

48

19

44

16

54

31

28

13

50

24

53

23

32

14

39

18

46

17

46

16

30

14

30

18

34

20

27

8

31

\3

27

10

36

14

45

17

30

9

51

15

31

12

33

15

34

\0

26

\0

I

I

3

I

4

0

3

2

4

I

2

I

4

2

3

I

2

2

I

I

3

2

I

I

I

I

4

2

3

2

4 I

4 3 4 I
3

1128 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Answers to Questions

Period
October November December January 79 February March April May June July August September October November December January 80 February March April May June July August September October November December January 81 February March April May June

Navy
lodged
28 47 27 34 50 41 16 55 25 35 40 21 38 23 28 16 26 33 28 25 22 29 22 31 28 20 20 14 18 36 24 37 28

Army

denied lodged

II

23

9

14

25

15

9

31

7

II

15

II

14

8

12

3

77

11

104

11

123

11

129

11

117

6

123

14

129

10

92

14

106

7

103

14

82

7

76

6

57

125

13

113

8

103

II

97

10

75

Air Force

denied lodged

I 3 3
2 2 I

2

4

3

14

7

2

11

17

1

38

5

47

3

51

6

34

9

37

7

27

12

26

5

35

6

21

6

14

11

22

7

13

2

20

4

16

2

13

3

16

10

9

5

denied
I 2 3 2 I I
3 2 7 3 2 5 1 4 3 4 8 5 10 2 5 5 10 6 2 2 I 3 9 3

Notes-
(1) Collection of Army data 1976-79 inclusive would require a manual search of thousands of individual dossiers.
(2) Differences between the Services in the number of applications lodged reflect the differing nature of each Service's role and hence the employment of its members. For example, frequent seagoing service in the Navy and field service in the Army involve family separation which can influence members' attitudes. Activities of this kind are limited in the Air Force.
(4) The earliest age at which a person can enlist in the Services is at 15 years which applies to apprentices. All Service apprentices are enlisted for 9 years;
(5) There are not statistics available to show whether members enlisted at the minimum age are more likely to seek premature discharge than members enlisted above the minimum age.
Departmental Air Travel: Department of Industrial Relations
(Question No. 1134)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(I) How many travel warrants have been issued for his department officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.

Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The Department of Industrial Relations was created on 5 December 1978. The information requested covering periods since that date is not readily available and I am not prepared to authorise the use of Departmental staff to compile the necessary figures.
Expenditure Commitments: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1210)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What specific commitments for expenditure, excluding normal recurring costs of running the Department such as salaries and administrative costs, does the Department of National Development and Energy have for (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
(3) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the fact that' when a similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining information would involve collection of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.

Answers to Questions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1129

(4) Has the development of forward estimates in the Department of National Development and Energy now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer valid.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the Minister for Finance's reply to Question No. 1216 which appeared in the House of Representatives Weekly Hansard for 10 June 1981 (Page 3551).
Expenditure Commitments: Department of Housing and Construction
(Question No. 1230)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) What specific commitments for expenditure, excluding normal recurring costs of running the Department such as salaries and administrative costs, does his Department have for (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that when a similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining the information would involve collection of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resO\1rces.
(4) Has the development of forward estimates in his Department now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer valid.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I) to (4) See the answer provided by the Minister for Finance to Question No. 1216, which appeared in Hansard of 10 June 1981.
Annual Reports and Other Publications: Department of Finance
(Question No. 1242)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) What annual n;ports are produced by the Department of Finance and authorities under the Minister's aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
(3) Are other regular publications issued by the Department of Finance and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has supplied the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) Annual reports and their cost for 1979-80 . were:
Department of Finance Annual Report, $1,090.
Superannuation Fund Investment Trust and Commissioner for Superannuation Ann\1al Rreport, $2,306.
Annual Report by the Commissioner for Superannuation on the General Administration and operation of the

Papua New Guinea Superannuation Scheme and the Contract Officers Retirement Benefits Scheme, $192.
(3) No regular publications other than the annual reports listed above are issued by the Department of Finance, though the Department is responsible in whole or in part for the preparation of various doucments presented in conjunction with the annual Budget.
Employment of Private Consultants: Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 1265)
Mr Bungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80; if so, (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Details of consultants engaged by the Department of the Treas\1ry in 1979-80 follow:
(a) (i) Two.
(b) (i) Mrs K. Trotter; (ii) Dr B. Stone & Associates.
(c) (i) To conduct advanced technical word processing training for managers; (ii) To conduct a management course.
(d) (i) $336.00; (ii) $735.15
Details of consultants engaged by the Australian Financial System Inquiry in 1979-80 follow:
(a) (i) Three.
(b) (i) Professor M. G. Porter, Monash University; (ii) Dr P. Swan, Australian National University; (iii) Professor R. R. Officer, Monash University.
(c) (i) To prepare a report on the technical aspects of the monetary targeting approach to the implementation cf monetary policy; (ii) To prepare a report on the theoretical aspects of business taxation; (iii) To prepare a report on the company finance aspects of business taxation.
(d) (i) $14,018.80 (includes $12,518.80 costs); (ii) $2,681.07 (includes $181.07 costs); (iii) $2,818.88 (includes $318.88 costs).
Superannuation Liability of Statutory Authorities under the Treasurer
(Question No. 1317)
Mr Bungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 April1981:
(I) What statutory authorities under his aegis have liabilities to the Commonwealth by way of employer contributions for superannuation which have not been paid or which have not yet been determined.
(2) If these contributions have not been paid, what are the amounts involved and how and when is payment to be made.
(3) If the contributions have not yet been determined, when is the liability expected to be assessed and how is payment expected to be made.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) My colleague, the Minister for Finance, is preparing a consolidated response to this question and similar questions asked of all Ministers.

1130 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Answers to Questions

Industrial Action: Department of the Treasury
, (Question No. 1369)
Mr Bungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) How many officers or employees in his Department have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions, In each of the last two years.
(2) How many man hours were involved in these actions. (3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; If so, on what occasions. (4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken In respect of officers or employees on go slo}\" work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 1979-80: Treasury, including the offices of the Insurance Commissioner, Life Insurance Commissioner and Australian Government Actuary: (a) 18; (b) Nil.
Royal Australian Mint: See answer to Question No. 1372 (Hansard, 10 June 1981) asked of the Minister for Finance.
1980-81: Treasury, including the offices of the Insurance Commissioner, Life Insurance Commissioner and Australian Government Actuary: (a) 59; (b) Nil.
Royal Australian Mint for the period from 3 September 1980 (when the Royal Australian Mint became the responsibility of the Treasurer) until 30 June 1981: (a) 61; (b) The following instances involved restrictive work actions:
3-15 September 1980 (9 days)-ban placed on late lunch hours and ban on repairing selected machinery.
13-25 November 1980 (9 days)-overtime duty banned. 14-25 November 1980 (8 days)-bans placed on repair of selected machinery. 20 March 1981-selective work bans imposed. Note: The number of officers actually participating in these restrictive work actions cannot be readily identified. (2) 1979-80: Treasury: 44 hours. Royal Australian Mint: See answer to Question 1372 asked of the Minister for Finance. 1980-81: Treasury: 316 hours. Royal Australian Mint: 44.174 hours. (3) Nil. (4) Disciplinary actions under the Public Service Act were not taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions. On two occasions, when tradesmen employed at the Royal Australian Mint refused to perform their normal duties, action was taken under section 32A of the Public Service Act. The first occasion was on 24 March 1981, when two tradesmen were directed to undertake their normal duties. As a result of giving the directions, the tradesmen walked off the job together with other tradesmen who are members of the Australasian Society of Engineers. The second occasion, on 12 June, 1981, resulted in the provisions of section 32A of the Public Service Act being applied to a tradesman employed at the Royal Australian Mint, who refused to perform his normal duties.

Head Office, Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 1493)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) Arc any sections of the Heud Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. Melbourne: Trade Publicity Brunch-57 people Sydney: A section of the Trade Publicity Branch-3
people (2) Decisions to relocate units of Government employment to Canberra are taken by Government on the advice of the Location of Australian Government Employment Committee (LAGE), an inter.departmental committee chaired by the Public Service Board. The advice tendered to Government by the LAGE Committee is based on submissions by the relevant Department, and consultations with interested bodies such as staff organisations. Any plans to relocate the sections in Canberra are a matter for LAGE consideration and subsequent decision by Government.
Vehicle Conversion to LPG Usage: Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 1551)
Mr Bungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many (a) cars. (b) commercial vehicles and (c) trucks were being operated by his Department, excluding vehicles supplied by the Department of Administrative Services, as at 30 June 1980.
(2) How many of these vehicles had been (a) converted to liquified petroleum gas usage and (b) purchased already equipped for LPG usage.
(3) Have plans been made to increase the use of LPG in vehicles operated by his Department; if so, what are the details.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) Nil, (b) nil, (c) nil. (2) (a) Not applicable, (b) not applicable. (3) Not applicable.
Vehicle Conversion to LPG Usage: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 1564)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 : .
(I) How many (a) cars, (b) commercial vehicles and (c) trucks were being operated by his Department. excluding ,vehicles supplied by the Department of Administrative Services, as at 30 June 1980.
(2) How many of these vehicles had been (a) converted to liquified petroleum gas usage and (b) purchased already equipped for LPG usage.

Answers to Questions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1131

(3) Have plans been made to increase use of LPG in vehicles operated by his Department; if so, what are the details.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Nil.
(2) Not applicable.
(3) Not applicable.
Tea Services: Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 1603)
Mr Bungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many (a) full-time and (b) part-time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his Department in 1979-80.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The following information relates to staff employed in the financial year 1979-80:

(I) (a) (i) 3; (ii) I; (b) (i) nil; (ii) nil;
(2) (a) $32,594.85; (b) $229.78.
For further information I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1615 provided by the Minister for Administrative Services on 10 June 1981 (Hansard. page 3481).
Production of Documents
(Question No. 1672)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What statutory authorities or officers are empowered to direct production of documents, files, papers, etc., relating to their inquiries.
(2) What penalties are provided in each case for failure or refusal to produce the material.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's questions:
Insofar as the questions relate to statutory authorities and officers within my portfolio the information sought is as set out below. Powers exercised by or on behalf of Courts have been treated as outside the contemplation of the questions.

Statutory Authority or Officer

Statutory Provision

Nature of Requirement

Penalty for failure or refusal

Registrar or a Deputy Registrar, Security
Appeals Tribunal

Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979, Subsection 70 (2)

May summon a person to appear before the Tribunal to give evidence and to produce
documents

Section 75 provides, inter alia, for a penalty of $500 or imprisonment for 3 months

Chief, Police, Stipendiary, Resident or
Special Magistrate of a Territory or, in cer-
tain circumstances, of a State

Commonwealth Prisoners Act 1967, subsection 12 (2)

May summon a person to appear before him to give evidence and to produce documents and articles

$100

A Member of the Human Rights Commission

Human Rights Commission Act 1981, section 15

Where the Commission has reason to believe a person is capable of producing documents relevant to a matter under examination or
inquiry, may, by notice in writing require that person to produce any such documents
to the Commission or to a prescribed person

$1,000

Chairman, Parole Board
of the Australian Capital Territory

Parole Ordinance 1976, section 12

Has the same powers as if he were the Chair-
man of a Board of Enquiry appointed under the Enquiry Ordinance 1938

Section 9 of the Enquiry Ordinance 1938 provides that any person failing to produce
documents relevant to
an enquiry without reasonable excuse
shall be guilty of an offence-penalty $100

Registrar of Marriages

Marriage Regulations made under the Marriage Act 1961, regu-
lation 75

May require an authorized marriage celebrant to return any books, documents, forms or
other papers for use in connection with the
solemnisation of marriage

$100

Administrative Tribunal

Appeals

Administrative. Appeals Tribunal Act 1975, section 38

May order a person whose decision is under review by the Tribunal to lodge an additional statement or statements containing further and better particulars

$1,000 or imprisonment for 3 months

Registrar or Deputy Registrar of the AAT
acting under the direction of the presiding member of the Tribunal

Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975,
section 40

May summon a person to appear before the Tribunal and to produce documents

$1,000 or imprisonment for 3 months

1132 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Answers to Questions

Statutory Authority or Officer

Statutory Provision

Nature of Requirement

Renalty for failure or refusal

Courts Martial Appeals Courts Martial Appeals May summon a person to produce documents, Warrant for apprehen-

Tribunal

Act 1955, section 31

books or writings

sion for failure to

attend in accordance

with summons; $200

or imprisonment for 3

months for failure to

produce document etc

Chairman of the DisciLegal Practitioners OrdiMay summon a person to attend a disciplinary $100

plinary Committee of nance 1970, section 32 inquiry and to produce books or documents

the Law Society of the

Australian Capital

Territory

Examiner appointed by Legal Practitioners OrdiMay require a solicitor whose records are $1,000

the Law Society of the nance 1970, section 67 being examined to produce books, papers,

Australian Capital

accounts, registers of receipts, securities and

Territory to examine

documents in his possession relating to trust

the records of trust

monies received or paid by him

monies kept by a sol-

icitor

President or Secretary of Legal Practitioners OrdiMay require the manager or other person in $250

the Law Society of the nance 1970, subcharge of a bank to permit an examiner

Australian Capital section 67 (2)

appointed by the Law Society to inspect and

Territory

make copies of documents of records of the

bank relating to a trust bank account kept

by the solicitor and solicitors whose records

are being examined

Attorney-General

Section 30AB, Crimes If the Attorney-General believes that any per- $200 or imprisonment

Act

son has in his possession any information or for 6 months

documents relating to an unlawful associ-

ation, he may require the person, or in the

case of a corporation, any person holding a

specified office in the corporation, to answer

questions, furnish information and allow in-

spection of documents belonging to or in the

possession of the person or corporation

which relate to certain specified trans-

actions, payments, money, property or

funds

Quarantine: Baggage Inspection
(Question No. 1697)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Further to the answer to Question No. 701 (Hansard, 8 June 1978, page 3377) was any further action taken on the recommendation made by the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet in its review of Australian quarantine arrangements that the plant and animal quarantine functions for baggage inspection be merged?
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Under long-standing arrangements, many animal and plant quarantine functions at Australian ports of entry are undertaken on the Commonwealth's behalf by State Departments of Agriculture or their equivalent. Internal organisational arrangements for their performance are matters for the States concerned. To date, States have preferred, for various reasons, to maintain separate animal and plant quarantine personnel to support the baggage inspection function at major ports.
However, an organisationally integrated Agricultural Health Service was implemented by the Northern Territory Government in 1979 following. the introduction of self government and this provides, inter alia, merged animal and plant quarantine services relating to baggage inspections

undertaken at Darwin airport. Operational experience with this arrangement will allow appropriate comparisons to be made with the systems which have traditionally operated at major ports of entry elsewhere in Australia.
International Banking
(Question No. 1929)
Mr Howe asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the study 'Financial Disorder and International Banking' by Jack Guttentag and Richard Herring predicting a crisis in international banking caused by large-scale defaults in repayments by the oil importing countries of the Third World, whose debts now total $500 billion.
(2) If so, is he able to say whether any contingency plans have been made by major international organisations to deal with such a major shock to the world banking system.
(3) What is his attitude to the seriousness of this alleged potential crisis.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The problem of the external indebtedness of developing countries has received much attention in the past few years and especially since the second round of large increases in oil prices. I have not seen the study quoted by the honourable

Answers to Questions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1133

member, but the problem has been well documented in other places. I refer for instance to Occasional Paper No.3 of the International Monetary Fund, 'Exter'nal Indebtedness of Developing Countries', May 1981.
(2) Policy questions related to developments in the debt situation of deficit nations are kept under continuing review by the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and by several other international organisations. The IMF and IBRD have in recent years taken measures to improve the access of member countries, including developing countries, to their resources. These include increased drawing entitlements and longerterm financing in the IMF, sale of part of the IMF's gold holdings, and interest subsidy accounts, for the specific benefit of developing country members, and the introduction of structural adjustment lending in the IBRD.
(3) The debt situation of the oil importing developing countries could potentially involve serious implications for the international financial system. However, the present situation is by no means unmanageable, for several reasons. First, when allowance is made for inflation or when debt or debt servicing obligations of the developing nations are related to indicators of those countries' abilities to pay (e.g. exports or measures of national product), the dimensions of the problem, while considerable, are put in a more appropriate prespective. Second, while there have been instances of debt servicing difficulties, the process of recycling funds to nations experiencing enlarged current account deficits has in general proceeded quite effectively. Third, there is growing recognition-in both debtor countries and in the financial institutions whose lending to such countries has expanded rapidly-that there are potential problems which require adjustment of domestic economic policies. In a growing number of cases this has required temporary financing from the IMF related to implementation of economic policy packages agreed with the IMF.
Overall, while individual oil-importing developing countries will probably continue to experience severe debt problems, the major international organisations are taking ameliorating action to assist those countries to maintain essential development programs while adjusting to changed international circumstances. The importance of appropriate adjustment policies by the oil-importing countries themselves is better appreciated, and the problem, while serious, has not yet taken on the proportions of a crisis. Indeed, there has been some recent stabilisation in the oil market, and this improvement could be maintained if adjustment policies are pursued by all oil-importing countries, developed as well as developing.
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment: Advocacy of Income Splitting
(Question No. 1947)
Mr Hurford asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :
(I) Can he say whether the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, since being appointed to the Ministry, has repeated his advocacy of income splitting for taxation purposes as a means of helping women instead of the Australian Labor Party's policy of better spouse rebates and increased family allowances.
(2) If so, can he also say whether the Minister has also stated during the same period that there would be significant benefits for low income families in income splitting.
(3) Would splitting a taxable income of (a) $5,000 effect a taxation saving of less than $6 per week, (b) $10,000 effect a taxation saving of less than $23 per week and (c) $30,000 effect a taxation saving of $59.22 per week if an upward

adjustment to taxation rates to compensate for lost revenue were ignored.
(4) If the position is as stated in part (3), is he able to say upon what facts the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment bases the statement referred to in part (2).
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I am aware of certain views on income splitting for taxation purposes which the honourable Minister for Home Affairs and Environment expressed on this subject prior to his entering the Ministry, but I am not aware of any additional comment which he may have made on this subject since then.
(3) The weekly tax savings from income splitting would depend on the form of income splitting and on the amounts of income derived by husband and wife.
(4) See answers to (I), (2) and (3). I would also refer the honourable member to the many published articles by the honourable Minister, and his speeches as reported in Hansard, on this subject.
I add that in response to what it regarded as a lack of balance in the tax system in respect of single income families, the Government increased the maximum rebate for a dependent spouse by 34 per cent from $597 to $800 for the 1980-81 income year and that, as a result of half-indexation, there will be a further increase to $830 for 1981-82.

Canberra Convention Centre
(Question No. 2110)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:

(I) Is it a fact that private enterprise developers have (a)
shown an interest in and (b) put forward a number of proposals for the development of the Canberra Convention Centre; if so, can he say why these developers have not
proceeded with the development.

(2) Why is the centre not proceeding and for how long
will this project be deferred (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1838).

(3) How many jobs would be made available by this project, both during construction and on completion.

Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) and (2) Submissions closing I December 1980 were invited from private enterprise developers interested in build-
ing a complex containing a convention centre/international hotel and major office complex. Three submissions were received and considered by an Interdepartmental Committee.
Each of the submissions envisaged substantial Common-
wealth assistance in one form or another.

In the recent Report on the Review of Commonwealth
Functions, it was announced that development of a convention centre would be deferred indefinitely.

In recent weeks there have been indications of some

interest by private enterprise in renewing discussions in the

matter.

.

(3) Employment for between 300-400 would have been
provided directly during the construction phase if any of the earlier development prop9sals had gone ahead. The number of full-time jobs that would have been available in the conven-
tion centre and hotel is of the order of 300.

1134 REPRESENTATIVES 9 Septe~ber 1981

Answers to Questions

Buoyancy Vests
(Question No. 2157)
Mr Kent asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that a large number of owners of small boats in Australia use buoyancy vests that are imported from the United States of America.
(2) Is he able to say whether most Australian States require buoyancy vests to be approved and marked according to the Australian Standard 1499 and that persons carrying buoyancy vests that do not carry the Standards mark are infringing the law and can be prosecuted.
(3) Is it a fact thill the American vests do not carry the Australian Standards mark and that they are marked with imperial rather than metric measurements.
(4) Will he take action to rid the Australian market of these imported buoyancy vests in order to protect consumers in future; if so, what action will he take.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am aware that buoyancy vests are being imported from the United States of America. Information is not available on the number of owners of small boats in Australia using these vests.
(2) Buoyancy vests may be used for a variely of purposes including such activities as boating, sailing, water skiing, fishing, marine construction and bridge building. Not all of these activities are regulated by legislation. I am advised that there are requirements concerning the cartying of buoyancy vests in State and Territory boating legislation administered by various harbour and marine board and police authorities around Australia, but that there are variations in that legislation as to whether the buoyancy vests are to meet the requirements of the Australian Standard A.S. 1499-1979, be marked with the Standards Association of Australia certification mark or be'of an approved type.
(3) Buoyancy vests manufactured to meet the requirements of A.S. 1499-1979 are to be marked with certain information including the intended body mass range that the vest has been designed to support. The body mass ranges specified in A.S. 1499-1979 are in metric terms. Vests manufactured to meet US. requirements show the body mass range in imperial terms-
(4) As Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, I can initiate action to prohibit the supply of certain unsafe consumer products under the Trade Practices Act. Similar action can be taken to ban unsafe imports under the Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations. If clear evidence is made available to me that unsafe buoyancy vests are coming onto the Australian market, I will take appropriate action.
Participation in Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting: Department of National
Development and Energy
(Question No. 2166)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(I) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division and (c) 4th Division officers in the Department of National Development and Energy are engaged (i) full time or (ii) part time in administrative policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.

(2) How many officers of the Department are'expected to

attend the meeting.

'

(3) What is the expected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel and'other expenses.

(4) What other expenses does the Minister expect the Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the meeting.

Mr Anthony-:-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

I refer the honourable member to the Prime Minister's
reply to Question No. 2162 which appeared in the House of Representative's Weekly Hansard for 10 June 1981 (Pages
3560-61).

Participation in Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting: Department of the
Treasury
(Question No. 2169)
Mr Hayden asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(I) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division and (c) 4th Division officers of his Department are engaged (i) full time or (ii) partime in administrative, policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.
(2) How many officers of his Department are expected to attend the meeting.
(3) What is the expected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel and other expenses.
(4) What other expenses does he expect his Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the meeting.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The number of Treasury officers involved in matters relating to the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting has tended to vary depending on the nature of the policy issues which have arisen. However, as a guide, two Second Division officers and three Third Division officers have had fairly regular involvement, on a part-time basis, in preparations for the meeting.
(2) The question of Treasury representation at the meeting has not yet been decided.
(3) See (2) above.
(4) None.

Participation in Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting: Department of Aboriginal
Affairs
(Question No. 2185)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(1) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division and (c) 4th Division officers in the Department of Aboriginal Affairs are engaged (i) full time or (ii) part time in administrative policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.

Answers to Questions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1135

(2) How many officers of the Department are expected to attend the meeting.
(3) What is the expected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel and other expenses.
(4) What other expenses does the Minister expect the Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the meeting.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) None.
(3) and (4) Nil.
Participation in Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting: Department of Housing
and Construction
(Question No. 2186)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(1) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division and (c) 4th Division officers in ~is Department are engaged (i) full time or (ii) part time in administrative, policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.
(2) How many officers of his Department are expected to attend the meeting.
(3) What is the expected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel and other expenses.
(4) What other expenses does he expect his Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the meeting.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) See the answer provided by the Prime Minister to Question No. 2162.
The Department of Housing and Construction currently has two 2nd Division officers, fourteen 3rd Division officers and five 4th Division officers engaged part time, and one 3rd Division officer engaged full time on physical building preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting.
(2) & (3) Nil. However officers of the Department of Housing and Construction may be required to service any unforeseen matters related to the physical facilities.
(4) The Department's current estimate of cost for project management, design, contract adminmistration and supervision services is $310,000. This amount includes $125,000 for design services by private practitioners.
The Department's overall estimate for physical building work is $1.5m.
Social Security: Disadvantaged Persons
(Question No. 2244)
Mr Mildren asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 12May 1981:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the fact that approximately one million Australians will be classified as being disadvantaged under the definition contained in the latest health system proposal.

(2) Will the increased work load required to issue cards indentifying persons as disadvantaged, impose further work upon an already hard-pressed workforce.
(3) Will this increased work load require an increase in the Department of Social Security workforce; if so, what is the estimated increase required.
(4) How will the Minister ensure that the process of classifying persons as disadvantaged will not be an affront to their dignity.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) & (3) The new arrangements will result in an increased work load in the Department of Social Security. The Public Service Board has agreed to an extra 660 staff being employed over the initial period of the scheme to enable the extra workload to be met.
(4) The scheme has been designed to ensure that people regard participation as a right. People in receipt of unemployment or special benefit will not be required to lodge a separate application for a Health Care card, the card being supplied automatically on the basis of information already provided in connection with their claims for benefit. In the case of migrants and refugees, eligibility will not be subject to income limits. It will be necessary for other people to lodge an application giving details of their income.
The procedures to establish entitlement have been made as simple as possible and could not reasonably be construed as an affront to a person's dignity.
Glue Sniffing
(Question No. 2266)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the prevalence of the practice of glue sniffing amongst adolescent children in Australia.
(2) If so, has he (a) caused any research to be carried out on the extent of the improper use of this substance and (b) taken action through the National Health and Medical Research Council to require labels on glue containers to carry a warning concerning the detrimental effects associated with the use of the substance as a narcotic.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes, I am aware of the prevalence of glue sniffing in Australia.
(2) (a) No, but my Department is constantly monitoring reports on this problem; and
(b) the 1'Iational Health and Medical Research Council has recommended in its Uniform Poisons Standard, which is used as a basis by the States and Territories for their poisons legislation, that the following warning statements be included in the label of formulations containing those substances subject to abuse:
'Avoid contact with skins and eyes and avoid breathing its dust (or vapour).'
Committees of the Council have this problem constantly under review and at present consideration is being given to whether additional statements are required. The major problem is that highlighting potential hazards can be counterproductive by drawing attention to products and facilitatingabuse.

1136 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Answers to Questions

Australian Government Centre in Parramatta, New South Wales
(Question No. 2268)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:
(I) Have any decisions been taken by the Government concerning the proposal to construct an Australian Government Centre in Parramatta, New South Wales; if so, what are the details.
(2) If the Government has not yet reached a decision, is the proposal under active consideration; if so, when is a decision likely.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) The future of the Parramatta site is under consideration in the context of the overall review of Commonwealth landholdings as announced by the Prime Minister on 30 April 1981 in his statement on the Review of Commonwealth Functions:Because of the wide ranging nature of the review it is not possible at this stage to indicate when a decision will be taken.
Bank Mergers
(Question No. 2326)
Mr Hurford asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
( I) Is it a fact that by allowing the possible mergers of the National Bank with the Commercial Banking Company of Sydney and the Bank of New South Wales with the Commercial Bank of Australia, competition amongst banks will be reduced.
(2) Will these mergers be depressing, if not detrimental, to the persons and companies who rely on banks for funds, in particular small businesses, whose needs are relatively modest and whose leverage is relatively slight as a consequence.
(3) Will this also result in reduced employment prospects in the banking sector, with special adverse effects for country people and those living in regional centres where job opportunities are already few.
(4) If so, do these factors constitute sufficiently strong national interest considerations which would allow him reasonably to withhold his consent to the mergers.
(5) If these factors are not sufficiently strong to make him withdraw his assent to the possible mergers, will he seek to amend the Banking Act to ensure that these important considerations do constitute reasonable grounds for refusing any mergers.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (5) The honourable member will be aware that I gave my consent to the two merger proposals he mentions under section 63 of the Banking Act 1959 on IS June 1981. I refer the honourable member to the statement. I issued at that time, which canvasses the issues he has raised.
Foreign Banks in Australia
(Question No. 2327)
Mr Hurford asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(I) Has it been suggested that a motive for the possible mergers of the National Bank with the Commercial Banking Company of Sydney and of the Bank of New South Wales

with the Commercial Bank of Australia is an expectation by local banks of increased and fierce competition in the near future form foreign banks.
(2) Is it a fact that the Government could announce now that it will not allow the entry of foreign banks into the mainstream Australian banking system whatever the recommendation on this subject by the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System.
(3) Will the Government make this announcement at the same time as refusing consent for the mergers so that the fears of Australian banks that foreigners will be allowed into the system to take an easy profit will be removed and there will be no decline in the branch banking services offered to small customers in the present system.
(4) Have his announcements given the strong impression that he will not refuse consent for the mergers with the result that investors have been encouraged to go ahead and facilitate the mergers, with consequent adverse effects on employment and banking services particularly for small businesses.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am aware that such suggestions have been made by some commentators.
(2), (3) and (4) The honourable member will be aware that I gave my consent to the two merger proposals he mentioned under section 63 of the Banking Act 1959 on IS June 1981. Before doing so, I discussed with the Chairman of the Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System whether it would be possible to accelerate that part of the Committee's report dealing with competition in the banking system so that the Government might have before it that section of the report at the time the decision was taken on the two merger proposals. For reasons particularly related to the interdependence of various sections of the report, the Chairman informed me that he did not think it practicable to report separately on that aspect of the Inquiry. I fully understand his reasons for that conclusion.
More generally, the Government will be considering the recommendations and supporting argumentation of the Inquiry, including in respect of foreign bank entry, on their merits when the Inquiry's report is received.
Bank Mergers
(Question No. 2343)
Dr Jenkins asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
Will he, in making his decisions on banking mergers, have regard to (a) existing drastic cuts in banking facilities in rural areas and (b) the necessity for retention and restoration of adequate rural banking facilities.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The honourable member will be aware that my consent under section 63 of the Banking Act 1959 to the amalgamations proposed between the Bank of New South Wales and the Commercial Bank of Australia Limited and between The National Bank of Australasia Limited and the Commercial Banking Company of Sydney Limited was given on IS June 1981. The question of banking services, including in rural areas, was taken into account in the Government's consideration of this matter. I refer the honourable member to the public statement. I issued at the time.

Answers to Questions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1137

Shipbuilding Board

(Question No. 2352)

Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 28 May 1981:

(I) What consultation with shipbuilders and shipbuilding unions was conducted by the Government prior to the decision being taken to abolish the Shipbuilding Board (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1846)

(2) What were the views expressed by these interested parties

(3) What Government-industry consultation mechanisms will be established to replace the Board.

Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) During last year there were consultations at their request between myself and representatives of the Australian
Council of Trade Unions Shipbuilding Committee. Informal
discussions were' also conducted between officers of the Department of Industry and Commerce and shipbuilders.

(2) The Australian Council of Trade Unions Shipbuilding Committee acknowleded that under the new simplified shipbuilding bounty scheme introduced in July 1980 the Australian Shipbuilding Board would eventually become redundant. The Committee believed the Board should be replaced by an Advisory Council. Shipbuilders have not indicated concern about the abolition of the Board.

(3) the Council relevant to shipbuilding is the Machinery

and Metal Fabrication Industries Advisory Council.

.

Loans to the Australian Wheat Board
(Question No. 2362)
Mr Kerin asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 May 1981:
(I) What was the interest rate charged by the Rural Credits Department of the Reserve Bank of Australia on loans to the Australian Wheat Board prior to the March 1981 increase in the RCD rate.
(2) What was the equivalent commercial rate at this time.
(3) What was the interest rate gap used to determine the subsidy to be paid under the Wheat Board interest subsidy scheme.
(4) Following the March 1981 increase in the RCD interest rate, what was (a) the RCD rate charged to the Australian Wheat Board. (AWB), (b) the equivalent commercial rate and (c) the interest rate gap used to determine the subsidy.
(5) What is the percentage point difference between the interest rate gap which existed prior to the March 1981 increase in the RCD rate and the gap which existed on 30 April 1981.
(6) What changes have there been in the RCD rate, and the commercial rate, since March 1981 and how does this affect the Government's announced policy of reducing the interest rate subsidy to the AWB by one per cent.
(7) If the gap has not yet been reduced by one percentage point, what action will be taken to adjust the gap to achieve this reduction as announced by the Prime Minister on 30 April 1981 (Hansard, page 1847).
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The interest rate on RCD loans applicable to the Australian Wheat Board between 8 December 1980 and 26 March 1981 was 10.5 per cent per annum.

(2) The Australian Wheat Board's commercial borrowings are obtained almost wholly through the issue of bank bills and promissory notes. The cost of each issue is set by reference to the bank bill rate available in the market on the day of issue plus a margin. In the three months period prior to the March increase in RCD rates, bank bill and promissory note rates paid by the Wheat Board were in the range of 12.1 per cent pa to 15.95 per cent pa.
(3) Under the provisions of the Wheat Marketing Act 1979 the Commonwealth reimburses the Australian Wheat Board for the difference between the cost of commercial borrowings and the cost if those borrowings had been obtained from RCD. Each drawdown and rollover of Wheat Board bills and notes on any particular day normally involves the issue of a mix of bank bills and promissory notes for different amounts and maturities at different rates of interest. The amount of the reimbursement is calculated separately for each individual issue on the basis of the difference between the amount of interest paid on each individual issue and the amount of interest that would have been paid if that issue had been financed from RCD. Interest rate differentials are not recorded since payments of subsidy are calculated on the basis of amounts of interest paid.
(4) (a) The interest rate on RCD loans applicable to the Australian Wheat Board was increased on 26 March 1981 to 11.5 per cent per annum, on 15 May 1981 to 12.25 per cent per annum and on 22 June 1981 to 13.25 per cent per annum.
(b) Between the 26 March increase in RCD rates and 30 June 1981, bank bill and promissory note rates paid by the Wheat Board have been in the range of 14.85 per cent pa to 16.9 per cent pa.
(c) Seeanswerto (3).
(5) See answer to (3).
(6) In my answer to questions 4 (a) and 4 (b) I detailed the changes in RCD interest rates and bank bill rates since the March RCD interest rate increase. The Reserve Bank has the statutory responsibility to determine RCD interest rates, although the practice has been established for the Treasurer of the day to be consulted. As part of this consultative process, I formally conveyed to the Governor of the Reserve Bank on 27 May 1981 the Government's decision on 15 April 1981 that the differential between the interest rate on commercial borrowings by the Australian Wheat Board and the rate charged for advances to the Board by the Rural Credits Department of the Reserve Bank should be reduced by one percentage point. The decision to increase RCD interest rates on 22 June 1981 which was taken by the Reserve Bank, took into account the Government's decision.
(7) See answer to (6).
Carpentaria Light Vessel: Replacement
(Question No. 2366)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 28 May 1981:
(I) What was the cost of the study conducted by Posford Pavry Ltd in the matter of a replacement for the Carpentaria light vessel.
(2) When was the study completed.
(3) What recommendations were made by Posford Pavry.
(4) Has his Department accepted the recommendation; if not, why not.
(5) Has Transport Australia undertaken any studies into the relative cost of light vessels and of fixed structures as an alternative to light vessels; if so, what were the conclusions of these studies and will he table the reports of these studies in the House.

1138 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Answers to Questions

(6) Are there any contractual arrangements between the AGA Ltd, company and Transport Australia regarding ligHt vessels; if so, were these arrangements negotiated before the previous Director of Navigational Aids resigned to work for the AGA company.
(7) What has been the value of orders and contracts placed with the AGA company by the lighthouse service in each of the last 10 years.
(8) What proportion of the manufactured goods purchased by the service does this represent.
(9) What is the value of capital goods purchased by Transport Australia from the AGA company that remain in store and what is the average age of the items.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The cost of the study carried out by the engineering consultants Posford, Pavry, Sinclair and Knight was $50,000.
(2) The final report was submitted in December 1978.
(3) The principal recommendation of the study was that the replacement for the Carpentaria Shoal light vessel should be an unmanned fixed structure equipped for automatic operation.
(4) The principal recommendation made by the consultants was not accepted.
The consultants stated that a light vessel would not meet the Department's standard with respect to both the luminous and geographic range. Since the consultants' report was prepared, a light vessel has been developed, and proved in service, which meets this standard.
The consultants' report suggested that if a fixed structure were placed at Carpentaria Shoal, it might reduce the navigational dependence on the Booby Island station to a degree where this station could be unmanned. On this basis, in their economic analysis, the consultants added in to the costs of the light vessel option costs associated with the manning of the Booby Island station. The question of manning the Booby Island station is however entirely separate from the issue of deciding the type of replacement aid for Carpentaria Shoal.
The consultants based their analysis on two new light vessels being required, the vessels being exchanged at the station site at periodic intervals. The Government is proposing that only one light vessel be purchased for Carpentaria Shoal, and that the new vessel will be relieved for periodical short maintenance periods by an existing light vessel.
(5) No detailed studies have been carried out by the Department of Transport on the relative costs of light vessels and fixed structures in general. In this particular case the consultants' report was examined in depth. This examination revealed that use of a new light vessel on Carpentaria Shoal would be the most economical approach.
(6) There is no contractual arrangement between the Department and AGA for the construction of light vessels. A $2.4m contract was placed with an Australian shipbuilding company in June 1981 for the supply of two light vessels. The placing of this contract has however required an amount of $58,70 I to be paid to AGA in respect of design rights, documentation and royalties. The previous Director of Navigational Aids left the Department in February 1981.
(7) 1971-72-$54,257, 1972-73-$15,447, 1973-74-$3,047, 1974-75-$4,144, 1975-76-$29,556, 1976-77-$71,343, 1977-78-$146,041, 1978-79-$34,424, 1979-80-$116,599,1980-81-$147,029
(8) 1971-72-5.5 per cent, 1972-73-0.6 per cent, 1973-74-0.2 per cent, 1974-75-0.2 per cent, 1975-76-1.2 per cent, 1976-77-3.1 per cent, 1977-78-5.9 per cent,

1978-79-1.0 per cent, 1979-80-3.4 per cent, 1980-81-3.6 per cent.
(9) The value of these goods is $107.266 and their average age is 3.7 years.
Social Security: Payment Increases
(Question No. 2399)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that the most recent increases in social security payments were effective from the first payday after I May 1981.
(2) Is this usual procedure for social security payment increases; if so, for what reason is this procedure adopted.
(3) Does this mean that a social security recipient receiving advance payments accruing from 30 April 1981 received an increase effective from 13 May 1981 while a social security recipient receiving advance payments accruing from the day after I May 1981 received an increase effective from that same day.
(4) If so, will the Minister correct this apparent anomaly for this and future payments by making the increase effective from the one date and not the first payment after a certain date.
(5) If he will not undertake to do this, what is the reason.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes; provisions in the Social Services Act require that increases in benefits due to variations in the consumer price index apply to every instalment of benefit that falls due on or after I Mayor I November, as appropriate.
(3) Yes.
(4) and (5) Unlike pensions, where there is a common payday, there is no single payday for unemployment, sickness and special benefit, the payday for each individual being directly related to the day on which his benefit was granted. Consequently, when the rate of benefit is increased each May and November the increase is not paid to all beneficiaries from a single day.
In general, unemployment benefits are paid in arrears and sickness benefits in advance. If the increases were to be applied from I May and I November this would advantage some beneficiaries. However, a larger number of beneficiariesthose paid in arrears-would be disadvantaged. For example, if the payday is 2 May, only two days would be paid at the increased rate whereas under existing arrangements the full instalment is paid at the increased rate.
Additionally, the administrative implications of adopting the suggested procedure would be significant. Given existing facilities, it would be necessary to process the majority of benefit instalments manually for the two periods concerned and staff resources to do this are not available.
The present provisions of the Act are generally satisfactory and no amendment is proposed.
Defence Services Homes Corporation, Queensland: Sale of Property
(Question No. 2403)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:

Answers to Questions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1139

(I) Has any property previously owned by the Defence Service Homes Corporation in Queensland been sold within the last five years by any means other than the standard procedure adopted by his Department in the disposal of Commonwealth land, with priority being given to other Commonwealth departments, State and local governments.
(2) If so, to whom has the land been sold and for what price.
(3) What is the purpose for which the land is to be used in each case.
(4) Was any Commonwealth property at Wishart, Queensland, sold without application of existing covenants; if so to whom and for what price was the land sold and why was it sold without application of existing covenants.
(5) Will his Department attempt to discover the price at which any of the property referred to in this question was resold after purchase from the Commonwealth.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Since assuming responsibility for the disposal of Defence Service Homes Corporation land in 1979 my Department has sold 237 parcels of residential land in Queensland to the general public for $2,471 ,000.
(3) See (2).
(4) No. Defence Service Homes Corporation advises that no covenants ever existed over land at Wishart.
(5) No.
Pesticides in Blended Teas
(Question No. 2404)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) Did the Queensland Minister for Health refer in October 1980 to the National Health and Medical Research Council's sub-committee on pesticides the result of a survey conducted by the Queensland Health Department on blending teas.
(2) If so, did the survey disclose various levels of several types of pesticides in certain blended teas.
(3) Did the survey also reveal the presence in some blended teas of the pesticides DOE, DOD, DDT and BHe.
(4) Is it a fact that food and drug regulations do not allow any level of these pesticides in blended tea.
(5) Which teas contain pesticides which are not allowed.
(6) What level of pesticides is contained in each of these teas.
(7) What action will he take as a result of the survey.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. A letter was received by my Department from the Queensland Department of Health in July 1980, attached to which were the results of 25 analyses performed on blended tea. The letter was referred to the National Health and Medical Research Council (NH & MRC) Pesticides and Agricultural Chemicals (Standing) Committee (PACSC) for consideration. It was that Committee's opinion that the pesticide levels detected were low.
(2) and (3) The results of the analyses carried out by the Queensland Government Chemical Laboratory did reveal the presence of some organochlorine compounds in the tea. These compounds include DOE, DOD, DDT, BHC and Chlordane.

(4) Regarding the food and drug regulations in Queensland covering residues in tea, I quote from the then Queensland Minister for Health's press release of 11 July 1980: 'At present maximum residue limits are fixed for a range of pesticides in tea. But the Queensland survey ... has disclosed other pesticides not allowed under Food and Drug regulations. The pesticides discovered in the tea were Aldrin, Dieldrin, DOE, DOD, DDT and BHC'.
(5) Disclosure of the names of teas, which on analysis showed residues in the Queensland Government survey, is a matter for that State's authorities and it would be inappropriate for them to be released by the Commonwealth Government.
(6) The range of residues found in the teas were:
BHC-not detected to 0.079 mg/kg of tea, Aldrin-not detected to 0.024 mg/kg of tea, Dieldrin-not detected to 0.004 mg/kg of tea, Chlordane~not detected to 0.24 mg/kg of tea, DOE-not detected to 0.007 mg/kg of tea,
DOD-not detected to om 3 mg/kg of tea, DDT-not
detected to 0.033 mg/kg of tea.
(7) Enforcement of regulations relating to pesticides and their residues in foods, including tea, is not a Commonwealth matter but a matter for the State/Territory authorities. Market Basket Surveys conducted by the NH & MRC over recent years on foods purchased in the six State capitals have shown that pesticide residues in tea are minimal.
Japan: Defence Spending
(Question No, 2418)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Aft'airs, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report from Washington, D.C., USA., in the Brisbane COl/rier-Mail, 7 May 1981, that the USA. Defense Secretary asked Japan to increase defence spending so that Australia and New Zealand could help protect Persian Gulfapproaches.and that it regarded (a) B-52 aircraft landings, (b) communications and (c) joint exercises with Australia as crucial.
(2) Have understandings been formulated between Australia and the USA. on this role for Australia; if so, what are the understandings and when were they formulated.
(3) Does evidence available to him support the reported claim of the Secretary that the Soviet Union has far outspent the USA. on arms in recent years.
(4) Is he able to state whether Mr Suzuki said on the weekend preceding the report referred to in part (1) that Japan's public opposed defence increases.
(5) Does the Government share the USA. view that a Middle East rapid deployment force will decrease superpower tensions; ifso, on what basis is this view taken.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I have read the newspaper report referred to as well as the text of the address by Mr Weinberger on 5 May 1981 in Chicago. Mr Weinberger's address did not contain either by statement or implication the concepts reported in the COl/rier-Mail report referred to by the honourable member. Mr Weinberger did not refer at all to B-52 landings, communications or joint exercises with Australia. Contrary to the assertion in the COl/rier-Mail that Mr Weinberger 'called on Japan to increase its defence spending so Australia could help protect the eastern approaches to the Persian Gulf', what Mr Weinberger actually said was 'What Japan does to strengthen its defences enhances our (i.e. the United States') ability to fulfil our treaty obligations to Australia and New Zealand. What Australia and New Zealand contribute to

1140 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Answers to Questions

safeguarding the eastern approaches to the Indian Ocean increases our capabilities and NATO's to counter any coercive threats on NATO's distant flanks-Turkey and Norway.'
(3) Yes.
(4) In a television interview in the United States which was broadcast on 3 May 1981, Mr Suzuki is reported to have said 'Our people would not approve of increasing defence spending . . .'.
(5) I am not aware that the US Government has expressed this view, nor does it reflect the Australian Government's understanding of the purposes of the rapid deployment force.
National Employment Strategy for Aborigines Scheme
(Question No. 2463)
Mr Mildren asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
(I) How many trainees under the National Employment Strategy for Aborigines (NESA) Scheme are currently working with Telecom Australia?
(2) Will Telecom continue to employ Aboriginal trainees under the NESA Scheme?
(3) How many trainees under the NESA Scheme have been trained by Telecom?
(4) How many trainees who have completed their training have been employed as permanent employees of Telecom following the completion of their NESA training?
(5) Does Telecom have a policy of positive discrimination in Favour of employing adequately qualified Aborigines?
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 42.

(2) Yes.
(3) 49 (excluding those counted in question I).
(4) 5.
(5) Telecom Australia has a policy of equal employment opportunity. Consistent with this, Telecom encourages aboriginals, and other disadvantaged groups, to seek employment with Telecom when there are employment opportunities available.
Commonwealth Housing Agreement
(Question No. 2484)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 5th June 1981:
(I) What sum has been made available by the Commonwealth to each State under the Commonwealth Housing Agreement in each financial year since 1970-71.
(2) What sum was made available to (a) the State housing authority and (b) the Home Builders Account in each case.
(3) How many (a) new dwellings were constructed and (b) established dwellings were purchased, with these Commonwealth funds in each case.
(4) How many loans were made through the Builders Account and what was the average value of loans in each case.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Table I below shows the amount of Commonwealth advances made to each State in financial years since 1970-71 under successive Commonwealth State Housing Agreements. For 1971-72 and 1972-73, when there was not a Housing Agreement in operation, the figures shown are the amounts of State loan funds allocated to welfare housing subject to payment of a Commonwealth grant under the States Grant (Housing) Act 1971.

Table 1 COMMONWEALTH ADVANCES FOR WELFARE HOUSING
($ million)

Financial year

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

Total

1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 (a) 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

48.30 55.50 60.70 86.00 123.41 123.41 123.41 128.01 \03.72 52.51 54.65

36.50 36.50 39.00 53.50 98.16 98.16 98.16 101.76 82.45 41.74 43.44

10.50 12.80 15.85 17.40 43.81 31.01 37.41 39.81 32.26 16.34 17.00

25.00 27.70 30.00 32.75 56.36 56.36 56.36 58.46 47.37 23.98 24.96

12.50 20.70 15.40 13.00 37.44 33.44 35.44 36.74 29.77 15.07 15.68

8.75 8.30 8.80 16.00 26.22 22.22 24.22 25.22 20.44 10.35 10.77

141.55 161.50 169.75 218.65 385.40 364.60 375.00 390.00 316.00 160.00 166.50

(a) Includes Commonwealth advances of $6.55m in 1972-73 under Housing Assistance Act 1973.
(b) In addition to the above, Commonwealth grants were paid to the six States for rental assistance to pensioners and other persons in need as follows:
States Grants (Dwellings for Aged Pensioners) Act 1969: 5 financial years 1969-70 to 1973-74~total $25 million States Grants (Dwellings for Pensioners) Act 1974: 4 financial years 1974-75 to 1977-78-$40 million Part III of Housing Assistance Act 1978: 1978-79-$14m, 1979-80-$1 00m,1980-81-$1 05.5m.
(2) Table 2 below shows the allocation of Commonwealth advances between State housing authorities and the Home Builders Account (Home Purchase Assistance Account since 1978-79) of each-State in the financial years since 1970-71.

Answers to Questions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1141

Table 2 COMMONWEALTH ADVANCES FOR WELFARE HOUSING
($ million)

Financial year

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

Total

1970-71 1971-72 1972-73(a) 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81
1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

33.81 38.85 43.54 60.20 74.91 98.73 86.39 89.61 72.61 36.76 32.79

State Housing Authorities

25.55

7.35

11.75

25.55

9.55

13.10

27.75

12.50

14.50

37.50

12.20

15.50

61.80

31.34

33.56

68.71

22.17

33.56

68.71

28.57

33.56

71.23

30.40

34.81

0.00

10.26

22.57

0.00

0.00

9.00

21.72

0.00

9.96

8.75 16.35 9.10 9.10 20.57 26.75 23.04 25.72 20.84 10.55 9.41

Home Builders/Home Purchase Assistance Accounts

14.49

10.95

3.15

13.25

3.75

16.65

10.95

3.25

14.60

4.35

17.16

11.25

3.35

15.50

6.30

25.80

16.00

5.20

17.25

3.90

48.50

36.36

12.47

22.80

16.87

24.68

29.45

8.84

22.80

6.69

37.02

29.45

8.84

22.80

12.40

38.40

30.53

9.41

23.65

11.02

31.12

82.45

22.00

24.80

8.93

15.75

41.74

16.34

14.98

4.52

21.86

21.72

17.00

15.00

6.27

6.13 5.81 6.25 12.00 18.22 17.70 19.38 20.00 16.35 6.21 6.46
2.63 2.49 2.55 4.00 8.00 4.52 4.84 5.22 4.09 4.14 4.31

93.34 109.21 113.64 146.50 240.40 267.62 259.64 271.77 142.61 62.52
80.34
48.22 52.29 56.11 72.15 145.00 96.98 115.36 118.23 173.39 97.48 86.16

(a) Includes Commonwealth advances of$6.55m in 1972-73 under Housing Assistance Act 1973. (3) Table 3 below shows the number of new dwellings completed and the number of established dwellings purchased with the Commonwealth advances allocated to State housing authorities as per Table 2.
Table 3

Financial year

NSW

Vic.

Q1d

SA

WA

Tas.

Total

1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80(a)
1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

3,831 4,005 2,174 2,003 2,977 4,574
2,769 2,207 2,611 2,983

State HousingAuthorities--dwellings completed

2,807

1,398

1,808

2,220

1,443

1,588

1,764

1,440

1,162

1,441

903

1,099

2,746

1,359

862

2,520

1,069

1,321

2,318

696

1,176

2,330

897

1,380

1,672

501

1,776

1,185

436

1,392

2,368 1,356
848 1,197
723 765 821 1,277 668 764

State Housing Authorities--dwellings purchased (b)

n.a.

113

18

214

214

n.a.

3

229

n.a.

n.a.

106

191

n.a.

163

144

27

82

139

185

2

5

41

163

343

598

12,810

518

11,130

624

8,012

582

7,225

704

9,371

817

11,066

752

8,532

862

8,953

784

8,012

790

7,550

31

n.a.

6

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

32

467

28

581

(a) Includes dwellings completed with Commonwealth grants allocated to States under Part III of the Housing Assistance Act 1978.
(b) Not available for years prior to 1974-75 and for 1980-81.
n.a. not available.
(4) Table 4 below shows the number of loans approved and average value of loans from the Home Builders/Home Purchase Assistance Account of each State.

1142 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Answers to Questions

Table 4

Financial year

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

Total

1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80
1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

3,231 2,286 2,725 3,447 3,943 1,844 2,865 2,619 2,111 2,007
$ 16,475 17,962 19,579 21,432 23,567 24,639

Number ofloans approved

2,105

576

2,625

1,903

519

2,538

1,426

531

2,798

2,673

633

2,763

3,374

1,053

3,031

2,097

668

2,869

2,177

671

2,825

1,801

664

2,815

3,293

1,224

2,832

2,532

1,432

2,333

Average value ofloans approved (a)

$

$

$

15,254

15,154

14,873

18,445

17,313

16,780

21,104

17,847

17,601

22,890

17,885

18,686

26,942

23,685

21,283

26,855

24,200

22,945

497 184 725 392 1,172 531 372 657 362 287
$ 14,902 16,747 19,746 23,575 26,135 26,509

438 381 419 648 705 511 423 389 385 382
$ 13,475 14,151 20,523
n.a. 22,334 22,694

9,472 7,811 8,624 10,556 13,278 8,520 9,333 8,945 10,207 8,973
$ 15,396 17,328 19,261
n.a. 24,054 24,731

(a) Not available for years prior to 1974-75 and 1980-81.
Reviews of Defence Science and Technology
(Question No. 2496)
In substitution for the answer which appeared in Hansard, (page 554) of 19 August 1981.
-Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
(I) Did he commission external and internal reviews of the Defence Science and Technology (DST) Organisation for the Government approximately 3 months ago; if so, has he received the results of the reviews.
(2) Did he undertake to table the reviews and the Government's response to them for discussion by the Parliament and interested parties.
(3) Did his Department inform staff organisations on 8 May 1981 that the reviews would be tabled before the end of the autumn period of sittings.
(4) Do the reviews comment very favourably on the efficiency and detailed research being undertaken by the DST Organisation and that this view is contrary to the Government's overriding intention to cut defence staff and research facilities without consideration for the long term defence needs of Australia; if so, is this the reason for the Government's refusal to table the reviews.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I announced the Reviews referred to by the honourable member on 13 November 1979. They were conducted in 1980 and the Reports were received in November 1980.
(2) It was my intention to table the Reports during the Autumn period of sittings. However some of the recommendations of the Reports come within the terms of reference of the recently announced Defence Review. The Government decided therefore to refer the Reports to the Defence Review. That body has now identified a number of recommendations it wishes to consider.
Rather than delay action on the remaining recommendations I have therefore released the Reports and the Government's response to those recommendations not being considered by the Defence Review, I tabled the Reports on 19 August 1981.

(3) My Department did not indicate the Reports would be tabled but stated that it was expected that this would be the case. Subsequently the Government decided to refer the Reports to the Defence Review.
(4) The reviews make a number of comments on the efficiency and detailed research being undertaken by DSTO. Some are favourable, some critical. They identified deficiencies in the organisation, management administration and operations of the DSTO which the Government is anxious to see remedied.
The honourable member can be assured that the Government has no intention of taking any action with regard to the DSTO without the long term defence needs of Australia well in mind. It is in this spirit that we have responded to the recommendations of both reviews.
Industrial Specialisation
(Question No. 2506)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
What are the current proposals of each of the member countries of the Association of South East Asian Nations for industrial specialisation.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There are two ASEAN industrial co-operation programmes-the 'ASEAN Industrial Projects' and the 'ASEAN Industrial Complementations Schemes'; which have been endorsed by the ASEAN Governments to stimulate intra-ASEAN trade and industrial co-operation.
The ASEAN Industrial Projects are large plants involving investments of the order of US$250-350 million owned jointly by the five ASEAN member countries. As originally proposed, the ASEAN Industrial Projects would produce the entire region's needs for given products and each ASEAN member would give adequate market support to these products through, for example, guaranteed purchases and tariff preferences. To date four Projects have been accepted; amonia-urea fertiliser plants in Aceh (Indonesia) and Bintulu (Malaysia), rock salt-soda ash plant probably in Laem Chabang (Thailand), and a copper fabrication plant in the Philippines. Stages of implementation vary from tenders being

Answers to Questions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1143

sought for construction of the plant in Indonesia, to feasibility study in the case of that proposed for the Philippines.
Other potential areas under study include: metal-working, machine tools, fisheries, electrolytic tin plating, heavy duty rubber tyres, television picture tubes and electronic components.
The ASEAN Industrial Complementation Schemes envisage a number of schemes for the manufacture of different products within an industry, or industries in the ASEAN countries. As with the ASEAN Industrial Projects, products are to be exchanged principally within the ASEAN region on a commercial basis supported by preferential trading arrangements.
The Basic Agreement on ASEAN Industrial Complementation was approved by the ASEAN Foreign Ministers at their meeting in Manila in June 1981.
The text of the new agreement records the desire of ASEAN Governments to provide guidelines and institutional arrangements within which the governments and the private sector can collaborate to identify opportunities, formulate programs etc for pursuing industrial complementation on the basis of mutual and equitable benefits for member countries and increased industrial production for the region as a whole. In brief, the agreement provides that each country participating in a particular complementation package will be granted exclusivity privileges in respect of certain products allocated to it under the package. Where these products are already being manufactured within ASEAN, other participants may not set up new production facilities or expand existing ones for a period of two years. Where products are new to ASEAN, the exclusivity privileges extend for four years. Such limitations would not apply in cases where 75 per cent of new or expanded production by other participants is intended for export outside the ASEAN region. Products identified under complementation packages are to qualify for preferences in accordance with the ASEAN Agreement on Preferential Trading Arrangements (PTA) and special preferences outside the PTA may also be granted during the period of exclusivity.
The first complementation package to be agreed by ASEAN Governments under the new arrangement relates to the production of components for the automotive industry. It is understood that products have been allocated as follows:
Indonesia: diesel engines (80-135HP); motor cycle axles; wheel rims for motor cycles.
Malaysia: spokes and nipples; drive chains and timing chains; crown wheels and pinions; seat belts.
Philippines: body panels for passenger cars; transmissions; rear axles.
Singapore: universal joints; oil seals; V-belts.
Thailand: body panels for commercial vehicles of one ton and above; brake drums for trucks; heavy duty shock absorbers.
Ownership of Domestic Airlines
(Question No. 2603)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) In which countries are domestic airlines (a) owned by the private sector and (b) maintained by the private sector.
(2) What detailed comparison of (a) costs, (b) revenue, (c) profitability and (d) charges to users is he able to provide of (i) publicly owned and (ii) privately owned domestic airline terminals.
(3) Do owners of private domestic airline terminals budget for a return on funds employed; if so, what level of return does

he anticipate on Australian Airline Terminals if they are sold to the private sector.
(4) Does he expect that such a sale will reduce the level of air fares.
(5) Which domestic airline terminals are owned by the private sector in Australia and who are the owners in each case.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I assume this part of the honourable member's question also refers to domestic airline terminals. The position would differ from country to country. However, in the United States, airports are generally owned by local government authorities who in general provide the terminals. In the United Kingdom,airports, including terminals, are provided by Government or local government authorities. A similar situation prevails in Canada.
(2) Detailed information of the type requested is not available.
(3) Private ownership of terminals in Australia is by the airlines or through finance companies under lease back arrangements to an airline (see answer to (5) below). The costs associated with the operation and maintenance of terminals would be budgeted for by the airlines in the normal way but there would be no offsetting revenue (other than through fares) and thus no concept ofreturn on funds employed.
(4) The' ultimate effect of a sale of a terminal on fares would depend oil many factors and would be impossible to predict at this stage.
(5) Some domestic terminals on Commonwealth airports have been provided by the private sector on sites leased from the Commonwealth pursuant to the provisions of the Airports (Business Concessions) Act 1959. The terminals concerned are:

Airport Sydney Brisbane
Cairns Mackay Wynyard King Island

TermiI1al Lessee

Ansett T.A.A. Ansett T.A.A.
Ansett T.A.A. Ansett Ansell T.A.A. Ansett

Ansett Perpetual Trustees Co.
Ansett Nauru Phosphate Royalties Trust
Ansell T.A.A.
Ansett Ansett T.A.A. Ansett

Genetic Engineering
(Question No. 2617)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the moratorium on genetic engineering which was observed by scientists in the United States of America and Great Britain for some years during the 1970s.
(2) Has his attention also been drawn to the serious legal and ethical problems which have arisen arid will arise in the future as a consequence of renewed experimentation in genetic engineering which includes such problems as cloning, ageing and the legal status of in vitro embryos.
(3) What steps is the Government taking to acquaint the Australian people and the Australian Parliament of these problems and what contribution is the Government making to their resolution.

1144 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes, this voluntary embargo on certain types of recombinant-DNA experiments was agreed upon by researchers themselves following some early work in 1973 and 1974 during which the potential hazards of the recombinantDNA technique were realised. The Australian Academy of Science set up a voluntary monitoring system to oversee Australian research in this area in 1975.
(2) Yes, however, I should point out that many of these problems are not necessarily related to genetic engineering e.g. in vitro Fertilization does not make use of genetic engineering techniques.
(3) The Minister For Science and Technology plans to establish a monitoring committee For recombinant-DNA, to prepare and review guidelines as necessary and provide a continuing assessment to the Minister of the hazards associated with the production and/or application of material incorporating recombinant-DNA molecules unlikely to occur in nature.'

Advertising of Changes to National HeaIth

Scheme

'

(Question No. 2692)

Mr Morris asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:

(I) What expenditure has been incurred in advertising the latest changes to National Health Scheme arrangements in the (a) printed and (b) electronic media to the date of prep-
aration of the answer to this question.

(2) What further expenditure is planned For the remainder of 1981-82.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Expenditure incurred to date in advertising the changes to the health insurance arrangements is as follows:

(a) Print media: $250,000 on a national press campaign which described the changes and the reasons for it.

$11,345 on 'a selected press/magazine campaign to pUblicise the availability of a 'Health Care Hotline' telephone answering service.

$171.60 on local press advertising in Canberra/
Queanbeyan to publicise a seminar for doctors' receptionists, welFare workers, etc., on the health
changes;

(b) Electronic media: $60,000 on a national radio campaign to pUblicise the availability of a 'Health Care
Hotline' telephone answering service.

(2) No decisions have been taken on Further expenditure in 1981-82.

Radioactive Tailings
(Question No, 2699)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) Is it a Fact that radioactive tailings were used on the Trans-Australian railway track.
(2) If so, how many tonnes were used.
(3) What evidence is there that the use of these tailings does not pose a hazard to the passengers and crew of trains.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) and (2) Approximately 200,000 tonnes of rock from the Radium Hill Mine were crushed for use as ballast between Winnininnie and Cockburn during construction of the Peterborough to Broken Hill section of the standard gauge railway. The rock contained some low-grade mineralised material but was mainly non-mineralised overburden material from shaft sinking and similar developmental work done in getting access to the ore-body.
(3) A radiation survey was made along the railway early this year by the South Australian Health Commission. Readings indicated radiation at background levels typical of a granite area, and thereFore not a health hazard.
International Conference on Kampuchea
(Question No. 2700)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
Which countries participated in the International Conferenceon Kampuchea held in New York, USA in July 1981.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
A. Participants: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma,Burundi, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Democratic Kampuchea, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Fiji, France, Gambia, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Kuwait, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Thailand, Togo, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zaire.
B. Participants without the right to vote: Khmer People's National Liberation Front, National United Front For an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful and Co_operative Cambodia.
C. Observers: Botswana, Djibouti, Finland, Guinea, Holy See, Liberia, Mali, Mexico, Republic of Korea, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Surinam, Switzerland, Tunisia, United Republic of Cameroon, European Economic Community.
Inflation
(Question No, 2701)
Dr Klugman asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) Does the Round-up of Economic Statistics published by his Department in July 1981 state on page 23 that CPI data understatesAustralia's inflation.
(2) If so, and iF the position is as stated, does this adversely affect all those whose incomes are related to the CPI, For example, pensioners and most wage and salary earners.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. It is assumed that the passage referred to is the Following:
'On the basis of CPI data, Australia's inflation rate over the year to the March quarter 1981 was about one and a halF percentage points below the OECD average, while on the basis of private consumption deflators, Australia's inflation rate over the year to the December quarter 1980 (the

Answers to Questions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1145

most recent available data) was about half a percentage point below the inflation rate in the major seven industrialised countries. The CPI data are thought to overstate Australia's relative advantage and a comparison of personal consumption deflaiors is believed to provide a more reliable indication as to relative inflation rates.'
The over-statement referred to in the final sentence quoted above reflects a number of factors, including the following:
(i) The CPI in the United States gives a large weight to mortgage interest rates. When interest rates are rising sharply, as in 1980, this results in increases in the CPI running ahead of price rises generally. The United States of course has a substantial weight in the OECD average.
'(ii) The average CPI for the OECD membership as a whole includes several countries (e.g. Turkey, Iceland and Greece) which have been recording very high rates of inflation but which are of limited relevance to assessments of Australia's international competitiveness.
(2) The statement in the Round-up does not imply that the CPI understates Australia's inflation.
Exploitation of Underground Water Resources
(Question No. 2703)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the section on water in the background report by the Australian Science and Technology Council on characteristics relevant to science and technology in Australia.
(2) If so, is it a fact that much research needs to be done on the rate of recharge of aquifers to enable groundwater yields to be managed effectively.
(3) Will he ensure that this research is undertaken as a matter of urgency in view of the expected growth in mineral projects in outback areas of Australia which will require large amounts of water.
(4) Have any studies been made of the supply and demand for water associated with resource development projects in outback regions; if so, who has undertaken the studies and when were they carried out; if not, what is the reason.
(5) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the experience in the United States of America where over-exploitation of underground water resources, such as the Ogallala Aquifer, is leading to serious problems; if so, will the Commonwealth Government take any action which will avert similar problems in Australia, particularly for basins which cross State borders.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) Basic data on aquifer behaviour is being provided through the Commonwealth/States water resources assessment program, toward which the Commonwealth has provided approximately $60m since 1964, including some $9.3m last year. Relevant research is being carried out by the Australian Atomic Energy Commission, the Bureau of Mineral Resources, CSIRO and State water agencies, in some instances in close co-operation with private industry. Details are

available in successive editions of the Inventory of Water Resources Research published by the Australian Government Publishing Service for my Department of behalf of the Australian Water Resources Council. A conference to review groundwater recharge organised by my Department on behalf of the Australian Water Resources Council in Townsville last year concluded that much of the work necessary to understand groundwater recharge is already being carried out and knowledge is improving.
(4) The States are responsible for the assessment, development and management of water resources, including studies associated with prospective resource development projects within their own boundaries. As evident over a period of years State water agencies are working in close co-operation with private industry to ensure that where there is potential for resource development projects in outback regions, lack of water resources information will not delay their implementation.
(5) Yes. However, there is no situation in Australia comparable to the over-exploitation of the vast Ogallala Aquifer formation in Kansas, USA. As acknowledged in the ASTEC report, Australia places lesser demands on its water resources than most other developed countries, and I have no reason to believe that groundwater resources are not being properly managed by the State authorities.
River Murray
(Question No. 2704)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) Over what distance does the River Murray constitute the border between South Australia and Victoria.
(2) Does this section of the boundary lie on the South Australian or Victorian bank or is it constituted by the median line.
(3) In the terms of the River TYlurray Waters Agreement, which State has responsibility for the maintenance of a navigable channel in the river between Lock No. 6 in South Australia and Lock No.7 in New South Wales.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the fo1lowing answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) About 11.1 kilometres.
(2) I have been informed that the question of the exact location of this particular part of the boundary between the two States has never been clearly resolved, nor has it been seriously challenged. The question is one for resolution by the two States.
(3) The River Murray Waters Agreement requires South Australia, as the constructing authority for the River Murray Commission, to carry out all necessary dredging and snagging upstream of Lock 6 in the river to the distance to which navigability is affected by the structure.
Liability of Air Transport Carriers
(Question No. 2707)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that the liability of aircraft carriers is limited under the provisions of the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability)

1146 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Answers to Questions

Act 1959 to the sum of $45,000 in respect of death or injury, and $300 in respect of baggage and has not been changed since 1959.
(2) If so, are these limits appropriate in 1981, and will he take action to increase the liability of air transport carriers to more realistic figures.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The current levels of liability for domestic operators under the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959 are $45,000 in respect of death or injury to passengers, $300 for loss or damage to registered baggage and $30 for loss or damage to baggage in passengers' own care. In 1959 the levels of liability set down by the Act for death or injury to passengers and loss or damage to both registered baggage and baggage in the passengers' own care were  7,500,  100 and  10 respectively. These levels of liability were subsequently converted to $15,000, $200 and $20 in 1966 following the introduction of decimal currency. Following a review in 1970 the levels of liability were increased to $30,000, $300 and $30 respectively and in 1976 the domestic limit for death or injury to passengers was further increased to $45,000 to bring it into line with the level generally applying internationally.
(2) The current levels of liability are presently under review. It is considered that the domestic liability limits should generally keep pace at least with domestic economic conditions and public expectations. This review is proceeding and I expect that the Government will be in a position to introduce amending legislation in the near future.
Foreign Investment in Australia
(Question No. 2720)
Mr Humphreys asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that he has banned the purchase of a North Queensland callie property known 'as Kalpower Pty Ltd and Cape York Cattle Company by Nevada, USA, based Robert W. and Annaliese Fullmer, on the grounds that the business would continue to be controlled by foreigners, including a person who is not one of the foreign persons by whom the business is presently controlled.
(2) If so, does the decision represent a major change in the Federal Government's approach to foreign investment.
(3) Has he been approached by the Queensland Government to supply further details of this proposed acquisition.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. On 4 August 1981 I signed an order under the Foreign Takeovers Act 1975 prohibiting the proposed acquisition by Robert W. Fullmer and Anneliese Fullmer of the assets of the Australian business carried on by Kalpower and Cape York Cattle Company.
(2) The decision does not represent a change in the Government's approach to foreign investment. Under its foreign investment policy the Government seeks to ensure that Australians have been given adequate opportunity to purchase rural land before allowing a sale to a foreign interest. Whilst for reasons of confidentiality details of the Fullmer proposal cannot be divulged, I am able to say that after careful consideration of the proposal the Government concluded that Australians has not been given adequate opportunity to purchase the land in question.

(3) The Queensland Government has not sought further details concerning the proposed acquisition but has made known its views on the proposal to me.
Department of Defence: Language Needs of Department Personnel
(Question No. 2723)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Has any survey been made of the language needs of his Department's personnel who are stationed overseas.
(2) What preference is given in his Department's recruitment policy to persons with skills in languages other than English.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) My Department continually monitors the language needs of its personnel stationed overseas. This monitoring is the basis for the selection of the languages taught at the RAAF School of Languages, Point Cook, where training is available for both civilian and Defence Force Personnel.
(2) Preference is not given, either in Australian Public Service recruitment policy, or in that of the Defence Force, to persons with skills in languages other than English. However, the possession of appropriate language skills is a criterion for selection for any position where such skills are necessary or would be highly desirable.
Opinion Polls: Publication Before Elections
(Question No. 2757)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
Further to the answer to my Question No. 2499 (Hansard, 19 August 1981, page 528) relating to the publication of opinion poll results at election time, will he consider adopting a policy similar to that which applies in France where the publication of opinion polls is prohibited several days before a national election; if not, why not.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I have nothing to add to the Prime Minister's reply to Question No. 2499 (Hansard, 19 August 1981, page 528).
Australian Beef Exports Containing Horse Meat
(Question No. 2760)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(1) Has a quantity of Australian beef export been identified as containing an element or portion of horse meat.
(2) What inspection procedures and other precautions must be undergone to ensure that beef exported from Australia does not contain any foreign element and is real beef.
(3) What action will be taken against any export firm found responsible for knowingly exporting horse meat as beef.
(4) Can deceptions of this nature occur within Australia.
(5) What precautions are taken within Australia to ensure that horse meat or other foreign or substitute meat is not passed on to the Australian consumer as beef.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1147

(I) Yes.
(2) Meat needs to be kept under inspection control from slaughter until final shipment. Officers of my Department are currently examining as a matter of urgency possible ways of improving product security measures in these areas.
(3) Action will be taken in the light of available evidence. For example it is possible prosecutions could be considered under the Exports (Meat) Regulations, the Customs Act, the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act, the Crimes Act or the Trade Practices Act.
(4) Yes.
(5) Requirements relating to the production, inspection and sale of meat for human consumption on the Australian domestic market are prescribed under State legislation. Requirements and enforcement procedures vary between States. In most States the production of inedible meat (pet food) is controlled. Some States require that inedible meat be decharacterised prior to its sale so as to preclude its substitution for edible product.
Poverty Line
(Question No. 2764)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Did the Minister's predecessor instruct the research secretariat within the Department of Social Security to review the Henderson poverty line concept, and develop a new poverty line; if so, did the review take place.
(2) If the review took place what were its conclusions and results.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) The report will be released at an early date and I will then make a statement about it in the Senate.
Brisbane Airport
(Question No. 2776)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Are noise abatement procedures rarely applied at Brisbane Airport.
(2) What do these procedures consist of, and when are they applied to aircraft movements.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) Noise abatement procedures consist of:
(a) preferred runways
(b) preferred flight paths
(c) operational restrictions consisting of limitations on training and the hours of operation of jet aircraft (the curfew).
Full details of the above-mentioned procedures are published in the Department of Transport's Aeronautical Information Publication, Terminal Area Procedures (AIP-TMA).

The noise abatement procedures are applied whenever the safe operation of an aircraft would not be jeopardised, and the safe, orderly and expeditious flow of air traffic permits.
Brisbane Airport: Curfew
(Question No. 2781)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
What extra staffing (particularly in respect of air traffic controllers) and administrative factors are involved in dealing with the arrival and departure of A300 Airbus aircraft during the curfew period at Brisbane Airport.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
No extra staffing or administrative factors are required.
Brisbane Airport: Aircraft Noise
(Question No. 2783)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) What computer and other equipment is available at Sydney airport for the purpose of monitoring aircraft noise.
(2) Will similar equipment be installed at Brisbane Airport, if not, why not.
(3) What equipment and procedures presently exist at Brisbane airport for the purpose of assessing noise levels.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) A fixed aircraft noise monitoring system is installed at Sydney airport. It consists of 10 noise monitoring terminals at locations around the airport, with a central computer logging data on the airport. A separate portable noise measurement set is also available.
(2) No. The information being provided by the Sydney system includes aircraft noise profiles and can be directly related to similar locations around Brisbane airport. In view of this, the cost of installing and running a computer based noise monitoring system at Brisbane would not be justified.
(3) No permanent noise measuring equipment is installed at Brisbane. However, the Department of Transport possesses a range of portable noise measurement and analysis equipment centrally held in its laboratory in Melbourne. This equipment can be deployed to Brisbane, or any other airport, as the need arises. Noise levels can also be assessed using the Department of Transport's computer airport/aircraft noise simulation program.
Brisbane Airport: Curfew
(Question No. 2784)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 19 August 1981 :
(I) What individuals and organisations, including Government bodies, have clearly indicated in evidence to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Public Works Committee their support for, or concurrence with, the need for a curfewfree airport on the Brisbane Airport redevelopment site.
(2) Did any Minister, Member of the Commonwealth Parliament or representative of the State Government at any stage in Public Works Committee hearings object to the removal of all curfew restrictions from the redeveloped site.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

1148 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) The Commonwealth Department of Transport, the Co-ordinator General's Department of the Queensland State Government, TAA, Qantas, Mr D. F. Jull, M.P., ex-member for Bowman, Hon. K. M. Cairns, M.P., ex-member for Lilley, Senator D. J. MacGibbon, Senator for Queensland.
(2) Yes; K. H. Vaughan, M.L.A., member for Nudgee.
Commonwealth Public Servants
(Question No. 2788)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Is the system of cheque payment of Commonwealth public servants more inconvenient than the previous method of payment for those on night shifts. .
.(2) If so, on what advice was the change of payment arrangements made.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Commonwealth public servants may elect to receive payment of their salaries by cheque or in any of several other ways, namely, crediting of salaries to their accounts with trading and savings banks, building societies or credit unions.
The range of options means that most employees should not be inconvenienced greatly, if at all, by the discontinuation of cash payments. Night shift workers in particular would presumably have readier access to financial institutions than many other workers.
(2) This change in procedures was decided upon by the Government as part of the Review of Commonwealth Functions, and advice sought by the Government on the matter was received from the appropriate official quarters. In addition, Staff Associations have, in the past, expressed concern at the risks to staff inherent in a cash pay system.
Brisbane Airport: Engine Maintenance
(Question No. 2797)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
Was any form of maintenance being conducted on aircraft engines involving considerable noise in the Brisbane Airport area at approximately 2 to 3 a.m. on 4 August 1981; if so, why, and where exactly was the maintenance carried out.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Ansett Airlines of Australia carried out ground running tests on their Boeing 727 aircraft, VH-RMN, between 2.00 a.m. and 2.05 a.m. on 4 August 1981. All three engines of the aircraft were run at low power for an after-service check. The location of the aircraft was outside Hangar 10.
Funding of Social Security Projects
(Question No. 2810)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 20 August 1981:
(I) Is it normal procedure of the Department of Social Security that announcements of approval of funding from the Department for various projects is made by the Minister or, where the approved project concerned is located in a

Government-held electoral division, by the local Liberal or National Country Party member.
(2) Has any attempt been made by the Minister or by a member of the Department to deny to Opposition members this right to announce approval of funding for projects.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) The 'practice followed in these matters by my department reflects my view that it is appropriate for backbenchers in Government-held electorates to announce local grants or funding approved by the Government of which they are a part. I am not aware of any instances where Opposition members have approached me or my department wishing to announce such grants. I would, indeed, be rather surprised to hear that the Opposition was anxious to announce Government initiatives, and would certainly not think it appropriate for them to do so.
Statutory Authorities under Minister for Primary Industry
(Question No. 2845)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I) Further to the Review of Commonwealth Functions which called for Ministers to scrutinise all authorities within their portfolios (Hal/sard, 30 April 1981, page 1850) which statutory authorities within the Minister's portfolio are to be (a) terminated, (b) continued and (c) reviewed in depth.
(2) If the scrutiny referred to in part (I) has not been completed, when will it be finalised and the results reported to Parliament.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) All statutory bodies under my responsibility are \;leing reviewed as a follow up to the statement by the Prime Minister on 30 April 1981. My report will be forwarded to the Prime Minister shortly and I understand that Parliament will be informed of any results later this year or early 1982.
Sanctions Against the USSR: Compensation
(Question No. 2872)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I) What are the details of the compensation payments of over $5.901 paid as a result of sanctions against the USSR and Iran during 1980-81.
(2) What are the details of proposed compensation payments of $6m to be paid as a result of sanctions against the USSR and Iran proposed for 1981-82.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The details of the payments made during 1980-81 are:

Claimant J.W. Allen (Pty Ltd

Amount paid
$ 19948.20

Answers to Questions

9 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1149

Amount

-C-la-im--an-t--------------------------------pa-id-

$

Australasian Training Aids Pty Ltd

(a) 2088052.26

Beatrice Publishing Pty Ltd

74763.08

Bloch & Behrens Pty Ltd

43276.12

Commercial Bureau (Australia) Pty Ltd

169896.00

Commonwealth Banking Corporation

88913.45

Victor Dekyvere & Co (b)

451052.27

Michael Edgley International Pty Ltd (b)

440 163.00

J.R. Hopkins . . . . .

740.38

Jetset Tours (b)

200000.00

Kellogg (Aust) Pty Ltd

45780.56

G.H. Michell & Sons Pty Ltd

117296.33

Muskens Bourke Travel Pty Ltd (b)

22771.50

Palanga Pty Ltd (b)

814876.22

Pioneer Industries Pty Ltd

113025.57

Royal Agricultural Society

I 182630.00

Henry B. Smith Ltd

I 629.45

The Travel Bag Pty Ltd (b)

20675.00

WA. Tanners & Fellmongers Pty Ltd

10401.36

Total

5905890.75

(a) Includes a loan of $650000.00. Amount is net of repayments of $61 947.36 in respect of goods disposed of after payment of compensation.
(b) Amount shown relates to parts of c1aim(s) settled.
(2) The final level of compensation payments to be made in 1981-82 will depend on the results of assessments, most of which have yet to be made, of the eligibility of individual amounts claimed under the compensation guidelines announced by the Government. The $6m provided in the Budget for this purpose is based on an estimate of funds required.
Up to 26 August 1981, the following payments had been made in 1981-82:

Claimant

Amount paid

Bladon Marketing Services Pty Ltd Craig, Mostyn (Tallow) Pty Ltd Michael Edgley International Pty Ltd S.G. Heath International Hat Co Port Phillip Mills Pty Ltd
Total

$ (a) 75000.00
34840.83 324220.29
I 802.80 39623.40 82690.09
558 177.41

(a) Part of claim settled.
At 26 August 1981 claims from 40 claimants (including those claimants to whom payments in respect of part of their c1aim(s) have been made) remained to be settled. A number of these claims are of an interim nature and in most of these cases it is not clear whether, and if so when, final claims will be lodged.

Department of Primary Industry: Percentage of 1980-81 Outlays Spent in May and June
(Question No. 2907)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice,on 27 August 1981:
What percentage of total outlays for 1980-81 was spent by the Minister's Department in (a) May and (b) June 1981.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) 7.5 per cent.
(b) 6.8 per cent.


