House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 124, 1981 Tuesday, 25 August 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Death of the Hon. Reginald Thomas Pollard

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 681

Tuesday, 25 August 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS Mr ANTHONY (Richmond~Acting Prime Minister)-Mr Speaker, I inform the House that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is ill with a viral infection. During his absence I will act as Prime Minister.
DEATH OF THE HONOURABLE REGINALD THOMAS POLLARD
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Acting Prime Minister)-Mr Speaker, it is with regret that I inform the House of the death yesterday of a former member of the House, Reginald Thomas Pollard. Reg Pollard was well known to a number of members of the Parliament and I am sure that I speak for all in expressing sadness at his passing. Mr Pollard was member for Ballaarat from 1937 to 1949 and member for Lalor from 1949 to 1966. He was Minister for Commerce and Agriculture from 1946 to 1949. I am sure that there are still many people in the rural sector today who remember the work that he did on their behalf in those early post-war years. He was also involved in the general work of post-war reconstruction and acted in that portfolio for fairly long periods on two occasions.
Before entering Federal Parliament, Reg Pollard had been a member of the Victorian Parliament from 1924 to 1932 and held ministerial rank. As a glance at the parliamentary records will show, Mr Pollard served this Parliament in many ways and was a member of a range of committees. Of course, when we go back to 1915, we find that Reg Pollard enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force and went overseas with the 6th Battalion in October of that year. He was wounded in France in 1918. It can be truly said that Reg Pollard served his country with great distinction in peace and in war.
I recall Reg Pollard as a very dignified and kindly man, but on the other hand he really had a capacity to hand it out when he wanted to. He was one of those people who knew how to fight when they had to fight. I would put him in the same class as Eddie Ward, Les Haylen and even the former member for Hindmarsh, Clyde Cameron. Reg Pollard was a great stalwart of the Australi"an Labor Party and I am sure that every member of that party will remember him for many years with great affection and with great respect. He was a man who could claim to have had

a most distinguished record. In expressing my sympathy to Mr Pollard's son and his family, I move:

That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 24 August 1981 of Mr Reginald Thomas Pollard, a member of this House for the divisions of Ballaarat, from 1937 to 1949, and Lalor, from 1949 to 1966, and Minister for Commerce and Agriculture from 1946 to 1949; places on record its appreciation of his long and meritorious public service; and tenders its profound sympathy to his family in their bereavement.

Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the

Opposition)-We heard with sadness the news of

the death of Reg Pollard. Reg Pollard was a

stalwart of the Australian Labor Party right

through the most difficult and dangerous years

that have ever faced this country. He saw the

Great Depression and what it did to the millions

of Australian workers whose interests were so

close to his heart. He. took part in the great con-

scription debates of the First and Second World

Wars and, although he served with distinction as a

volunteer for three years in the trenches in

France, where he was wounded, he remained

throughout his life a staunch opponent of forcing

young men to fight against their will. He was a

member of this House from 1937, first as the

member for Ballaarat and then as the first

member for Lalor. He served in all some 29 years

in this Parliament to 1966. He was, it is fair and

accurate to say, a veteran warrior of the worst war

in recent history-World War I. It seems to be a

rather cruel paradox that he should have paid the

price of opposing the nastiest and the most im-

moral conflict in our times-Vietnam-by being

defeated in 1966.

.

He was Minister for Commerce and Agriculture in the Chifley Government and was part of the innovative and creative team which reconstructed this country after the war, providing a
solid basis for the future of this nation. I should mention that he was again part of a highly creative and thoughtful group of men who from 1956 to 1959, as members of the Joint Committee on Constitutional Review, produced an analysis of our Constitution and prescriptions for its future
which still stand well today. Reg Pollard was a pugnacious, irrepressible, tough debating member of this Parliament; but he was also thoughtful, he was constructive and he was persistently fair. He was highly regarded for his good humour, his wit and his vitality. He was a Labor man whom Labor men were proud to call their friend. I am proud to have been able to do so. We join in extending our deepest sympathies to his surviving family. We are all deeply saddened by his passing.

Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence)-I was a comparatively young man

682 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Death a/the Han. Reginald Thomas Pollard

when I came into this House, and I well recall Sir Arthur Fadden saying to me: 'You will get a lot of advice in this place. Most of it is dubious. The only advice I give you is that all of the good bowlers are not on the one team'. To have known Reg Pollard was a splendid vindication of that assessment of this Parliament. Reg Pollard was a very distinguished member of the Australian Labor Party. He was a very distinguished parliamentarian commanding immense service in this Parliament for the cause of his party and the wider cause of this country. He was a very distinguished Australian.
If I may offer a personal view, what I enjoyed immensely about him was the vigour with which he expressed his views. He expressed his views with great gusto, robustly, but in ultimate terms with enormous good humour. Nary a day went by without Reg saying a word or two to me about some issue, no matter how irrelevant or how irreverent it may have been to the political issues of the day. He had an extraordinary capacity to make his point. I can vividly recall an adjournment debate, when adjournment debates, if I may say so, with respect, counted for something. At the time he was having an argument with a Minister. Jam sorry, but I forget the Minister's name. Ministers are thoroughly transient creatures. He was the Minister in charge of war service homes.
Mr Uren-He was Spooner.
Mr KILLEN-I forget who he was, but he was having an afl~ument about the qoalityof the fOUI1dations in a war service home. The'Minister was mildly reluctant to take notice, so Reg proved his point by getting a wheelbarrow and wheeling into the House part of the foundation. He dumped it on the floor of the House and said: 'If this makes no impact on the Minister then the Minister is thicker than the concrete'. Three nights a week he played billiard bowls in the now private dining room with another great adversary of mine who knew how to hand out an insult, the late E. J. Ward. They were quieter, more reflective days when there was a little more leisure around this place. He enjoyed that immensely. He enjoyed this place immensely; he enjoyed the opportunity of exchanging views. As I say, he did it \Vith immense good humour, immense personal commitment and great. dignity.. Along with you, Mr Speaker; our distinguished right honourable friend, the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony), the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden), the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren), and a number of other honourable members, I have had th~ pleasure of sitting in this place with great men. I n).lmber the late Reginald Pollard amongst~them.

I extend to his family my profound and deep sympathy.

Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor)-RegPollard was the-first member for Laloi' and the only one so farto die: His origins were very humble. He was born in October 1894 and educated at the Woodend State school. He joined the Australian Imperial Force in 1915 as a member of the 6th Battalion and rose through the ranks to be an officer at a time when that was very difficult to achieve. He was wounded in France and suffered
from the effects of that wound until his death. he returned to Australia in 1918 to become a soldier settler at Woodend. He was a member of the Victorian -Parliament between 1924 and 1932 as a member of the Legislative Assembly for Bulla and later Bulla-Dalhousie. He served in the Hogan Go\'ernment as Minister without Portfolio, in fact Minister for the unemployed, between 1929 and
1932.
He wrote to me once saying that he had not
taken a very active role in the AustraHan Labor Party until a by-election was held in his district. He said: 'I was ploughing one day and some blokes I knew came up and said that the local member had died and that I ought to give it a go'. That was very much Reg Pollard's style. He was knocked out of the Victorian Parliament in 1932, ran for the Federal Seat of Gippsland in 1934 and finally entered the Hous'e of Representatives in 1937 as
MHR for Ballaarat. Between 1946 and 1949 he served in the Chiftey Government as Minister for Commerce and Agriculture. In 1949, when the new seat of Lalor was carved out of the old seat of Corio, Reg Pollard was elected; he was re-elected six times;

In 1951 Reg Pollard was approached to contest

the deputy leadership of the Labor Party after the

death of Mr Chiftey and the election of Dr Evatt

to succeed him, but he decljned, although he had

strong support and might well have won. In 1960

he. contested t~e leadership against Arthur

Calwell and lost narrowly~ That defeat was one of

the great 'might-have-beens' of Australian poli-

tics. If he had won the leadership the outcome of

the 1961 election might have been different.

I

",

In 1966 at the age of 72 years he was defeated

,narrowly .on preferences ,by a freakish combi-

nation of circumstances. In that-year seven people

standing as independents contested Lalor. Most of

them were Royal Australian Air Force personnel

who wanted to get out Reg Pollard was at the

bottom of the ticket. The Liberal candidate who

won, Merv .Lee, .\Vas immediately in front of him

on the ticket and all the preferences flowed down

to him. A journalist friend of mine, John Keiley,

Death of the Hon. Reginald Thomas Pollard

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 683

tells a story about that election. Nobody thought of Lalor as a seat that Labor could lose at the 1966 election. No attention was paid to it by the media, even on election night. On election night Reg Pollard was well ahead on primaries. On the Monday morning John Keiley from the Sun rang the late J. V. McConnell, the director of the Liberal Party in Victoria and said to him: 'Have you got any comment to make on Lalor?' McConnell said: 'Lalor? What on earth is there to comment on in Lalor?' John Keiley said: 'It looks very much as if your man is going to get up in Lalor.' 'Really', said McConnell, 'and who was our man in Lalor?'
Reg Pollard was courageous and aggressive. He was avery powerful speaker, as all who heard him will testify. I heard him last at the age of 83 or so at a function at the old Customs House in Melbourne when he amazed everyone with the fervour of his speech. He was suspended from the House of Representatives several times and threatened with suspension on innumerable occasions. He was involved in a few rowdy scenes and occasional fistfights over the years but he made no enemies. He was admired as a great patriot, a great Australian and a great parliamentarian.
In 1979 a number of us, including Gough Whitlam, Frank Wilkes and Clyde Holding, made strong representations to the Council for the Order of Australia that Reg Pollard should be given the Order of Australia in recognition of his 37 years as a member of parliament and six years as a Minister. I do not think we received even an acknowledgement. There are a whole host of mediocrities and eminent forgettables who have received the Order of Australia. Reg Pollard passed froin the scene without any official recognition at all. He may not have cared. He was not the sort of man to be worried about decorations and rank; but we ought to be concerned when real merit such as Reg Pollard had goes unrecognised and unrewarded.
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Firstly, as Minister for Primary Industry, I pay my tribute to the late Reg Pollard. As has been mentioned, he was Minister for Commerce and Agriculture from 1946 to 1949. There are many leaders throughout the farming community today who still recall the robustness and vigour of Reg Pollard. He had the daunting task in the post-war period of getting agriculture back on the road. He was the leader in the creation of a new wheat stabilisation plan, the fundamentals of which, without question, stand with us today. Certainly some changes have been made to it but he was the original architect of that plan. I pay tribute to him for that.

Also the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade commenced in 1946-47. He had to get Australia's viewpoint placed firmly before that and carry the worries and woes of Australia. In those days we were more isolated in a technical sense than we are today with faster moving aircraft. He also had to restart the sale of Australia's agricultural commodities in their bulk form by seeking entry to markets around the world. In all of these things he tackled problems with the same sort of vigour that I knew him personally to have .when I first came into this Parliament.
My second reason for wishing to speak is that I had an association with the late Reg Pollard through my father who was no shrinking violet in debate himself on agricultural matters at conferences when the late Reg Pollard was in attendance. When I came into this House I did so with some knowledge of the late Reg Pollard. I enjoyed very much the very vigour, already spoken about, that he put into his speeches when he stood in this place and on occasions his attacks on me as a young back bencher. The other thing that impressed me was his kindliness to a young member. After having vigorously attacked me and my party-particularly me-on one occasion he came out and said: 'Well, your father would have been proud of you there tonight, son, for the way you did it.' I forget what the argument was about at the time but, having vigorously attacked me in the House, he had the kindness to say something nice to me afterwards. I really think he was genuine in his approach to me. He had not only a robustness and vigour in this Parliament but also a kindliness many may not be aware of. I support the motion moved by the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony).
Dr JENKINS (Scullin)-I support the motion before the House in regard to myoId friend the late Reg Pollard. I suppose the changing nature of electorates is reflected in the fact that the electorate of Lalor that Reg Pollard represented included most of the seat that my colleague the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) represents, most of the seat my colleague the honourable member for Burke (Dr Theophanous) represents and a very substantial part of my present seat. It is not because of that situation that I wish to speak about Reg. I had a long personal association with him, long before I entered this Parliament. I happened to J:?e one of his constituents. I happened, surprisingly enough, to be a member of his campaign committee in some of the elections he contested. My friend the honourable member for Lalor referred to the 1966 election. I can recall my wife and I being present for many days at the recount of the preferences

684 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Death a/the Han. Reginald Thomas Pollard

and the sinking feeling we had as it became obvious that our old friend, after many long years of service, was to suffer defeat.
Reg Pollard represented a parliamentarian different from the ones we are used to today. He was a parliamentarian who was interested in parliamentary debate and who would scorn the speech that was written and read out to the House. He preferred to be on his feet with his facts marshalled to do battle with his opposition on the other side. I think the days of that class of parliamentarian are passing. Reg Pollard did his job very effectively and he carried that effectiveness out into the general electorate. I attended a number of country meetings and conferences with Reg. There was one thing about accompanying him to those conferences-one always had time to reflect on the countryside around one because whether one was seated in the front of Reg's utility with him driving or being driven in another car, one never went faster than 35 miles per hour, as Reg believed that that was the maximum speed at which a vehicle should be driven.
Reg in his later life developed a much calmer approach to change in our parliamentary world. On the way to one of these meetings we were having a very heated discussion on a certain matter in the back of the car. He stopped me by saying: 'Well, doc, when I was your age'-I am now talking of some years ago-'I thought I could change the world overnight too, but I have learnt after all my years in Parliament that it is a much slower process than that'. I am finding that he was right. As well as being a good performer in Parliament he was well loved in that very vast electorate, by Victorian standards, that he represented. He was known to all groups, was well respected and was an outstanding representative of the Australian Labor Party.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON (Lowe)-I support the motion. I do so because I think I knew the late Reggie Pollard almost as well as anyone else in the House. You will remember, Mr Speaker, and I think some other members of the House will remember, that the Department of Commerce and Agriculture was changed to become the Department of Trade and the Department of Primary Industry. I was the first Minister for Primary Industry. Naturally enough, many of the things with which I had to deal were also of very great interest to the late Reggie Pollard. It will be remembered that he introduced the first wheat stabilisation agreement in Australia. When I became the Minister I spoke to him frequently about the agreement because I felt that many changes had to be made. He agreed-with them. I remember very well that on the night when the discussion

ended and the agreement was signed by me on behalf of the Commonwealth and by representatives of the State governments, I rang him and told him of the price. He said: 'That is about 3d more than you told me about only four days ago'. I replied: 'Yes, that is so, but my permanent head was sick and I had nobody else with me. I felt that it was better to agree and to obtain the States' full approval than not.' He was ecstatic.
There was a similar occurrence in the case of the butter industry. I am sorry that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is not able to listen to this speech because in those days I was very generous to the butter industry. We had agreed to a fairly good increase in price, and Reg phoned me to ask me about it. I said: 'Well, you know my attitude to these things. I gave them everything they wanted, so they had every right to be satisfied'. It was much the same \'{hen we gave the first increase in a base price for the butter industry. The late honourable member was delighted when such a thing happened. It showed his real feeling for the agricultural and primary industries of this country. I regarded him as a friend, a very charming person, as nice a bloke as you could find in the House. Therefore, I am glad to be able to join my colleagues on both sides of the chamber in what they have said. Also, I wish to convey my very deep respects to his relatives and to those who survive him.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke)-I am very sadd~ned at the death of Reg Pollard who, as the honourable member for Scullin (Dr Jenkins) has mentioned, represented what is now effectively the seat of Burke as well as the seat of Lalor. He lived in my electorate, in Woodend, after his retirement. I had occasion to meet him at the end of last year when the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) came to present him with a medal to mark his many years of active service to the Australian Labor Party. It was a very emotional occasion for him to be surrounded by friends and to be presented with that medal. Although he was of a very advanced age, he charmed everyone with the stories he told about the old parliamentary days; in fact, he reminded us of just how good things were within this Parliament in those days. He offered, and gave me, his support in the last election campaign. I can only say that I regret that because of the hurly-burly of events I was not able to spend more time with him afterwards. I wish to express my deepest sympathies to his family, and especially his children.
Mr UREN (Reid)-Mr Speaker, I served with Reg Pollard in .this House from 1958 to 1966. I thought he was 70 when he was defeated but the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones)

Death of the Hon. Reginald Thomas Pollard

25 August. 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 685

said that he was 72. I will not quibble with that. All I can say is that he was the youngest 72 year old person I have known in my life. His politics were young. He was aggressive in debate. He was never a personality man; he was a policy man. I never heard him attack a man personally, but certainly he would attack policies. He was also a dedicated socialist, a fact which no one has mentioned today. He expressed his views concerning socialism and one interesting aspect is that, distinct from many who in their younger days are socialists and as they become older tend to move away from socialism, Reg Pollard was always very firm in his socialist commitment.
The election of the party leadership in 1960 was ironic. Reg Pollard was responsible for the defeat of Ward as deputy leader. In turn, Ward was responsible for the election of Calwell as It<ader. The honourable member for Lalor said that Reg Pollard was defeated narrowly. He was defeated by 42 votes to 30. That may seem to have been a wide margin but, in fact, the Ward group, which comprised six or seven members, voted for Arthur Calwell as leader. In turn, in the Deputy Leadership ballot, preferences when distributed moved the majority of votes away from Haylen to Whitlam instead of to Ward. Historically, that situation changed many things.
Few people were aware that Reg Pollard had insomnia. He rarely slept more than two or three hours a night. The rest of his time he read very widely. Generally his readings were devoted to humanity and to people. He used his great wisdom to transfer that commitment to the younger members of our party. That is why I said that I have never known a man at his age to be so young in his penetration and his activities even after he was defeated and left the Parliament. Meeting him was an inspiration for those who fight for what Chifley called the light on the hill. I have those feelings for PoUard. He gave me inspiration for the future.
He lived a wonderful and happy life with his family at Woodend. The Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) talked about the episode of fighting with what was the War Service Homes Division for a fellow whom he thought had suffered an injustice. The former Senator Sir William Spooner was the Minister involved. Reg continued that fight behind the sCenes and in the end he had to wheel that part of the foundation of his constituent's house into the Parliament. That is the type of fellow he was. I join my colleagues in addirig my respect and condolences to his family at Woodend. AU in the Parliament should have known Reg Pollard. He was an inspiration to all Australian parliamentarians..

Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes)-I want to endorse briefly the remarks that have been made. It is a sobering thought that when you, Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) and I entered the Parliament in 1955, Reg had been here for 18 years. Each of us accepted him as a master craftsman. He was the most honest, uninhibited and forthright parliamentarian I have seen perform. Many people have some of those qualities, but Reg Pollard was rare in that he had them all together. I suppose it was because of that that he was able, with great frequency, to top the ballot in the parliamentary caucus room. He never aspired for very much, but whatever he sought he gained with almost the total endorsement of his colleagues. It says something for him that although he went off to fight in France and served as a serjeant, subsequently a lieutenant, was wounded and carried several bits of shrapnel in his lung, there was no greater antagonist towards conscription than Reg Pollard. In fact, it was his hard stand on that issue which resulted in his removal from the Parliament at the 1966 election which was, of course, what was known as the Vietnam election.
I often remember Reg telling stories about the immediate post-war days when he made his living from chopping wood and carting it in a cart with a horse called Dobbin to the bakery. He used to talk with great affection about a very fine old parliamentarian named Don .McLeod. If my memory serves me correctly he preceded the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) as the honourable member for Wannon.
One thing that caused Reg Pollard to be very notorious on-the special occasions around this place was that he was a great recipient of all the free cigars that came from the Royal occasions and the banquets. Honourable members from both sides of the House who did not smoke used to say, almost with one voice and in unison: 'I do not smoke, but I will take that for Reg Pollard.' He puffed away on those long cigars for a long time. I know that the late Don Whitington said of Reg Pollard that no one was more suited to succeed Ben Chifley to the leadership of the Australian Labor Party. I always believed that he could have been a leader. I am pleased to recall that, in fact, I supported him towards that end. I mourn his passing and regard the service he has given as tieing extremely valuable to the 'nation and an inspiration to many members of the Parliament.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-'--Mr Speaker, I would like briefly to join those honourable members who have spoken in relation to the passing of Reg Pollard. Reg was a down to earth person, a person

686 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Death o/the Hon. Reginald Thomas Pollard

who served in this Parliament sufficiently long ago that there is now no Labor member of this Parliament who served with him. You, Mr Speaker, a few Government members, including the present Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) and Senator Chipp from Victoria did serve with him. I believe Reg Pollard's great contribution to this Parliament and this nation was his fight for organised marketing and proper stabilised conditions for primary industry. He was a victim of what was a bad resettlement scheme for soldier settlers after the First World War. He consistently fought for farmers to be given the basic right to which he considered they were entitled-a living.
I well remember the story of a referendum on introducing a floor price for wool which he, along with many others, was instrumental in having put to the people in the 1920s and the referendum was lost. Only 74.5 per cent of the votes were gained, and that was not enough to win. But Reg Pollard never changed. For as long as I can remember-I remember him in campaigns when I first stood as a candidate-he was pushing for floor prices, stabilised prices, and a basic income for farmers. He lived through the Depression, and he lived until the end of his life as a man whose basic concern was to give all Australians a fair go.
Mr MILDREN (Ballarat)-As the current member for Ballarat, it is my privilege to join in this moment of thought and reflection upon the late Reg Pollard. Reg Pollard represented the seat of Ballaarat from 1937 to 1949 and he successfully contested four elections during those very troubled years in this nation's history. He was a humble man, a man of great loyalties and a man who was totally committed to the cause of the less advantaged people in our society. Reg Pollard was a much loved man in his electorate and throughout the community. He was an assiduous worker. He never lost touch with his constituents even though he achieved the honour of membership of the great Chifley Ministry. As has been mentioned, he was Minister for Commerce and Agriculture from 1946 until 1949, and Acting Minister for Post-War Reconstruction from June to August in 1947 and from November 1947 to February 1948 during the absence overseas of another great Australian of happy memory, the Honourable J. J. Dedman.
He was a man much loved and much respected by the farming community. As indicated, he was responsible for introducing the first wheat stabilisation scheme. Reg Pollard was, in essence, a man of the people. Be never lost sight of the purpose for which he was elected. He was never one to

shun those whose lives reflected their disadvantaged state in our society. He was not a man to equivocate and perhaps that should be a lesson for many politicians. He made a comment which reflects the basic premise of his philosophy. Whilst mean spirits might quibble, the comment made at a picnic attended by stalwarts at ~urrum beet gave him direction in his politicaland personallife.Jt epitomised his love for the underdog in our society. He said:
In a capitalist society the worker is always right.
The nation and the Australian Labor Party can reflect with gratitude upon the contribution of this great Australian. I should like to pass on my deepest sympathy, and that of my party and the Ballarat electorate, to his family and relatives.
Mr SPEAKER-I remember Reg Pollard with affection, .respect and admiration. I want to add just one thing to what has been said, with all of which I agree: Reg Pollard was one of the few members of this House who were able to fill the House when they spoke.
Question so resolved in the affirmative, honourable members standing in their places.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned Citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that sy-ringes be made available on the NHS and that insulin prescriptions revert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles, Mrs Child, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hawke, Mr Holding, Mr Innes, Dr Jenkins, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Kent, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Dr Theophanous and MrWillis.
Petitions received.
Trans Australia Airlines
To the Honourable, The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned Citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.

Petitions

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 687

The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national
interest.

Sale of Trans Australia Airlines would inevitably result in:

(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline

services in Australia;

.

(ii) higher domestic airfares.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans Australia Airlines.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mrs Child, Mr Free, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Milton, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Scott.

Petitions received.

Review of Commonwealth Functions

To the Honourable The Speaker and Members' of the House
of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned Citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That the decrease in Federal Government funding for health, transfer of Commonwealth responsibility to the States, application of the 'user' pay principle to health services and encouragement of private business and profits in the health sphere will inevitably lead to a downgrading of health services and increasing health risks among people who cannot afford health insurance or private payment of doctors and hospitals.

That the cuts in Federal Government spending resulting
from the recommendations of the Cabinet Sub-Committee of Review of Government Functions (Razor Gang) will lead to an increase in unemployment and a general deterioration in community services and living standards.

Therefore your petitioners urge that:

I. The Government continue Commonwealth funding of

health services at an improved, and certainly not a

lesser, level than that operating prior to September I,

1981.

.

2. That recommendations of the Cabinet Sub-Committee

of Review of Government Functions (Razor Gang) be

not proceeded with.

..

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Les Johnson, Mr Keating and Mr Les McMahon.

Petitions received.

Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programs will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a

system of health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology and environment of the Island.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the Register of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975 take into consideration the protection of the Island.
3. That the Queensland Government has given approval to the sandmining of Moreton Island despite the advice of conservationists and despite the opposition of the majority of electors in the Moreton region.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will request the Government to refuse export permits covering mineral sands mined on Moreton Island.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Donald Cameron and Mr Moore,
Petitions received.
Tertiary EdiIcation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. The proposal to introduce fees for higher and second degrees will mean that access to post-graduate and recurrent education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and ability to cope with technological change will suffer; this proposal must be seen as a step in the direction of the introduction of fees for all tertiary students.
2. The proposed introduction of a loans scheme for students will mean graduating with a heavy debt or being denied a tertiary education if loans are refused because a student is seen as a 'poor risk' (particularly affecting women and those doing non-vocational courses); only the rich will be able to get a tertiary education without course restrictions and the burden of indebtedness.
3. In regard to the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the light of the availability of loans, it should be noted that any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate, can only further limit access to education.
4. The proposed restriction of adult secondary assistance to those needing qualifications for employment will severely restrict access to a full high school education and necessary bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school early.
5. The proposal not to fund 30 colleges of advanced education if they are not rationalised is an attack on teacher education. This attack will create teacher shortages in the mid-I 980s, restrict access to education now and endanger the future quality of teaching available to Australian children.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:

688 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Petitions

(i) post-secondary tuition fees not be introduced for any courses or for any category of students;
(ii) that the TEAS scheme be extended so as to more fully meet the real financial needs of students;
(iii) that a comprehensive loans scheme not be introduced; (iv) that there be no restriction of adult secondary
assistance; (v) that the proposal not to fund 30 CAEs unless they are
rationalised be rescinded.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child and Mr Dawkins.
Petitions received.
P9stal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled, the humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade .postal and mail services. throughout Australia will place in jeopardy existing services and the security of the mails by:
Downgrading a large number of official post offices Reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period Reducing the number of street posting boxes Delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices Downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified istaff Using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the postal and mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham and Mr Hicks.
Petitions received.
Family Allowances
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representativesin Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. Because of an anomaly in tax rates a single income family pays nearly $10 a week more tax than a dual income family earning the same total amount.
2. Family allowances established in 1976 have not been increased since then, yet over the same period living costs have increased by nearly 60 per cent.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that:
The Parliament should act-
I. To restore the lost value of family allowances and to index them for future price rises.
2. To increase the spouse rebate from $830 to $1,342 per year.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hodgman and Mr McVeigh.
Petitions received.

South-west Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth:
That your petitioner~ are gravely concerned at proposed future hydro electric developments in South West Tasmania. This area is on the Register of the National Estate and therefore is of national concern. We call on the Federal Government not to allocate funds or allow funds to be raised for development of roads or dams in the South West but rather to provide such funds as would enable the preservation of this area. It is a national issue and therefore Tasmanians should not be made to bear any financial burden resultant from its preservation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Spender and Mr Uren.
Petitions received.
Proposed Sinai Peacekeeping Force
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. bipartisan concern exists -in the Australian community over involvement of Australian military forces in the Middle East where those forces are not under United Nations auspices;
2. concern is also evident about Australia's military capacity to provide those forces without weakening Australia's defence;
3. Sinai is not an area within Australia's sphere of influence; and
4. Australian agricultural export markets may be adversely affected by Australian military participation in Sinai.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the-Australian Parliament does not ratify Australian military participation in the proposed Sinai peacekeeping force, unless that force is fully controlled by the United Nations.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
I. Note that legislation establishing plant breeders' rights in other countries has had serious adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights overplant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce tr~ly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilisers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmimtal threats.
2. Recognise that maintenance of the genetic. diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the

Petitions

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 689

Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic materials from faIling into private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gar~ deners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant breeders' rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ca.rlton.
Petition received.
Copyright
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showelh that:
The Copyright Act as amended by the Copyright Amendment Act 1980 places unnecessary restrictions on the education system.
All photocopying and videorecording used exclusively for education purposes should be exempted from the provisions of the Copyright Act.
Any amendments to the copyright law which affect the education system should not be made operative during an academicyear.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Carlton.
Petition received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(I) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-classified under Therapeutic Agents (not under "Cosmetics" as at present) in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research 'to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.

Petition received.
Aboriginal Land Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the projected repeal by the Queensland State Government of the Aborigines Act 1971-1979 and the Torres Strait Islander Act 1971-1979 will almost certainly lead to the degazettal of all Aboriginal reserves in Queensland, as has already been the case with Aurukun and Mornington Island.
That if, as is likely, the Aboriginal communities from these reserves are placed under similar shire council legislation on fifty year leases, they will be exposed to serious encroachment on their land by mining and tourist interests.
That it is also quite clear, on past evidence, that these interests will have the full backing of the Queensland Government and the rights of Aboriginal people to land rights and self-management will not be granted by that Government.
That the Commonwealth Government has the power to legislate and acquire land for Aboriginal people under its constitutional powers since the amendments to the Constitution in 1967, but it is your Petitioners' sincere belief that it failed to act in 1978 arid thus failed in its duty before the people of Aurukun and Mornington Island.
That the Aboriginal people of Queensland have stated that they want land rights and self-management.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government make use of its constitutional and legislative powers to grant full land rights and self-management to the Aboriginal people of Queensland.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled, the humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Bunyip post office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham.
Petition received.
Privacy and Personal Information
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Personal Information rliscussion paper number 14, brought down by the Law Reform Commission in June 1980, undermines the family unit and the authority of parents, which is the Christian basis of our society, by proposing that "between 12 and 16

690 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Petitions

years, a child should be entitled to object to disclosure of information to a parent."
It is your petitioners sincere belief that:
(a) an adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a mature enough stage of life to decide whether or not the disclosure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.
(b) as a record keeper has no responsibility for the child, and as his moral standards may be different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.
(c) a parent has a unique position which may enable him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the right to guide the child in the direction he/she feels fit.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
(2) That the Members of the House of Representatives will reject the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission and find some other means to protect children from the excessive abuse of some parents.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dobie.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is increasing Interest Rates on Home Mortgage Loans without due concern for its impact on the general community and ask that the Government re-consider its attitude to Low and Middle income earners.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert any further effects of increases in interest rates on Home Mortgage Loans which cause Financial, Social and Psychological pressures on families.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Duffy.
Petition received.
Kampuchea
To the Honourable the Speaker, and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Humble petitioners and the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the fact that whilst Governments are sympathetic to emergency funding that is no ongoing funding for rehabilitation for such countries as Kampuchea. We are particularly distressed to hear that the milk factory would cease tOcfunction by October due to lack of support funding. This was brought to our attention at a dinner organised by Toronto/West Lakes World Vision at which Senator Neville Bonner was guest speaker. Your petitioners therefore humbly call upon the Federal Parliament to express their concern and to present their petition.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hodges.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That the basic rate of pensions and rent allowance is not sufficient to meet present day needs.

In light of the 20 per cent increase in M.P.s salaries pen-

sioners are being unfairly treated.

'

Therefore, your petitioners urge that:

I. Basic rate of pension be increased to 30 per cent of the average weekly earnings.
2. Rent allowance be increase from present $5.00 weekly to $20.00 weekly.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Hodgman.

Petition received.

Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of Parliament assembled in the House of Representatives. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other taxpayers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHowe.
Petition received.'

Defence Service Home Loans
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition. of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That all members of the Women's Services 1939-45 War qualify as "Australian Soldier" under the Defence Service Homes Act for loans because on voluntarily joining the Australian Forces they took the oath to resist His Majesty's enemies, making themselves available for combat duty in War Zones, and according to Acts and Regulations of the period the Military women had enlisted for service anywhere, some Naval women to sail in any waters, with all servicewomen available for service in Papua New Guinea.
As those members of the Royal Australian Navy, the Australian Imperial Force and the Royal Australian Air Force of 1939-45 War who were not sent to War Zones are granted loans, refusal to grant eligibilityto all Ex-servicewomen of 1939-45 War is unjust and unfair.
Your petitioners therefore humblipray that you amend the Defence Service Homes Act by repealing sub-section 4 (2A) (b) (c) (d) of the principal Act as amended by No. 137 of 1978, and grant eligibility to all members of the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service, the Australian Women's Army Service, the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force, the Australian Army Medical Women's Service, and the Voluntary Aid Detachment of 1939-45 War.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jarman. I
Petition received.

Health Care Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully requests that the Federal Government ensures that:

Petitions

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 691

(a) ,It honours its 1975 election promise to maintain Medibank-a free, universal health insurance scheme, and institute methods of improving hospital and health services for the Australian people.
(b) The Community Health Program remains a Federal Government responsibility, with increased funding and expansion of services.
(c) It abandons means-testing and the re-introduction of charges at public hospitals which will severely disadvantage low and middle income groups.
(d) Every effort be made by the Federal Government to meet the health care needs and demands of the Australian community.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled will give earnest consideration to this most vital matter.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.
Belconnen Mall, Australian Capital TerJ;'itory
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the small businessmen of the Belconnen Mall, who by their hard work have built up excellent retail services, should be encouraged and assisted to own their own premises in the Belconnen Mall.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly.
Petition received.
Family Allowances
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled: The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia reSpectfully showeth:
That the allowable amount of income to be earned by people receiving social security benefits has not been adjusted since 1972 and in the case of unemployed not since 1969.
That the $20 allowable for beneficiaries in 1972 was at a time when the benefit was $18.25 per week.
That if the same principle applied and if the amount earned had been indexed the amount now allowable would exceed $63.20 per'week.
That Family Allowances have never been indexed.
That heartless, insensitive, frugal and anomalous social security benefits, allowances and rules are causing severe financial distress to many citizens and causing the breakup of families.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government will bring all allowances and benefits up to levels which would make them equivalent in real monetary terms to the time when they were set.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kerin.
Petition received. ,

Interest Rates.
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the burden of interest payments on housing loans is now at such record levels that most citizens paying off their homes are becoming severely financially distressed.
That the burden of additional expense together with increases in health insurance and hospital charges is putting increasing stress on family relationships.
That the policies of favouring overseas private investors to buy up our resources are causing inflationary pressures, declining public services and ever higher interest rates.
That we support all efforts to give relief to people making house repayments, particularly in the first five years of purchase, but also when expenses are higher after the first years of marriage.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government will give interest rate relief by way of tax concessions or a subsidy on mortgage repayments.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kerin.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Boort, Victoria, post office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray th., the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lloyd.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives Assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the closing down of CYSS could cause many problems in the home and on the streets as the unemployed youth of Australia will have nowhere else to go. CYSS has played a valuable role in our community and ably assisted our youth.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Community Youth Support Schemes be reinstated so as to help the unemployed youth of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrLloyd.
Petition received.
Pornographic Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

692 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Petitions

That we the undersigned, having great concern at the way in which children are now being used in the production of pornography, call upon the Government to introduce immediate legislation:
I. To prevent the sexual exploitation of children by way of photography for commercial purposes;
2. To penalise parents/guardians who knowingly allow their children to be used in the production of such pornographic or obscene material depicting children;
3. To make specifically illegal the importation, pubIlcation, distribution and sale of such pornographic childabuse material in any form whatsoever, such as magazines, novels, papers or films;
4. To take immediate police action to confiscate and destroy all child pornography in Australia and urgent appropriate legal action against all those involved or profiting from this sordid exploitation of children.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will protect all children and immediately prohibit pornographic child-abuse materials, publications or films.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lusher.
Petition received.
Copyright
To the Honourable Speaker and honourable members of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of Australia. We, the humble petitioners, undersigned, request that the Federal Parliament amend and/or otherwise alter the Copyright Act due for proclamation on July 1st, 1981, as follows:
Music, hand copied or photocopied, at present in use in schools as educational aids for the purpose of instruction of music students, be declared exempt from the Act, such copies to include full band arrangements or individual parts.
Your petition,,"s humbly pray that the House will see fit to carry out such amendment so that school music programs will not be disadvantaged or have to be abandoned.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Sir Phillip Lynch.
Petition received.
Defence Spending
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The pefition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth:
(I) Condemnation of any support to proposed American neutron bomb manufacture.
(2) Concern that the present government's continued policy of armament and increased expenditure on defence is undermining basic social welfare.
Your petitioners therefore request that your Honourable House:
(I) unconditionally reject support for neutron bomb manufacture.
(2) replace defence spending with increased spending on social welfare.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon.
Petition received.

Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not fulfilling its responsibility in ensuring an adequate standard of living for all Australians, which is causing untold hardship on relief agencies' limited resources, and require the following steps to be taken as a matter or urgency:
I. That the Commonwealth Government raise the level of all pensions and benefits at least to the pov~rty line.
2. That the Commonwealth Government reconsider its recent decisions in relation to the health system and cuts to Commonwealth activity.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert further poverty and suffering in our community by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrNixon.
Petition received.

Family Allowances
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliamen\. assembled. The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
No increases have been made to Family Allowances since 1976 and since then consumer prices"have increased generally by over 50 per cent.
The current taxation system penalises single-income families who must pay more tax than other families earning the same total income.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should:
Ensure that the Government takes immediate action to restore the lost value of Family Allowances and to index them to cover future price rises,
Help single-income families by introducing optional income-splitting for taxation purposes.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.

Aboriginal Welfare

-To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

that there are Australian Aboriginal children living

under conditions of inadequate nutrition in a background of

poor housing, hygiene, and over-crowding that amounts to

a Third World enclave in the midst of affluence;

that such a state ofaffairs is intolerable in our country;

that only an effort on an unprecedented scale could cre-

ate conditions that would give tqese children the rights set

out in the United Nations Declaration of the Rights of the

Child.

"

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the-Government

will make generous funding available for the specific purposes

of:

"

making a real improvement in the health, housing, education, employment and welfare of our Aboriginal people,

Petitions

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 693

doing so with due regard to the needs, hopes and aspirations of tile Aboriginal people themselves;
providing increased help, encouragement and opportunity for Aboriginal people to train as nursing aides and in other para-medical roles, and as fully qualified nurses, doctors and social workers;
providing increased health education for Aboriginal people in ways that are acceptable to them.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This humble petition of citizens of Australia showeth that:
Citizens of this country are concerned with increased house interest rates and that this Government has not taken action to peg increases in such rates. We ask that the Government establish a maximum fixed interest rate on the First Mortgage that would cover the entire period of time for which the loan is taken out. The rate of interest to be set at the time of signing the contract.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by MrScott.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia:
Wish to strongly condemn the great decrease in Federal Government funding to the States and as a result, the serious downturn in employment, hospitalisation, medical care, housing, hospitals, schools, education, student opportunities and in public utilities generally.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Armitage.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned members of the electorate of Cook respectfully shows our concern regarding the proposed introduction of fees for post-graduate researchers in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education, since it appears likely that this action will have a serious and detrimental effect on cultural, scientific and technical research and. development within the Australian community.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Government will change the decision to introduce tuition fees for postgraduate study.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr'Dobie.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned members of the electorate of Werriwa respectfully shows our concern regarding the proposed introduction of fees for postgraduate researchers in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education, since it appears likely that this action will have a serious and detrimental effect on cultural, scientific and technical research and development within the Australian community.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Government will change the decision to introduce tuition fees for postgraduate study.
.. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrKerin.

This, together with increased interest rates, indirect taxation and rising prices, is causing untold hardship.
We demand of Government that there be an immediate, easing of fund restrictions and the imposition of a Resources Tax and Wealth Tax to meet these national needs.
Further, wedemand of Government there be an immediate substantial increase in pensions, allowable income above pensions, rise in tax ceiling and extended issue of Health Benefit Cards to the 2,000,000 underprivileged aged, incapacitated and unemployed Australians.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.

Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. 'The humble petition of the undersigned members of the electorate of Prospect respectfully shows our concern regarding the proposed introduction of fees for postgraduate researchers in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education, since it appears likely that this action will have a serious and detrimental effect on cultural, scientific and technical research and development within the Australian community.

by MrUren. Petition received.

Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Government will change the decision to introduce tuition fees for postgraduate study.

Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned members of the electorate of Chifley respectfully shows our concern regarding the proposed introduction of fees for post-graduate researchers in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education, since it appears likely that this action will have a serious and detrimental effect on cultural, scientific and technical research and development within the Australian community..
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Government will change the decision to introduce tuition fees for postgraduate study.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Klugman.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned members of the electorate of Grayndler respectfully shows our concern regarding the proposed introduction of fees for postgraduate researchers in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education, since it appears likely that this action will have a serious and detrimental effect on cultural, scientific and technical research and development within the Australian community.

694 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Petitions

Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Government will change the decision to introduce tuition fees for postgraduate study.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Leo McLeay.
Petition received.
Tertiary Educ~tion
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned members of the electorate of St George respectfully shows our concern regarding the proposed introduction of fees for postgraduate researchers in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education, since it appears likely that this action will have a serious and detrimental effect on cultural, scientific and technical research and development within the Australian community.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Government will change the decision to introduce tuition fees for postgraduate study.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morrison.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned members of the electorate of Banks respectfully shows our concern regarding the proposed introduction of fees for post-graduate researchers in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education, since it appears likely that this action will have a serious and detrimental effect on cultural, scientific and technical research and development within the Australian community.
Your petitioneB, therefore, humbly pray that the Govern- . ment will change the decision to introduce tuition fees for post-graduate study.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives ill Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned members of parents and citizens associations respectfully showeth:
That retention of the schools commission and the curriculum development centre in their present forms is essential for the balanced and progressive allocation of educational resources and facilities in the Australian co\l1munity.
That serious concern has been generated by the decision within the school commission guidelines, to cut funds to the general recurrent and capital programs by reallocation to transition, the decision not to implement the school improvement program; and the divisiveness created between government and non-government schools due to increases of $43.25 million to non-government schools while government schools funds have not increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Government will reverse these decisions-will retain the schools commission and curriculum development centre in their original forms; retain the schools commission proposals including recurrent and capital funding proposals; basket of services and the schools improvement program.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Adermann, Mr Ian Cameron and Mrs Darling.
Petitions received.
Telephone Charges
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned residents and telephone subscribers of The Municipality ofGlamorgan showeth:
That the undersigned subscribers in the Towns of Swansea, Coles Bay and Cranbrook (in the Municipality of Glamorgan) think it grossly unfair and unjust thljt they have to pay trunk call charges when 'phoning Hobart wher.eas subscribers in the Towns of Triabunna, Orford and Buckland (in the Municipality of Spring Bay) can 'phone Hobart for only the cost of a local call.
We ask if you will amend this decision and include Swansea, Coles Bay and Cranbrook in the Community Access 80 Scheme especially in view of the fact that we all pay the same 'phone rental charges and our need to 'phone HoLart for business and personal reasons is just as great, if not more so, than the subscribers in Triabunna, Orford and Coles Bay.
And your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Parliament will use its good offices to amend the decision in fairness to all subscribers.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray, etc.
by Mr Burr.
Petition received.
Post Office: Stanthorpe
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Shire of Stanthorpe showeth:
That they are most concerned with the downgrading of the S.tanthorpe Post Office, especially as business has been increasing, and with the attachment of the Thulimbah, The Summit, Pozieres and Cottonvale Post Offices, which are located in the Stanthorpe Shire, to the Warwick Post Office for operational purposes.
The Citizens of the Stanthorpe Shire are of the opinion that, notwithstanding, the statements that the grading of the Stanthorpe Post Office will affect neither the range nor the standard of postal services provided by that Office, they must be disadvantaged and the downgrading must be detrimental to the mail services, and general promotion of the Shire.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that:
I. The grading of the Stanthorpe Post Office be restored to its former level;
2. All Post Offices in the Stanthorpe Shire, and the Post Office at Dalveen, which town has a community interest with Stanthorpe, be attached to the Stanthorpe Post Office for operational purposes.
by Mr Ian Cameron.
Petition received.
Funding of Women's Centres
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned residents of Tasmania showeth that your petitioners are concerned about the uncertain future funding for Women's Refuges in Australia..

Petitions

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 695

Your petitioners therefore pray that the Commonwealth Government maintain responsibility for the National Womens'. Refuge Programme by continuing to fund them on a 75-25 per cent Federal State basis.
Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.

Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Hartley, South Australia respectfully showeth-that we oppose the Plant Breeders Rights/Plant Varietal Bill due to the fact that a certain group of people (multi-national companies) design, not only to have economic control over our seed market-hence, control over our livelihood, but, also making it necessary to use chemical fertilisers and pesticides in order that plant/plants will grow. The citizens of Australia do not need and should not be subjected to such tyrannical acts. The undesirable effects of artificial agents used in plant production has been well documented, but not well communicated to the people, the use of these artificial agents are not totally necessary; not to the extent that plants will not grow without them, as plants can be grown successfully by using Organic (NATURAL) gardening methods. As citizens of Australia we dq not want our plants/soil/air/water to be contaminated, poisoned by artificial agents, we do not want Multi-national Companies to line their pockets with the profit from selling seeds, chemical fertilisers/pesticides and contaminated plant products.
Your. petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Plant Variety Bill is not passed by Parliament.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kerin.
Petition received.

Aboriginal Community College

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet-
ition of the undersigned members of the Community of South Australia respectfully showeth-

I. That despite Ministerial and Departmental asSurances, decisions regarding the future of the Aboriginal Community

College are being made without consultation with the Aboriginal community;

2. 'That the Minister's decision has the effect of either closing the College or placing it under the control of the Department of Furthet Education, a decision which goes' against

the expressed wishes of both the College and the wider ~bor iginal community;
3. That the effect of such a move will be to remov~ effective control over the College out of the hands of the Ab-

original community and into the hands of Ii non-Aboriginal

bureaucracy;

,

4. That the Minister has failed to recognize the real achievements of the College in the past nine years in spite of the handicaps of uncertain funding and poor facilities and has
failed to take cognisance of the high regard which Aboriginal people have for their College;

5. That such a decision goes against the recommendations of the team who evaluated the College in 1980;

6. Moreover, that s\lch a d.ecision belies the expressed policy of the Australian government, of self-management forAb. original people.

Your petitioners therefote humbly pray that you will

1. Consult fully with both the College community and the wider Aboriginal community before reaching any decision on the future of the College.
2. Follow the expressed wishes of the Aboriginal community when making such a decision.
3. Ensure that control over the College remains in the hands of tlie Aboriginal community.
4. Make the policy of self-management for Aboriginal people a reality.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
MOTOR VEtIICLE INDUSTRY: PROTECTION
Notice of Motion
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide)~I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
, That this House calls upon the Government-
(I) to end the uncertainty caused by the draft recomm.endations of the Industries Assistance Commission on the motor vehicle industry as publicly supported by some Liberal and National Country Party members;
(2) to reject those recommendations of the Commission which will cause unemployment for thousands of workers, and
(3) to announce that the Quota System and Local Con- .tent Plan will continue in operation and other measures will be pursued to bring, about-'managed change' to ensure the lowest possible motor vehicle prices.
MOTOR VEHICLES: IMPORT PARITY PRICING
Notice of Motion
Mr SAINSBURY (Eden-Monaro)~1 give notice, that on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House, noting the success of the Government's import parity pricing policy for petroleum products, now-asks the Government to introduce legislation which will provide for a steady, phased movement towards import parity pricing for motor vehicles.
QUESTIONS WITIIOUT NOTICE
MOTOR VEHICLE INDUSTRY: PROTECTION
Mr YOUNG-":"I ask the Minister for Industry' and Commerce whether his attention .has been drawn t'o statements being made by motor vehicle employers and trade unions, including a statement by the Chairrrian of the Ford Motor Co. of Australia ,Ltd on Monday, warning that a 10 per cent reduction in protection on locally produced cars would mean the dismantling of a range of his company's facilities including the .closure of the Ford.plant at Geelong, a supporting statement by General Motors-Holden's Ltd that this would mean a reduction in the GMH work force from

696 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

17,000 jobs to 1,000 jobs and a statement by the Federation of Automotive Products Manufacturers that this would jeopardise 40,000 jobs in 150 plants involved in the components industry. Is the Minister prepared to give to this House, to the industry and to Australia an assurance that there will be no reduction in the protection in any form for the motor vehicle industry?
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-The answer is no.
SALES TAX
Mr GROOM-I direct my question to the Treasurer. Why have officers of the Australian Taxation Office asked wholesalers to collect the new sales tax even though the proposed legislation has not yet become law? Who has authorised wholesalers to collect this tax? What happens if they do not? Does the Treasurer know that a large quantity of goods held up in stores and on wharves for some weeks as a direct result of the recent transport strikes will now attract the increased sales tax? Is any relief available for the purchasers of those goods, especially for those who paid for the goods before the Budget but have not yet taken delivery from the wholesalers?
Mr HOWARD-The sales tax increases were the subject of legislation introduced into this Parliament on Tuesday night last. That legislation will increase the existing rates by 2.5 per cent and change certain other rates under the general heading of a series of anomalies which were set out in the Budget Papers. The Australian Taxation Office is collecting and behaving in precisely the same way as has occurred on all previous occasions when sales tax changes have been made. I have been informed by the Commissioner of Taxation that on every previous occasion when a classification has been altered which results in a higher rate of tax and when there has been an increase in the rate of sales tax, the practice has been for enabling legislation to be introduced when the change has been announced and for that change to have effect from the date of the introduction of that legislation. In every respect the legislation which was introduced, on Tuesday last and the behaviour of the Taxation Office under that legislation follow the previous practice.
I remind the honourable gentleman that the changes I announced in the Budget which will apply, for the first time, a rate of 2.5 per cent to a category of goods presently exempted will not be imposed, of course, until 1 January 1982. As a consequence, no steps will be taken by the Taxation Office to collect the sales tax in respect of those items until that date. I was not previously aware of the circumstances described by the honourable gentleman regarding a consignment of

merchandise which was affected by a strike. Regrettably, this is another illustration of the cost to this community and to individual merchants and traders of strike action. I indicate to the, honourable gentleman that it is not possible, in the circumstances that he has described, to provide an exemption in that case from the tax in question.
HEALTH INSURANCE
Mr FREE-My question is directed to the Minister for Health. Is it correct that the Government has refused to approve Medibank Private rates in a number of States despite the fact that in at least two States these rates have been announced already and pamphlets detailing them distributed? Did the Minister reject these Medibank rates because they were actuarially irresponsible or because they threatened the private funds by undercutting them?
Mr MacKELLAR-All health funds have to submit to the registration committee their suggested rates for contributors. The registration committee comprises two officers of my Department plus the Government Actuary. Obviously the various funds have access to their actuarial advice and the Government has access to the advice of the Government Actuary. The registration committee analyses the proposals put forward by the individual funds and makes a decision based on the experience and the background of the individual fund putting forward the propositions. Unless there is a dispute between the funds and the registration committee which cannot be resolved between those two parties, as Minister for Health I do not see any of the suggested rates put forward.
So far, I have not had to adjudicate or make any decision in relation to any of the rates put forward by any of the funds. I do not anticipate having to do so as I have every confidence in the good sense of both the funds andLhe registration committee. I make the point though that the Government will not allow a situation to develop whereby contributors joining a particular fund may have their health insurance put in jeopardy because of unsound actuarial rates put forward by any individual fund.
PRIME MINISTER'S HEALTH
Mr CARLTON-will the Acting Prime Minister provide further details to the House as to the state of the Prime Minister's health?
Mr ANTHONY-When the health of a person in a high public position is in question it causes an awful lot of comment, much of which is not sympathetic. But it certainly causes a lot of speculation and mischief when a person has a record of

QUfistions Without Notice

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 697

getting ill. I suppose a person in a high position is never expected to get ill. Occasionally, some of us do get the flu and we do get sick. The Prime Minister has previously had a bout of pneumonia which would be a matter of concern to anybody. On this occasion the Prime Minister has a viral infection. His doctors have advised him that he ought to have a spell, that he ought to be fully recovered before he goes back to work because of a very heavy program ahead of him, particularly with the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. Therefore he has decided to take three weeks off work. I think that is fair and reasonable and I am sure that anybody in normal circumstances would have at least that long a break.
HEALTH INSURANCE
Dr BLEWETT-Given the present instability of health insurance arrangements in this country, will the Minister for Health assure this House and the Australian people that after this week he will approve no further increases in contribution rates for health funds operative before 1 September 1982?
Mr MacKELLAR-It is most unfortunate that honourable members opposite should seek to cause confusion and to create doubt in the minds of the people of Australia in relation to the operation of the health insurance funds. The facts of the matter in relation to rates I have just spelt out to the honourable gentleman's associate. The amount of money which any fund has to cover, of course, depends on factors outside the direct control of the individual fund. For instance, the hospital charges which are introduced by the various State governments have a very significant impact upon the amount of pay-outs that any fund has to make. Obviously, I cannot give any assurance in relation to factors which are outside my control.
I point out that the charges which are introduced by State governments are for them to make decisions about. I also point out that a fees tribunal is due to sit in relation to doctors' charges or the scheduled fees, and obviously that will have an impact upon the amounts which health insurance funds have to payout. I hope that individual funds have taken these factors into consideration in relation to the rates that they have sought approval for under the current circumstances. I do not expect that the rates will change in the near future. It would be wrong of me to give an assurance that there could not be any change, but I do not expect-I would be very surprised-to see any changes in the rates as approved from 1 September.

SALES TAX
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-My question is directed to the Treasurer. It concerns the actual market cost to the consumer of the increase in the wholesale sales tax of 2+ per cent. Does he agree that the 2+ per cent tax at the wholesale level will be added to the former retail price which will then be the basis on which the retailer's margin will be added, with a consequent effect on the final price? Is he also aware that, in the real life of normal traders and in the inflationary conditions that exist today, the usual market response is to increase the mark-up and, therefore, the final price to the consumer and that this applies particularly to the cornerstore? Against this background, does he think it probable, as I do, that the increased cost to the consumer on average will be close to $3.50 a week, or more, rather than the official estimate of $1.50 to $2 a week? Was today's Australian Financial Review accurate in stating that the Treasurer said yesterday that the 0.8 per cent impact on the consumer price index had been calculated by the Australian Bureau of Statistics? Will he confirm that if this was so, it was a novelty?
Mr HOWARD-The answer to the first part of the right honourable gentleman's question is that, of course, the final price to the consumer will be affected by the retailer's mark-up. The extent to which that mark-up occurs will be determined critically by conditions of competition which exist in different parts of the retail sector in respect of different items which are affected by the sales tax changes. Obviously, if conditions of greater competition exist, the pressure constraining retail mark-ups will be greater. Unfortunately, there are some areas where competition does not exist to the optimum degree and, as a result, the retail mark-ups will be greater.
There is already some evidence in respect of certain products that competition will act to restrain the degree of mark-up. In one or two cases, I have noticed announcements to the effect that the 2+ per cent increase will be absorbed, for the time being, by certain traders. That underlines a point I made in reply to a question last week-it is very difficult t'o estimate with precision the impact of these changes on an average family. The figure that I gave of $1.50 to $2 a week is one that I still view as practical and appropriate. I repeat what I said last week: In order for the figure of $3.50 a week to be valid a consumer would need to spend more than half of average household disposable income on items attracting sales tax. In order for an increased amount of $3.50 to be attributed to the sales tax rises total expenditure on affected items would have to be about $140 a

698 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Questions Without NO,lice

week. In those circumstances I remain of the same make a significant contribution towards brQaden-

view as I expressed last week regarding that ing the tax base, with what was under cpntem-

amount.

plation earlier this year is to misunderstand the

I was correctly quoted in the Australian quality of both considerations.

Financial Review this morning. I said at a luncheon in Melbourne yesterday that the estimated impact on the CPI of the sales tax increases was about 0.8 per cent. It is the practice of the Government, through the Treasury, to obtain advice from the Australian Bureau of Statistics in
making CPI estimates. I am not sure that that is a novelty but I will examine the previous practice to see whether my understanding of the practice that was adopted this time is in fact wrong.

IMPORTATION OF FISH
Mr BRAITHWAITE-The Minister for Primary Industry would be aware of allegations that sea perch fished by the Russian fleet in New Zealand waters is gaining increasing access to the Australian market under the New ZealandAustralia Free Trade Agreement at prices considerably below the price of equivalent Australian fish, particularly along the Queensland coast. Is the Minister aware that further allegations are

TAXATION

being made that South East Asian nations are

Mr HAYDEN-I refer the Treasurer to the making similarimports to the Australian market

Prime Minister's media release of 23 August in at the same low prices? Would the Minister advise

which the Prime Minister stated that the 'Budget whether these prices are in fact dumping prices

has made a valuable step towards shifting the bitland whether any action is contemplated to seek ance of taxes away from direct on to indirect voluntary restraint or to impose a temporary

taxes'. Is the Treasurer aware that this statement tariff on these imports?

contradicts his reply to my question of 20 August in which he said that the Government's sales tax proposals could not be likened in any way to a broadly based indirect tax? Can he allay the fears expressed to me and other members that the Prime Minister's enthusiasm for indirect taxation, evidenced in his statement on 23 August, means
that further sales tax measures are to be introduced?

Mr NIXON-I am able to confirm that fish caught by Russian trawlers in New Zealand waters is being sold on the Australian market. As I understand it, the price varies depending on the quality of the fish, and in some parts of Australia
the imported fish is being sold at a greater price than the domestic fish. This has something to do with the presentation and the quality of the fish. I understand that in Queensland, in particular, the

Mr HOWARD-I am naturally not going to imported fish is selling at a lower price than the

give any forward assurances about revenue mat- ' reef fish of interest to the Queensland fishermen.

ters. The honourable gentleman, as a former The matter is presently being discussed by the

Treasurer, would know the very good reason why Australian Fishing Industry Council, which is

that ought not to occur. There is nothing inconmeeting in Canberra today. I will be discussing

sistent between what the Prime Minister said and with the Council the proposals it has or the

what I said in answer to the honourable gentleactions it wa,n~s taken in respect of the matter. I

man's question. The fact is that, although the dehave not had any suggestion put to me before that

cisions I announced lastTuesday night represent a South East Asian fish are coming into toe country

modest step towards a broadening of the tax base, ' under the,same circumstances, but I will look at

they are of a far different order and a far different that part of, the honourable member's question

colour than the major shift towards a broadly and inform him further.

based indirect tax which was under contem-

plation earlier this year and which was not

, NABARLEK URANIUM MINE

proceeded with for the reasons that I explained to Mr UREN-MY question is directed to the

the House.

Acting Prime Minister. Is it a fact ,that the radium

For instance, those items that were under dislevels in a plant run-off pond at the Nabarlek

cussion at that time included the introduction of a uranium mine were well in excess of the permitted

multi-stage value added tax, which was rejected; levels during 1980 and that in March this year

the introduction of a broadly based tax at the rethere was a spill from this pond? Who is respon-

tail level, which included a tax on services; and sible for monitoring radium levels at Nabarlek

not only the introduction of a significant broadenand downstream?, When was the Supervising

ing of the wholesale tax base but also, in conjucScientistinformed of excessive levels in the pond

tion with that, the introduction of a taxon serand of the spill? Has there been any breach in the

vices. To compare the changes that were permitted radium levels, notification procedures

announced last Tuesday night, although they will or plant design requirements at Nabarlek? If so,

Questions Without Notice

2S August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 699

what action does the Acting Prime Minister or the Government intend to take?
Mr ANTHONY-I have been notified that there was an incident at Nabarlek where some leakage of waste material occurred and that there was a delay in this being reported to the Supervising Scientist. That matter needs to be followed up; one needs to find out why this happened. The Coordinating Committee for the Alligator Rivers Region is also having a look at the question. I will see whether I can provide the honourable member with an answer to the detailed parts of his question. It is a matter of concern to me that there might be a breakdown or weakness in the administration which we have tried to put into place so thoroughly to ensure that all these matters are taken account of.
JET NETWORK AIR FARES: REPORT
Mr SHACK-I refer the Minister for Transport to the report of Price Waterhouse Associates Pty Ltd on jet network air fares which he tabled in this place last Thursday. The Minister will recall that in the covering letter to the report, the Director of Price Waterhouse wrote:
Our recommended formula for immediate use is provided in a confidential report under separate cover.
Will the Minister advise the House what is the Price Waterhouse recommended air fare formula? Will he make available to the House the confidential report he has received from Price Waterhouse?
Mr HUNT-The Price Waterhouse report recommended the abolition of the two-tier system, which is to the advantage of long-haul travellers. Indeed if the Government had adopted the approach of the Price Waterhouse report, fares between the eastern States and Western Australia would have risen by 12.6 per cent rather than the 8 per cent which was the average increas~ that was justified by the airlines in the last submission. I am not able to table the confidential report because of the confidentiality of the material that was provided. I have checked with Price Waterhouse. It has asked that the confidentiality of that information be maintained. However, I will table a letter that related to the confidential report which was written to the Secretary to the Department of Transport. The recommended flag-fall and distance rate are set out. For the benefit of the House I will read from a paragraph of the letter, which states:
Within the constraints outlined above we would recommend that the values set out for the first half of the year, or until review by IAFC, should be somewhere near the simple average of the two prices. That is $42.14 flag-fall and 7.293 cents per kilometre. This does not take into account the sec: ond tier distance rate. There should be an adjustment to our

price in the future to enable the recommended price to move toward the average price level expected for budgeted cost recovery over the year ended 30 June 1982, or to take account of
unbudgeted cost rises.

One of the reasons why the Government did not pursue the Price Waterhouse approach on this occasion was that there was a difference in the way in which Price Waterhouse allocated some of the cost inputs to the flag-fall as against the distance rate. This varied from the approach that the Holcroft inquiry adopted. Of course the question of cross-subsidisation of F27 services has not been dealt with at all. So, in fairness to all parties, it was resolved that. there should be an average
adjustment on this occasion. The Price Waterhouse report and the Holcroft report, of course, will be the subject of the inquiry as soon as the independent air fares committee is set in operation. There is no doubt that there will have to be
a public inquiry. The question of the flag-fall and the distance rate will naturally be the subject of a very close and intensive investigation by that public inquiry as soon as it comes into operation.

Mr Hurford-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. Could we ask the Minister to incorporate the whole letter in Hansard?

Mr HUNT-If you wish, yes.

Leave granted.

The letter read as follows-

25 August 1981

Mr C.C. Halton Secretary Department of Transport P.O. Box 367 CANBERRA CITY ACT 2601

PRICE WATERHOUSE ASSOCIATES PTY
Management consultants

Dear Sir, DOMESTIC AIR FARES FORMULA RECOMMENDATION

In accordance with your request we set out below information ancillary to our recent report on an air fares formula.

During our study we reviewed the historical cost (year

ended 3d June 1981) and budgeted cost (year ended 30 June

1982) of both airlines. TAA gave us permission to release all

the information including budgets for your confidential use.

However, Ansett requi~ed us to withhold any information re-

lating to their budgets.

.

The formula values recommended below are sufficient to allow the higher cost airline, TAA, a breakeven on budgeted costs and to allow Ansel!, the lower cost airline, a reasonable level of profit acceptable to both themselves and us.

The airline formula recommended by us aims at recovering airline operating costs in the terms of the two airline agree_ ment and at the same time maintaining airline viability.

The. values listed below are within the range from the cur.
rent price of $40.00 flagfall and 6.848 cents pllr kilometre distance rate" and the higher levels of $44.27 flagfail and 7.739

700 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

cents p~r kilometre which would be the average price necess-
ary to provide T AA with a breakeven on costs over the budget period which covers I July 1981 to 30 June 1982.
We have ignored the second tier rate for the purpose of this exercise because we agree with Holcroft that there is no accounting justification for such a complication to the formula.
It is worth noting that in the near future neither airline might pay taxes mainly because of the availability of investment allowances and in T AA 's case possible carry forward tax 10!lSes. Consequently the level of pretax profit allowed in the formula could also be looked on as fully distributable to shareholders/owners.
Within the constraints outlined above we would recommend that the values set out for the first half of the year, or until review by IAFC, should be somewhere near the simple average of the two prices. That is $42.14 flagfall and 7.293 cents per kilometre. This does not take into account the second tier distance rate. There should be an adjustment of our price in the future to enable the recommended price to move toward the average price level expected for budgeted cost recovery over the year ended 30 June 1982, or to take account of unbudgeted cost rises.
Our recommended formula rate is based on the assumption that it is the rate requested for the whole of the first half of the accounting year. An adjustment upwards may be necessary to take into account the lateness of the air fare application to the network in this period.
Yours faithfully
AJ McKinnon
Director
REFUGEE STATUS
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Has the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs received a report on the inquiry being conducted by a United States task force into the status of refugees from the South East Asian region, specifically as to whether these refugees fall within the definition created by various internationallegal instruments and recognised by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, or whether they are fleeing for mainly economic reasons and therefore may not be eligible for entry into the United States? What is the attitude of the Australian Government in respect of this matter?
Mr MACPHEE-I have had reports from Australian posts on discussions they have had with both the congressional mission and another mission headed by Mr Marshall Green on behalf of Congress. The inquiries reveal that the picture is a very complex one, It would seem that some people are leaving primarily for economic reasons, others are fleeing a possible draft, and were too young at the end of the Vietnam war to be genuinely called refugees, and others again are defiriitely still refugees. The situation is very complex. It is somewhat academic, if people actually leave by boat, to say that they are not refugees when we know very well that if they were--

Mr Hayden-But there are very few who are true political refugees today. That is incontestable. With respect, you have said that on the record.
Mr MACPHEE-Certainly. I am not denying that. I think that very few of them would now fall into the category of political refugees. I am saying that to send them home where they might be persecuted might then make them refugees,
Mr Hayden-But they send them home to China from Hong Kong and a host of other regions. Cut it out.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will remain silent.
Mr MACPHEE-Mr Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition wants it on his head and on his conscience to send home people who might then be persecuted, so be it. I am saying to the Parliament that there is no easy answer to this complex question. What is done in Hong Kong or elsewhere is not the business of this Government. The Government is currently discussing the matter in conjunction with other settlement countries-the United States and Canada in particular-and in conjunction with the member countries of the Association of South East Asian Nations, especially Malaysia and Thailand, and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. When there is something further to be said about any aspect of Government policy I shall do so, In the meantime the situation is of concern, This Government, in conjunction with the settlement countries and the countries of first asylum, is endeavouring to adopt humane deterrents which will limit the outflow.
I am bound to say that since the monsoon rains came the outflow has dropped considerably, This adds force to the suggestion that the people in question are not so much political refugees, In the days when they were predominantly political refugees they took to the seas even in the monsoon season. In March, April and May the outflow was very great. It must be a cause of international concern. It cannot be easily remedied by simply categorising people in a certain fashion.
Mr Lionel Bowen-More aid for Vietnam would help.
Mr MACPlJEE-We have opened up discussions with Viocnam on an orderly departure program. Senior officials of the Australian Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs went to Vietnam last month. We are pleased with the progress that has been made. Vietnam is now having similar discussions with the United States and Canada. At-the end of those discussions I will have more to report to the Parliament.

-
Questions Without Notice

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 701

JET NETWORK AIR FARES: REPORT
Mr HYDE-My question is directed to the Minister for Transport. It follows the question asked by the honourable member for Tangney. Did Price Waterhouse Associates Pty Ltd prepare a report on commission to the Government for the sum of some $20,000? Is the report now the property of the Government? If so, why is it necessary to ask Price Waterhouse before it is released?
Mr HUNT-The honourable member for Moore would know that I have tabled the report that was submitted to the Government. That report has been made public. However, some supplementary information was given to Price Waterhouse in confidence by the airlines and Price Waterhouse quite rightly believes that that information'given in confidence should be treated as in confidence.
REFUGEE STATUS
Mr HAYDEN-My question is directed to the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and follows his response to the question asked of him by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition. Is it a fact that people fleeing Communist China into Hong Kong when apprehended usually-I think in all cases-are returned to Communist China? Is it a fact that their position, their vulnerability and the dangers they face upon return are no greater nor less than those which the Minister suggested would confront non-political refugees fleeing Vietnam who happen to be returned? In those circumstances, can we take it as a principle of consistency that in future people who flee Communist China who are not political refugees, rather than being returned, can anticipate that the Australian Government will expand its program of refugee resettlement to allow them to settle here? Furthermore, as an ancilliary consideration, will the Minister also outline what prospects the Government has in mind for the settlement of the very large number of Afghanistan refugees who have fled into Pakistan probably with a higher claim to political refugee status and whose presence is a severe economic strain on the Pakistan Government and the Pakistan economy? In short, I ask the Minister to declare consistent and comprehensive guidelines so that there can be no confusion as to what the Government is about as distinct from political humbuggery?
Mr MACPHEE-The Governmen t has always been consistent. I will repeat its position. We work through the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. We have had no request that I am aware of on behalf of that authority or anybody else to take any refugees who are fleeing

China. If any have been returned, they have not been returned by the Australian Government because I know of no occasion when we have been asked to take such people.
Mr Hayden-You are not answering the question directly.
Mr MACPHEE-I am answering the question directly. I listened to the honourable member's question in silence and he can listen to my answer of equal length.
Mr Hayden-Don't be a blustering humbug.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will remain silent. I call the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.
Mr MACPHEE-If there is any humbug it is from the Leader of the Opposition.
Mr Humphreys-Answer the question.
Mr MACPHEE-I am delighted to answer the question. The position is that we have not been requested by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to take people from Afghanistan. The international policy there is to bring peace to Afghanistan and to repatriate the people when peace has been restored. In the meantime Pakistan-whilst it is hardly delighted to have so many refugees-is content with the international assistance given by a number of governments through the United Nations, including the Australian Government. My colleague, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, has announced to this Parliament the high level of aid which we have given under that program. We have not been requested by the United Nations High Commissioner to take refugees from Pakistan, from Somalia or from many other parts of the world from which people are displaced. We have said that we will take genuine refugees from Indo China because they were displaced and the countries to which they went asked that we take them.
As to those refugees who were in fact land people-as in the case of the people to whom the Leader of the Opposition has referred in Afghanistan and China-it is much easier for land people to be held in camps and then repatriated. In the case of boat people it is demonstrably more difficult. I would not rule out the possibility that the Australian Government and other governments concerned could negotiate with Vietnam to repatriate voluntarily some people with certain international assurances. They have not yet been sought in that sense and not yet been obtained. It is certainly a delicate problem. Our main concern must be for the well being of the individuals concerned. It is estimated by the Malaysians that over 40 per cent of those who set out from Vietnam to

702 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

- Questions Without Notice

Thailand and Malaysia have perished in the sea. I certainly do not want to take any premature action which might jeopardise the lives of others who, for whatever reason, set forth from Vietnam by boat.
AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS
Mr JULL-My question is directed to the Minister for Transport and it refers to the continuing saga of the air traffic controllers in Brisbane. Is the Minister aware that the new Qantas Brisbane Tokyo service is now in jeopardy because of the shortage of air traffic controllers and that the Queensland tourist industry stands to lose 10,000 interstate and overseas visitors annually if the airport is closed for three hours per day? What is being done in the short term and indeed in the long term to overcome this most incredible situation?
Mr HUNT-Needless to say, I am most concerned about the effect of the shortage of air traffic controllers at Brisbane Airport. .
Mr Humphreys-Why don't you do something about it?
Mr HUNT-In fact we are doing something about it through a program of trying to obtain from overseas as many air traffic controller trainees as possible. We have a recruitment program here as well.
Mr Scholes-You might be able to get some from America.
Mr HUNT-We do not discount any possibility. A number of options currently are under consideration, one of which is varying the roster principles and also the shift work operations and overtime provisions of the presen( arrangements affecting air traffic controllers. Discussions are taking place with the Public Service Board regarding concessions for a limited duration in order to ease the immediate problems in Brisbane. One of the great difficulties we have with the controllers there is that many of them have in fact been working for two years without recreation leave, and in the terms of the conditions under which they have to operate they must take their leave at the end of the second year. This has contributed to a shortfall of air traffic controllers in Brisbane as from 10 September. Quite clearly, every effort is being made to transfer air traffic controllers from other centres, where possible, but, unless I can get some flexibility within the arrangements applying as a result of the Public Service Board conditions, of course I will not be able to achieve the objective of easing the difficulty in Brisbane.
I hope that there will be some positive result from those discussions with the Public Service

Board. Clearly there will be some restriction as from 10 September. It has been arranged so that there will be no restrictions whatever over the Christmas period, but the first report that came to me indicated that there would indeed be a threehour restriction between 9 o'clock and 12 o'clock from 10 September to 30 June 1982. Quite obviously, that is not satisfactory to Brisbane, to the airline system or to the travelling public, and, obviously, alternative arrangements need to be made. I repeat that I am concerned about the matter. The Government has every reason to be concerned about it. The Premier of Queensland, the Queensland Minister for Tourism and a number of other people, including all the Queensland Federal members of this parliament, have been in touch with me. Rest assured that we will do everything in our power-except moving heaven and earth-to try to overcome this very embarrassing difficulty.
COMMUNITY YOUTH SUPPORT SCHEME
Mr DUFFY-I refer the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs to the Treasurer's Budget statement that the Community Youth Support scheme will be terminated and to the Minister's statement on the Australian Broadcasting Commission program, PM, on 20 August when he said:
I'd ask themto go home and to use the Commonwealth Employment Service where there are jobs available under our training schemes, or do some other course, one of the many courses or programs we have so they can get the skills and experience that they need to get a job.
I ask: Will the Minister give an assurance that the 50,000 young unemployed engaged in the Community Youth Support Scheme, will be absorbed into the programs referred to and/or be offered the jobs referred to? Ifhe cannot give such an assurance, will he reinstate the Community Youth Support Scheme to give assistance and support to the young unemployed who otherwise will be ignored and reje<;:ted by the Government?
Mr N. A. BROWN-It is strange that members of the Aust.ralian Labor Party should at this stage urge the reinstatement of the Community Youth Support Scheme, having advocated its termination and having poured abuse and opprobrium on it since the day it was established. I endeavoured the Qther day to draw attention to the large number of tIajning programs that the Government has in place and the large and indeed the increased number of places under those and the other programs which we have and which we are confident will meet the needs of the young people presently taking part in the Community Youth Support Scheme. If the honourable member waits

Questions Without Notice

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 703

until the matter.is raised as a matter of public importance this afternoon, I will give him further statistics on that. We are confident that the places are there. The funds certainly are there. What we need above all else is for young people to go to the Commonwealth Employment Service and use the services provided by it and the special guidance and counselling which are available there, and their needs will be met.
MEDIBANK PRIVATE
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Has the attention of the Minister for Health been drawn to the threatening telegram dated 8 July received by me from Medibank Private and reproduced on page 580 of Hansard of 20 August 1981? Is the Minister aware that the telegram was in response to my having questioned that organisation's financial soundness and its annoyance with the way my observations came out in print, which, though misreported by a newspaper' in a couple of aspects, are perhaps in retrospect prophetically correct? Will the Minister confirm that the Government regards two months' reserves of funds as necessary for the viability of a health fund and Medibank's last report shows it to be dangerously below that figure at less than a fortnight's reserves, that Medibank has extraordinarily high management costs compared to those of major private health funds and that it has lost millions of dollars in three States? Finally,does the Minister agree that endeavouring to silence members of this Parliament by standover tactics and intimidation is not a smart way for government agencies to operate?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable memb~r is not entitled to put those words in his question. Until the last couple of sentences his question was in order. I call upo~ the Minister to answer the earlier part of the questiqn. ,
Mr MacKELLAR-My attention was drawn to a speech made in this House last week by the honourable member during the grievance debate in which he incorporated certain material which had been sent to him by solicitors acting on behalf of Medibank Private. 'I was aware of the statement that the honourable gentleman was reported to have made during the recess. I would only say that Medibank Private is a statutory. authority and it is up to those in oharge of Medibank Private to make decisions as to what legal proceedings they may place in progress in relation to any situation. I can understand the honourable gentleman being taken aback by the telegram that .he received. I can also understand the feelings of those in charge of Medibank Private in relation to

the reported statements attributed to the honourable gentleman. It is not for me to say what legal proceedings or otherwise any government statutory authority should undertake. It is up to it to make those sorts of decisions. I would hope, though, that in relation to this matter the misunderstandings which obviously exist between the honourable member and Medibank Private can be sorted out by some conversation between the honourable member and those in charge of Medibank Private.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE WELFARE TRUST FUND
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)- Pursuant to section 34 of the Services Trust Funds Act 1947, I present the Royal Australian Air Force Welfare Trust Fund annual report 1980, together with audited income statements and balance sheets.
AUSTRALIAN MILITARY FORCES RELIEF TRUST FUND
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)- Pursuant to section 34 of the Services Trust Funds Act 1947, I present the Australian Military Forces Relief Trust Fund annual report 1980, together with audited income statements and balance sheets.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN NAVY RELIEF TRUST FUND
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)- Pursuant to section 34 of the Services Trust Funds Act 1947, I present the Royal Australian Navy Relief Trust Fund report 1980, together with audited income statements and balance sheets.
AUSTRALIAN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-For the information of honourable members, I present a report by the Australian Science and Technology Council on basic research and national objectives.
AUSTRALIAN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-For the information of honourable members, 'I present a report by the Australian Science and Technology Council on the marine sciences and technologies, entitied 'Towards an Australian program for the 1980s'.
PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrilll Relations)-Pursuant to section 22 of the Public

704 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Personal Explana,tions

Service Act 1922, I present the Public Service Board annual report for 1980-81.
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-For the information of honourable members. I present the report of the Industries Assistance Commission on by-law admission of certain goods-thermal detectors; refractory furnace linings; electric motors; engines for walk-behind lawnmowers; ring binder fittings; welded steel pipe; rectifying assemblies; frozen strawberries.
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL GALLERY
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-Pursuant to section 42 of the National Gallery Act 1975, I present the Australian National Gallery annual report 1979-80.
PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS
Mr HAYDEN-(Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr HAYDEN-I claim to have been misrepresented by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee).
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman may proceed to a personal explanation.
Mr HAYDEN-The Minister, in the course of his response to my question and probably more particularly to an interjection that I made, suggested that the view I was seeking to project lacked humanity. Without going into the details, I shaH quote from the Far Eastern Economic Review of 17 July of this year, which has an extensive series of articles in relation to people who are leaving Vietnam. I shall quote the article exactly. Speaking of studies, it states:
One, covering a three-week period in June. and surveying 300 arrivals in Hong Kong, for instance found that 55 per cent had left Vietnam for economic reasons, 25 per cent to avoid military service, 4 per cent for family reunion and only g per cent to avoid political persecution. In addition, more than half had not completed primary school, only g per cent had worked for the government prior to 1975 and 45 per cent had been fishermen since the war ended. Such statistics support the principal contentions of officials elsewhere in the regio.n, which are:
(2) a clear majority of those now leaving Vietnam are economic migrants . . .
I will not quote the article any further, but I will make reference-to an article of a similar nature which I read at about the same time. In that

article it was pointed out that one, of the major reasons for the movement of so-called boat people from Vietnam is a certain provocation and incitement, as it were. The Voice of America, it is alleged in that article, broadcast twice a day the position of pick-up ships, especially elements of the--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is now debating the matter.
Mr HAYDEN-I just want to make this point to justify the assertion that it is not a lack of humanity at all.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman has made that point.
Mr HAYDEN-I hope that the Minister is as persuaded as you are, Mr Speaker. I hope that the Press gallery is equally persuaded because I suspect that this is an issue which could be easily misunderstood and come out in coloured terms. May I succinctly conclude in about two sentences by stating that this report I was referring to pointed out how the Voice of America and the British Broadcasting Commission broadcast exact positions, weather conditions and a whole range of data which were clearly designed to encourage people contemplating departing Vietnam for economic reasons-very rarely these days for political refuge status reasons-by facilitating that departure. All I am suggesting is that in those circumstances there is a need for a drastic review of both the colour of people's responses to this issue and the Government's policies on it.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is certainly now debating the matter. I ask him to resume his seat.
Mr MACPHEE-(Balaclava-Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs)-Mr Speaker; I claim that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) has misrepresented my position.,
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman wishes to make a personal explanation he may proceed.
Mr MACPHEE-I said, in answer to the two questions, that while it is true that one can categorise people as economic immigrants or refugees, which I-have done, it is then another question of what one does about it, how one deters people from leaving, how one arranges for possible repatriation and how one arranges for an orderly departure in accordance with a special humanitarian program or an immigration program. If the L-eader of the Opposition were asconcerned as he says he is about the people--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is now debating the matter.

Coinmunity Youth Support Scheme

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 705

Mr MACPHEE-'Mr Speabr, may I say that while I was away and making statements about what I found and while I passed a lot of things on to other governments, the Leader of the Opposition wrote to my permanent head and asked for a briefing on this matter when J was in a position to give it. In fact, last week I gave the briefing in detail to the Opposition spokesman on immigration matters. I have similarly given a briefing to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). I plan to give recommendations to Cabinet shortly. I would think, in the meantime, that in the best interests of the people concerned and having the most humane considerations for the people concerned, it would have been better for that level of debate to have gone on rather than opening up a massive area which is, as the Leader of the Opposition says, capable of great misunderstanding. I think it would have been better for him to have confined himself to those discussions.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is debating the. matter.
Mr MACPHEE-For those rt:asons I think he was inhumane.
COMMUNITY YOUTH SUPPORT SCHEME
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The callous disregard for the plight of unemployed young Australians reflected in the Government's decision to abandon the Community Youth Support Schem~.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their placeS.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr HAWKE (Wills) (3.28)-There may be legitimate room for argument in our community as to what are the ap-propriate economic policies to be pursued in this country. I suggest that there can be no room for the callous and deceitful abandonment of the people who are the victims of those policies, particularly the young people of this country. That, of course, is precisely what is involved in the dismantling by the Government in the Budget of the Community. Youth Support Scheme and of tbe Government's prevarications in regard to what it has done which, of course, has been added to by the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) in the Parliament this afternoon. First of all, let us get the
-

facts straight as to what is the present condition. I suggest that, presumably, an impeccable source as to the facts is contained in the last available Department of Employment and Youth Affairs' annual report for 1979-80. The Government there states:
The Community Youth Support Scheme (CYSS) was introduced in November 1976 to provide a supportive environment to help young people develop and maintain skills and job orientation while unemployed. Finance is provided to representative community committees to run projects which involve young people in a range of employment-oriented and skills development programs, recreational activities and community service work.
Its objectives are to maintain the employability and a sense of purpose and direction of young people until they find jobs. These young people are helped to continue their job search and development of job skills. CYSS has expanded rapidly since its inception and a review and rationalisation of the scheme during the 1979-80 financial year consolidated its progress and provided a sound base on which future community-based projects can be developed.
That is a clear statement of the history, the purpose and value of CYSS. The report of the Government's own Department goes on to point out that since the Scheme's inception at the end of 1976 more than 130,000 people have been assisted. The figures are listed. I will not go through them except to point out that for the year ended June 1980, 274 projects fulfilled these purposes and functions. It was not an employment placement program but, essentially, a supportive program for young people who were the victims of unemployment. To bring that picture up to date I point out the picture for the year ended 1980-81. In the period 1980-81, so far as can be ascertained, some 55,000 young people were assisted in the ways pointed out by this report, so that that would give a total, since its inception, of about 200,000 people. To sustain that, there were 276 projects right around this country employing between 800 and 850 people as project officersabout 80 per cent of which were full time-200 ancillary staff and over 1,000 people who provided part-time services as sessional instructors to help the approximately 50,000 young people who were victims of unemployment. That is what we are talking about. We are not talking about something peripheral but something deliberately created by the Government to deal with a problem at the end of 1976.
If there has been a decision to abandon the scheme, I assume one could ask oneself the question: 'Has this been done because the unemployment situation is improving?' Of course, we know that the answer to that is in the negative. What are the facts? The facts are that currently 117,000 teenagers are unemployed. That is an unemployment rate amongst teenagers of 15 per cent. In the period since the Scheme was introduced-after all

706 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Community Youth Support Scheme

this Scheme was created primarily to' deal with the problems of young people who had a longer term problem of unemployment-the average period of unemployment of teenagers has, in fact, doubled to a point where the average period of unemployment is now 25 weeks. In fact, for those in the 20 to 24 years of age group the duration has more than trebled from 10 weeks to 35 weeks. '
What has been the picture of employment creation in this period? This is the statistic which I believe is probably quite unknown to honourable members of this House and it will come as a very considerable surprise. From the end of 1975 until the latest period, July 1981, there has been an addition of only 11,000 permanent full time jobs for teenagers-that is, compared with the end of 1975 there are now only 11,000 more full time jobs for teenagers. Nearly the whole of the increase has taken place in part time employment. That is the situation. In November 1976 the, Government brought in CYSS because it saw a worsening unemployment situation amongst young people. In the period from the end of 1976 until now, when the Government decided to abolish the Scheme, in fact the position has got worse.
What is the position which the Budget predicts for the coming period? Does it perceive an improving position? Of course it does not. The opposite is true. It sees a reduction in the employment growth rate from 2.6 per cent in 1980-81 to 2 per cent in 1981-82. It predicts, in fact, an increase in unemployment. The figures for the Australian Bureau of Statistics which have just come out in the last few days show an annual employment growth which has fallen to lO9,000. In fact, that represents a very significant decline from the peak figure of 12 months ago when the annual employment growth rate was 212,000. In other words, the situation with which this community is faced is, on the figures produced by the Government, at which we are looking, a deteriorating employment position, both in the predictions as to the rate of employment growth and the level of unemployment.
What does the Government seek to do in this situation in an attempt to justify its abandonment of this Scheme which has served the community well? In a deceitful fashiort the Government has attempted to argue that, in fact, it has made a massive increase in funds available in manpower and training areas and that, in fact, the young people-until this point the 55,000 who have been serviced by CYSS-will be able to be looked after , by the additional funds made available in the training area. '

Let us look at the facts and distinguish them from the deceitfulness which has been advanced by the' Government. The facts are that from 1975-76 until last financial year there has been a 58 per cent decline in real terms in the funds made available in the manpower, training and support program area. In fact, the increase' in money terms, and in the real terms it has made available in this coming financial year, will still leave this situation that in 1981-82, as compared with 1975-76, there will have been a 44 per cent decline in real terms in the funding by this Government of its total manpower, training and support programs. What does the increase that is involved this year do? Does it in fact provide a substitution in any way for what has been done under the CYSS program. I ask honourable members to contrast the fact that some 55,000 people were serviced-that is the way in which the Government talked about it in its annual report-or looked after in 1980-81 with the numbers to be added under the training programs by the provision of the additional funds. Making the most generous assumptions, at the very most there will be an additional 20,000 places for young people available in 1981-82 as a result of the expansion of funds. I repeat: At the very most, an additional 20,000 places will be created for young people.
But, of course, the major beneficiaries of those additional funds will riot be the long term unemployed kids; they will be basically the kids who are coming straight from school or virtually straight from school. If honourable members turn to the one program that the Government talks aboutin the papers associated with the Budget, the one program which can be said to deal with the problem of long term young unemployed-that is the extended Special Youth Employment Training Program-they will find that the additional funds are expected in 1981-82 to provide for only an additional 5,750 ,places. In other words, when we analyse the Governmenfs argument that the abolition of CYSS can be justified by the provision of additional funds made available under these other programs, we find that in, the one program that can be said to be relevant less than 6,000 new places will be provided. If it is said that some people have used some of the services more than once, in fact we are comparing 6,000 in the extended SYETP with at least 30,000 to 35,000 who have been looked after in the CYSS situation. In those circumstances is it any wonder that we have been inundated with complaints not merely from the people who are working in CYSS, but also from other people in the community who have seen the benefits o( this program? We have been inundated with requests
-

COf!lmunity Youth Support Scheme

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 707

from a wide spectrum of the community to see that this proposed abolition should not proceed. I will not read from literally hundreds of communications I have received. I will read just two of the telegrams I have received. The first is from Mr Farrugia, a youth worker of the Maroubra Catholic Church:
Youth in my parish are shocked at the Government's decision to abolish CYSS. We are asking you to register our disgust-in Parliament.
This is stated in a telegram from a CYSS participant in the Mudgee area:
Where do go when you got no where to go.
That is from a kid asking where you go when you have got nowhere to go.
Mr Tuckey-Why don't you send him home?
Mr HAWKE-I do not think that this tragic human situation is helped by the stupid, unhelpful and inhumane objections from the honourable member for O'Connor. One would have hoped that on this issue there would have been an attempt to understand that we are not dealing with a question of statistics. We are dealing with the real human tragedy of young people who are filled with despair and hopelessness and for whom the CYSS program was intended. To a large extent CYSS has done something to alleviate that human tragedy. That is what we are trying to do.
Mr TuckeyWhat about mum and dad?
Mr HAWKE-We do not have to depend upon these inane interjections from these people who have a record of bashing Aborigines. We do not have to listen to these interjections from that source at all. The fact is that we have had the assessment of these schemes by people who are qualified to make an assessment. The Department of Employment and Youth Affairs itself, in 1977, made an assessment and it found that the Scheme had in fact provided considerable gains for the participants in terms of personal and social development, confidence, morale and motivation. These were the findings of the Department itself. This was what these schemes had in fact done for young people faced with this despair and frustration of unemployment.
We not only have the assessment of the Department itself but also assessments made from within the Melbourne University and the Swinburne College of Advanced Education. I refer briefly to the report in the Age of Monday, 24 November on the assessment that was made by Miss Doreen Parsons, a graduate of the Swinburne College of Technology's Psychology Department. The finding there was that:

Unemployed young people involved in the Community Youth Support Scheme projects are less likely to commit crimes than those who are not involved.
In other words, a comparison was made between young people who had the opportunity of being involved in CYSS projects and programs and those kids who had not had the opportunity of being engaged in them. In that assessment it was found that these programs-not in aggregate economic terms; we are not worried about them; but in terms of what they do for the personal problems of young-kids-were doing something to maintain the morale, to maintain the feeling in these kids that there was something better to do than to resort to crime, to hard drugs and that sort of thing.
As my speaking time has just about expired, Mr Deputy Speaker, may I nail this Minister, in terms of what credibility he has when he talks in this area? I refer to an article in the Advertiser of 2 June 1981 headed 'No fear on youth schemes: Brown'. It states
Commonwealth-funded youth support schemes need not fear coming changes to funding operations, the Federal Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, Mr Brown, said yesterday.
That was on 2 June 1981. The article continued:
Mr Brown said an announcement would be made in a couple of months about changes in guidelines for the schemes, of which there were more than 250 in Australia.
. Hesaid-
That is the Minister-
the changes would be aimed at making the service "run smoothly and consistently."
How smoothly and consistently? That is what the Minister said in June. I refer now to an article in the Examiner and what an executive officer, speaking on the Minister's behalf, is reported to have said:
From now until the beginning of May you (project officers) should continue to operate according to the current CYSS guidelines and administrative arrangements.
The Minister cannot be trusted.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Employment and Youth Affairs) (3.38)-It is amazing to note the hypocrisy which seems to have gripped the Australian Labor Party in raising this matter in the search apparently for a temporary political gain when there are a few demonstrators outside. It is wise to remember the attitude taken by the predecessor of the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), because in the days when the Community Youth Support Scheme was started, the honourable member for

708 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Community Youth Support Scheme

Port Adelaide (Mr Young) had a lot to say about it. It is true to say that the Labor Party has done nothing but pour scorn and opprobrium on this scheme since the day it was conceived. The Government does not agree with that criticism and it has decided to terminate the scheme for entirely different reasons which I shall e?tplain shortly.
Let me make it plain so that it is on the record just what the attitude of the Labor Party is to the Community Youth Support Scheme. I ask you, Mr Deputy Speaker, to listen to these words:
The Scheme is no more than tokenism. confined to creating drop-in centres, providing 'cuddle-therapy' rather than the jobs young people really need. The guidelines even limit training, preventing formal educational classes or instruction in job skills as normally provided by educational or training institutions. The $12.26 million would be better spent on genuine job creation and training programmes.
Mr Birney-Who said that?
Mr N. A. BROWN-That was said by the honourable member for Port Adelaide, the former Opposition spokesman on employment and youth affairs. It is a position he has maintained continuously. It is a position he probably maintains today. But for the sake of some short term political gain' because there are a few demonstrators outside, the future leader of the Labor Party now decides to get on the bandwagon and condemn the Government's decision to terminate this scheme from 31 October. So let us look at the matter in perspective and honestly. There has been persistent opposition, scorn and opprobrium from the Labor Party about this scheme and it is not criticism with which the Government agrees. We are not terminating the scheme because we pour scorn on it.
Mrs Darling-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. I wOl\ld like a ruling from the Chair on whether it is permissible in this chamber for an honourable member to say things that are not true.
, Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- There is no point of order. I remind honourable members of the Opposition that interjections are out of order. The honourable member for Wills was heard in. virtual silence. I ask that similar courtesy be extended to the Minister.
'Mr N. A. BROWN,----To verify what I was saying I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard an extract from page 106 of I Want to Work by Mick Young.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
The scherrte is no more than tokenism, confined to creating drop-in centres, providing 'cuddle-therapy' rather than the

jobs young people really need. The guidelines even limit training, preventing formal educational classes or instruction in jOb skills as normally provided by educational or training insti- ' tutions. The $12.26 million would be better spent on genuine job creation and training programmes.
Mr N. A. BROWN~Let me make it plain that we do not agree with the scorn and opprobrium that the Labor Party has poured on CYSS project officers and people in local and State committees. It is time that Labor Party members woke up to themselves about this matter. We will terminate the scheme on 31 October because circumstances have changed and young people are in need of skills, training and work experience. We have in the Budget increased enormously the funds which are being devoted to those worthwhile purposes.
I have said that circumstances have changed. They have done so in this way: Unemployment, including unemployment for young people, has decreased. We have never maintained that the situation is satisfactory. But there have been great gains in teenage employment in the past year. Total teenage employment grew by 14,100 or 2.1 per cent between July last year and July this year. In the same period, the level of teenage unemployment fell by 18,500 or 17 per cent. We say that that is not good enough but we also say that young people, in order to get jobs and keep them, need training in the skills, work experience and abilities that employers need and will insist on before they take on those young people as employees. Accordingly, in this Budget we have made it plain that we will not proceed with this scheme after 31 October; rather we will increase the number of places available to young people to get work experience, basic job training and training in the skills that they need to get jobs and keep them.
Not only have we increased the number of places available, but also we have increased the funds available by an enormous amount. Let me tell honourable members of the amounts with which we are dealing. Expenditure on all Department of Employment and Youth Affairs programs has been increased by 23 per cent. Of this amount, 77 per cent is for apprenticeship or other training programs directed at young people. Expenditure on youth training programs will rise by 67 per cent from last year. It will be $79.4m this year which is a remarkable achievement in terms of Government expenditure. It indicates beyond any doubt whatsoever the commitment that the Government is prepared to make to put large sums of money into training young people and giving them the work experience, skills and abilities that they need to get jobs and to keep thein.

Community Youth Support Scheme

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 709

Honourable members should look at the number of places that will be available under our schemes. The honourable member for Wills gave some imaginary figures. I do not know where he got them. Let me tell the honourable member and the House what will be available for young people this year, particularly those who are presently taking part in the CYSS programs. Firstly, there will be 70,000 new training places. That is the basic fact which, apparently, the honourable member for Wills could not absorb from reading the papers.
Mr Holding-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. The Minister has been continually citing figures without identifying their source. I ask him either to table the documents or to identify the source of the material.
Mr N. A. BROWN-I will table the document. It is the employment and youth affairs programs for 1981-82 which is part of the Budget material. If honourable members opposite had looked at it, they would be familiar with the figures.
Mr Hawke-Is the 70,000 for young people?
Mr N. A. BROWN-The honourable member for Wills asks whether those. training places are for young people. The answer is yes. If he knew the first thing about the subject he would know that the Special Youth Employment Training Program applies to youth and not to adults. If we have established that, let us establish that there are approximately 70,000 new training places under that program this year. They will be in addition to the 20,000 which will carry over into this financial year. Secondly, it should be understood that we pay a transition allowance to encourage the young unemployed to attend preemployment, pre-vocational and preapprenticeship courses and courses under the Education Program for Unemployed Youth. Thirdly, it should be understood that last year we paid that allowance to 8,800 trainees. Honourable members may ask how many trainees we will pay the allowance to this year. The answer is 16,000. What has happened to the honourable member's figures? What has happened to his argument? He said that there are not enough training places or allowances for the people presently taking part in CYSS. His argument evaporates and disappears. There is no merit in it.whatsoever. Let me also say that there is $75.4m of government sector funds--
Mr Hawke-You are not telling the truth. You are as truthful now as you were in Adelaide. You lied in Adelaide and you arelying now.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-

Order! The honourable member for Wills will

withdraw.

.

Mr Hawke-I withdraw.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Wills will rise when he is called upon to withdraw.

Mr Hawke-I am sorry, Mr Deputy Speaker. I withdraw.

Mr N. A. BROWN-It should also be understood that up to $75.4m of government sector
funds under the school-to-work transition program will provide for post-school courses as well as school-based transition education in 1982. As if we did not have enough numbers to answer the honourable member's argument, there is also the Commonwealth Rebate for Apprentice FUll-
time Training scheme. Last year we provided rebates that encouraged the employment of 92,000 apprentices. This year we will be assisting 95,000 apprentices. So there is an increased number of opportunities for young people under that scheme. When those schemes are taken together, the places under the Special Youth Employment Training Program, the transition allowances, the allowances paid to people undertaking the Education Program for Unemployed Youth and the allowances paid to encourage the indenture and employment of apprentices, it should be abun-
dantly clear to anyone of moderate intelligence that thousands of places are available for young people if those places are brought to their attention and if they are prepared to use those training and work experience places which are available. We must face the real situation that there are young people in the Community Youth Support Scheme who have to have brought to their notice what these schemes are, how they work and what-
the prerequisites are for entry into them. Because I am concerned and the Government is concerned
about unemployment amongst young people, it is
my intention to ensure that young people have brought to their attention the wide ranging ambit of schemes which are available for them to. get work experience and to acquire skills to help them find and keep jobs. Departmental officials from my Department will be visiting all the CYSS projects. It will be explained to the project officers and to the participants in the scheme exactly what the Government's programs are, how those programs work, what the trainee allowances are and what facilities are available to them in their own areas so that they can take some positive action to acquire those skills, work experience and abilities which they need to obtain and to keep employment.

710 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Community Youth Support Scheme

That is the situation. The machinery, the funds and the programs are there. What is needed is an awareness amongst young people and those who advise them as to what our programs are and how young people can take part in them. Those visits will be made. Counselling will be given to young people and they will benefit from it. I also emphasise that young people should visit the Commonwealth Employment Service. They should use the services available there. If they do, they will find that the Special Youth Employment Training places are on the CES boards. They will find that the jobs are there. They will find that they'can get work experience and advice by using the CES.
Mr Hawke-That is a deliberate untruth.
Mr N. A. BROWN-They will find that the jobs are there. In case the honourable member did not hear, I repeat that they will find that there are specific jobs identified as Special Youth Employment Training Program jobs. They will get all the advice and all the help that they need to get themselves involved in one of the training schemes, one of the work experience programs, which are there. I must also say that we will be able to make the assets of the schemes available. to other organisations involved in youth work in the locality. The attempt by the honourable member for Wills to bring this matter on as a matter of public importance is tainted with hypocrisy because it is completely inconsistent with and clean contrary to the whole attitude of the Labor Party on this matter since the day CYSS was conceived.
I make this final point, and it is a very good opportunity to make it: This debate and this argument have been a salutary lesson, I would suggest, to the people of Australia, particularly to those interested in the issues of employment and unemployment. The salutary lesson-it is about time that more Australian people woke up to it-is that people will employ other people will employ other people if it is profitable for them to do so and if the people they are contemplating employing have the skills, abilities, experience and training that the employer wants. They will not employ people out of charity. They will not employ people because we ask them to do so. They will employ people if it is profitable and economic to do so and if the people available have the skills that they need. They will not do so otherwise. We say, therefore, that a government can do two things. Firstly, it can create the right economic environment in which it will be profitable to employ, as employers are now doing. The second thing a government can do is to equip people, particularly young people, with the skills, work experience, training and abilities that they need to acquire a job and to keep it.

Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation. I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-The honourable member may wait until the conclusion of the debate.
Mr YOUNG-I want to do it now, after the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown).
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member claims to have been misrepresented. He may briefly explain the manner in which he has been misrepresented.
Mr YOUNG-I preface what I want to say by saying that I consider it enormously important that my record on the question of employment and the unemployed be kept straight in this House because I am reasonably proud of the job I did for the Australian Labor Party in the three years I was shadow Minister for employment. What the Minister said was, of course, what I had said in the Parliament in applying the term 'cuddle therapy' to the Community Youth Support Scheme--
Mr N. A. Brown-It was in your book; it was not a parliamentary statement.
MrYOUNG-I do not want the Minister to interject because I do not think he is an expert on cuddling. It is not a totally objectionable term.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will proceed quickly to the point on which he has been misrepresented.
Mr YOUNG-Let me say this: Those things were said during a period in which the Government was claiming that anybody who attended a CYSS program was part of a massive government training program. CYSS has never been and is not today a massive government training program. I also want to add to what was said during debate in those three years.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member is debating the matter.
Mr YOUNG-No, I want to put the record straight. It is very important.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member should resume his seat for a moment. The situation, as it relates to making an explanation on the score of being misrepresented, revolves around simply the literal misrepresentation-not the debate of motivation or intention, but simply where an honourable member has been literally misrepresented. In that respect the honourable member is free to inform the House in what respect he has been misql.loted or misrepresented.

Community Youth Support Scheme

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 711

Mr YOUNG-I think, Mr Deputy Speaker, if you cast your mind back to the opening remarks of the Minister, you will see that his whole case rested on what I had said: The Government is now abolishing the CYSS because of what he said I said three years ago. I want to put the record straight and I think I am entitled to do that in the Parliament immediately after the Minister concluded his remarks. The former Minister-the present Minister for Industrial Relations-always used the figures of the P!!ople attending CYSS programs as people who were attending training programs of the Government. They were not at the last election--
Mr Shipton-Mr Depllty Speaker, I take a point of order. I submit to you that the honourable member for Port Adelaide is in fact ~ebating the issue and not speaking to a point of misrepresentation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair is inclined to uphold the point of order. I will extend further tolerance to the honourable member and ask him to come quickly to the point.
Mr YOUNG-Quite apart from not having said that we would abolish the scheme, at the last election, as spokesman again, I sent telegrams to each of the 270-odd CYSS centres in Australia telling them that they would be eligible for additional funds for job creation programs should Labor be elected at the en,d of 1980. We were not going to abolish them, we were going to extend their charter. That is exactly what should happen now. There is no provision for these children to go anywhere else but to the CYSS programs and there are not the jobs in Port Adelaide or anywhere else to take up these unemployed kids who are attending the CYSS programs.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat.
Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (4.0)-The speech that I have just been unfortunate enough to hear from the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A.Brown) must rate as the most cynical utterance that I have heard in my short time in Federal Parliament. The Minister obviously has. not had close contact, with the kids in. the Community Youth Support Scheme or he would not have wasted the entire time that he had to speak in trying to pour heaps of coal onto the Australian.Labor Party. This is a question which goes beyond scrapping between Liberal and Labor members. , This Minister,. on 2 June in the Adelaide Adver~iser,. was reported to have said that Commonwealth-funded ,youth support schemes need not fear coming changes to funding and operations. He has repeated this statement on

a number of occasions, and I believe from these reports that his utterances were so cynical as to indicate that he was staging an argument which he did not even believe in, that he did not want CYSS scrapped, and that he was rolled in Cabinet.
Mr Deputy Speaker, it is unfortunate that you are in the chair. I am casting no reflection on the Chair, but I wish to quote some of your words which appeared in your local paper, the Gympie Times, on Saturday, 22 August. The article states:
The Treasurer's brief statement signalling the end of CYSS came as a complete shock to you.
The story further says that you 'had been impressed at the level of performance attained at the local CYSS centre' and that you 'remain unconvinced that the 'decision fairly recognised the value ofCYSS in particular localities'. I commend you for those sentiments, which I share. I say to those to date mute honourable members in this chamber who, outside this chamber and in their electorates, have joined with their Labor colleagues in expressing dismay and concern at the demise of yet another social welfare project: 'Where do you stand in this chamber? Will your voices be raised in protest against this injustice? Where will you be when a vote is taken on the future of CYSS?,
There are 15 CYSS centres operating in the Brisbane metropolitan area, which covers nine Federal electorates, five of which are held by Government members. These members have had seven days to consider their position since the terse, two-sentence Budget announcement by the Treasurer that the Community Youth Support Scheme is to be discontinued on 31 October 1981. I hope that the honourable members from those electorates will take a stand in this chamber. I hope that they will not adopt the habit of saying one thing in their electorates and taking an entirely contradictory course of ac~ion in ~this House, where their votes and their voices really count. I am, therefore, calling on those Government members with moral conviction and conscience to cross the floor of this House to save CYSS when the vote is taken following the Budget debate. Our young unemployed Australhms need the support of honourable members on both sides of this chamber.
In all .the treachery that has been perpetrated on the kids of this country, the kids who have been sacrificed on the altar of the Government's economic policy, no greater injustice has been done than the abandonment of CYSS. The Government's failure to increase unemployment benefits for those under 18 years of age from an incredible $36 per week-$52 below the poverty line-was

712 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Community Youth Support Scheme

bad enough. The passive acknowledgment of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) that his Budget strategy would deliberately increase unemployment was bad enough. But the unkindest cut of all is that the - very program which would have helped in some way to relieve the anxiety and real poverty caused by increasing unemployment and decreasing unemployment benefit-the CYSS program-has been axed. The plight of those under-18s who are without parental support for whatever reason will now become unbearable without the safety valve of the local CYSS centres.
Youth homelessness in our cities is now in epidemic proportions. In my electorate of Lilley, street kids are sleeping in a hostel overnight and wandering around during the day. They are people without parental support. It is something that some Government members appear unable to understand from their privileged position in this chamber. When I raised the question on Wednesday night I had to put up with inane comments such as: 'Where are the parents?' Some honourable members are quite unaware that some kids have parents living in the country areas. Some do not have parental support. Some parents, because they are on such low incomes, cannot afford to keep their children at home or to keep them further at educational institutions. Honourable members should ask any church or community organisation which works with the young.
I make this solemn prediction. If the attentions of the Government are not directed immediately to the youths of this country and the crisis they face and to their increasingly aimless and hopeless existence, violence such as that which occurred at Brixton may be as common on the streets of Brisbane, Sydney and Melbourne as it is in London and Liverpool. How do. honourable members think the violence started there~ It was born out of unemployment and fostered by the indifference of politicians who would not stand up for what they believed in and bureaucratswho could not be truste.d. It was nurtured by social apathy and the derisive platitudes of 'dole bludger',
I am particularly concerned about the effects of OYSS cuts on the hundreds of y01,lng people who have been helped by CYSS centres such as Windsor and Deagon in my electorate. The project officers and staff at these centres, as in other centres around the country, have made an invaluable contribution to the often aimless existence of young people who through no fault of their own, find themselves unemployed. The CYSS centres have saved many of these people from falling into the trap of perpetual unemployment. Our unemployed youth have nowhere to turn. They need the confidence and backing of

their peer group. They need social workers and adults who will stand behind them. Once CYSS is scrapped how can we legitimately tell our young people that we sincerely care about their future and welfare? Our credibility as parents and politicians will be shot to pieces.
Towards the end of 1977,116 CYSS programs were under way around Australia involving 15,000 unemployed kids. If CYSS has been ineffective why has the Government continued to grant approval to those projects and an additional 180 projects? The proliferation of CYSS centres has served to heighten the expectations of the young unemployed. I point out that the other training schemes which are being vaunted do not meet the needs of the kids who will not be accepted. They cannot all be accepted, due to their large numbers. The Minister knows this. There will still be kids unemployed who will not have the support that they now have from CYSS centres which, by the Minister's words, are effective, are workable and should have extra funding in order to keep them going. The only thing that the Labor Party has said in the past is that we should have jobs rather than training for these kids.
Let us remember that we are talking about young people. They are the most vulnerable element in our society. 'Care for Kids' was 'last year's theme. How soon we forget. We had that theme in an election year. Could honourable members imagine the opposition to this Budget decision if it occurred in the midst of the 'Care for Kids' campaign? If this is an indication of the Government's good intentions of following up campaigns, what can we expect after the International Year of Disabled Persons? We will be cutting out all invalid pensions! At the weekend some unemployed young people honoured me by presenting me with this T-shirt which I proudly wear in this austere chamber. But these young people--
Mr Young~Tell us what it says.
Mrs DARLING-It says: 'Save CYSS from
Fraser's razor' r am keeping a promise to these
young people to stand in solidarity with them and to put their viewpoint across in this Parliament. I hope that Government members will note the message contained therein from the young people and that they will support our young people who have been let down entirely by this Government. There will not be a second chance. If Government members' kids were involved the smile would be wiped from their faces. It is necessary to retain CYSS. It is the only scheme which is looking. after thousands of young people who otherwise, at the

Community Youth Support Scheme

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 713

very best, would be playing space invader machines on the corner or at the very worst being drawn to the point of despair.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CHAPMAN (Kingston) (4.12)-The emotional tirade that we have just heard from the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) has failed to provide any rational argument against the Government's decision to abolish the Community Youth Support Scheme or in support of the matter of public importance raised by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), namely:
The callous disregard for the plight of unemployed young Australians reflected in the Government's decision to abandon the Community Youth Support Scheme.
This matter of public importance total demonstrates, as the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Me N. A. Brown) said earlier, the hypocrisy of the Australian Labor Party and the honourable member for Wills who raised it. As the Minister indicated, the Labor Party has continually criticised CYSS and its operation, yet now that it has been abolished the Opposition suddenly jumps to its defence. I quote again from the book by the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) I want to Work, where he clearly states:
The scheme, with a budget of $12.26 million in 1978-79, is to Fund community-based organisations to run activities For unemployed youth . . . .
The $12.26 million would be better spent on genuine job creation and training programs.
That is exactly the decision that the Government has taken in this Budget. It has transferred the funds that have been previously allocated to the CYSS projects to other training programs and furthermore it has significantly increased those training programs by 67 per cent. I will refer to that later in further detail.
The hypocrisy of the Labor Party is further demonstrated by the fact that a government of its persuasion presided over the greatest destruction of jobs in Australia since the Great Depression. Between August 1973 and August 1975 uriemployment increased from 67,200 to 215,500 while the recipients of unemployment benefits went up from 38,000 to over 160,000. The number of unemployed increased by 210 per cent and the number of unemployment benefit recipients by 324 per cent. During the same period the number employed in the private sector declined rapidly by 38,000.

So when the Fraser Government came to office in 1975 it was faced with the massive task of overcoming this disastrous situation. Through sound economic management, which included restraint on government spending and the urging of wage restraint, it has restored the climate for economic growth and thereby restored job growth. Slowly but surely success has been achieved and Labor's disastrous record has been reversed.
Employment in the last 12 months increased by 146,300 and over the last two years by 321,400. That growth in employment has been a consistent trend over that period. During the same period unemployment declined from 324,800 ~n July 1980 to 315,000 in July 1981. These favourable results have also been reflected in significant improvement in youth unemployment. Youth unemployment over the last two years has declined from 20 per cent to 15 per cent. This year 85 per cent oflast year's schoolleavers had obtained employment by the middle of the year, compared with 80 per cent in 1980. Once again that demonstrates a significant improvement in the employment situation for young people. The best thing that the Government can do, the best regard that it can show for young people, is to create an economic environment in which there is a growth in the number of jobs. The Government's policies have achieved this and they will continue to do so. The result of those policies is that there is now tremendous potential for job growth through the 1980s.
Of course, there is a major threat to this continued improvement in job opportunities. That major threat is the unrealistic attitude adopted by the trade union leadership and foisted on its members. This, of course, further demonstrates the hypocrisy of the honourable member for Wills, the former President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, in raising this matter of public importance.
The improving employment trend evident over the last two years slowed down in July. The recent wave of industrial unrest was a major factor contributing to that short term slowdown in employment growth. It undoubtedly undermined the confidence of employers. Our potential for future job growth is jeopardised by the currency given to the economic madness in the proposition that each wage earner is entitled to the benefits of collective bargaining, work value wage hikes, consumer price index increases, productivity in-. creases and a shorter working week, all combined. To argue in this way is to raise the expectations of the Australian wage earner beyond what is an economic reality. Such thinking is a prescription

714 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Community Youth Support Scheme

for inflation and for increasing employer resistmovement has. done in relation to youth unem-

ance to additional employment. The economy ployment. So a major initiative of the Govern-

does not have the capacity to pay and those who ment since 1975 has been to create an environ-

pay in the end are the unemployed.

ment in which there has been significant

The honourable member for Wills; when 'he was President of the ACTU, made a great song and dance in his Boyer lectures about the problem of unemployment. All such concern evaporates when the ACTU argues its case before the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. Without exception, under the presidency of Mr Hawke, the union movement persistently demanded more
and more for its members, ignoring in the process those who were unemployed and the way in which such demands had the potential for creating further unemployment. It seems that there is nobody so forgotten by the unions as a person who is no longer a union member because he is out of a job; and nobody so unknown by the unions as he

improvement in youth employment. The second prong of the Govermrient's approach has been to initiate a range of training programs to alleviate the situation of the unemployed and to improve their .skills,. The Community Youth Support Scheme was one of the earliest of those programs when it was introduced in 1976, but since it was introduced circumstances have changed greatly. I have already referred to the improved employment situation. The other factor is the many other training initiatives which the Government has
introduced over more recent years. The dovernment has also significantly increased its financial contribution to those various programs. That is once again evidenced in the current Budget.

who has never been a' union member because he

has neverhad a job.

The Government reaffirms its commitment to

It is no longer valid to imagine that eCOliomic
growth will occur independently of what the union movement does. If we are to stumble in our economic recovery from here on then those who persistently argue for wage increases will not only be held responsible but also have a lot to answer for. The trade unions must play their part, without further delay.

the training of Australians asa first priority in the
provision of a balanced work force. It is on that basis that the Government has announced its decision not to continue CYSS after the end of October but ,to transfer the funds that have been applied to that program to the other ,range of programs which have been introduced since 1976. The most practical way in which the Government can help the young to reap the benefits of a grow-

Mr Leo McLeay-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. I know that the honourable member is trying to mount an apology for the Government's economic proposals, but I thought the matter of public' importance was' about the

ing economy is to provide increased education, training and work experience opportunities so that they improve their skills and better compete in the growing labour market. Under the decisions taken no young person will be denied assistance to

callous disregard for the plight of the unemployed young Australians reflected in the Government's decision to abandon the Community YouthSupport Scheme. Could you ask the honourable member to be relevant?

make a successful transition to the world of work. It is on that basis that the Government has provided some $203m for the current financial year for employment and youth affairs programs. Expenditures on youth programs will rise by 67

Mr Order!

DTEhePUhoTnYouSraPbEleAmKeEmRbe(rMhraAs nrmot imtaagdee)a-

point of order. I have to interpret that the honour-

able member for Kingston is dealing with' the cir-

cumstances surrounding the Government's

. decision.

'

percent from ,the previous figure of $47.5m to $79.4mfor ;the current financial year. Those programs which are more effective in providing training for,young people to fit them for the world of work, such as pre-apprenticeship courses, the school to work transition program, the Common-

Mr Hawke-Very peripheral. -

wealth rebate for Apprentices Full-time Training Scheme and those other schemes and programs

Mr ,DEPUTY SPEAKER-It may be rather that wereinentioned by the Minister in his earlier

peripheral; nevertheless, I have to uphold the remarks in this' debate'are far more effective in as-

view I have put.

sisting young people to enter the work force than

.Mr CHAPMAN-Instead ofindulging inihistrionics in this chamber, the honourable meinber'

CYSS has be!;n. It is on that basis that the

Government has ,taken its decision. '

'

for Wills would better serve the young people of

Australia by using his persuasive. powers with;his ' Mr DEPUTY, SPEAKER--'-Order! The

union colleagues to change their attitude and start-, honourable member's time has expired. The dis-

to undo some of the:<. damage ,the trade union cussion is concluded.

Personal Explanations

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 715

PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)~ Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Dr BLEWETT-Yes. The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) in the course of his speech said that the attitude of the Australian Labour Party in this debate is clean contrary to the whole attitude of the Labor Party to CYSS. I simply want to say--
Mr N. A. Brown-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. Is an extra speech being made by the Opposition? The honourable member has not referred to himself as being mentioned in my speech. It would, with respect, be quite wrong for you to give the Opposition an opportunity to make a third speech in this debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Minister can be assured that I will be listening very carefully to ensure that the honourable member explains how he personally was misrepresented.
Dr BLEWETT-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. A remark was made about the attitude of Labour Party members who were in the chamber at the time. The Minister said their present attitude was clean contrary to the whole attitude of the Labor Party to CYSS. I wish simply to say that I, and I am sure many other Opposition members, have actively supported this Scheme in our own electorates.- I have regularly--
Mr N. A. Brown-Mr Deputy Speaker, with respect, such remarks have never been allowed as a personal explanation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Bonython must indicate where he personally was mentioned and misrepreSented in the debate. It is my duty to uphold the Standing Orders and that is provided in the Standing Orders.
Dr BLEWETT~Mr Deputy Speaker, the Minister said that remarks of honourable members of this House were clean contrary to our attitudes to the Scheme. If that does not refer to members sitting in the chamber-'--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-That is a matter which should have been brought up in the debate. I have to rule accordingly.
Mr SHIPTON (i-liggins)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented in a debate last Thursday.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I call the honourable member for Higgins.
Mr SHIPTON-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. In the Grievance Debate last Thursday, the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe) claimed that I said that Mr Thompson, the Premier of Victoria, threw the Alcoa project in Victoria into jeopardy. As can be seen from the record of my speech, I did not say that at all. As recorded on page 583 of Hansard, the honourable member in the middle of my speech interjected:
There is an incompetent government in Victoria.
As is recorded in Hansard, I responded to the honourable member for Batman as follows:
No, it is not incompetent at all. I will come back to that matter.
I did come back to the matter. I referred to the new effective, strong and fresh leadership of Lindsay Thompson in Victoria. I was critical of the State Electricity Commission of Victoria.in my speech but I was in no way critical of the Government in Victoria. I reiterate my confidence in the new effective, strong and fresh leadership of Lindsay Thompson in Victoria.
Mr HOWE (Batman)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the honourable member wish to make a personal explanation?
Mr HOWE-Yes. I refer to the same matter. With these matters involving an interpretation of what someone mayor may not have said, it is extremely important to look at the context within which statements are made. The context within which I was speaking was that of pointing out the utter confusion that exists in this country at the moment concerning the aluminium industry, the fact that that industry, in terms of expectations, has dropped 40 per cent so far this year, a result which is primarily the responsibility of the Federal Government.
Mr Bourchier-Mr Deputy Speaker, 1 raise a point of order. The honourable member claims to be misrepresented. So far he is addressing his remarks to his own speech. Is he suggesting that he misrepresented himself?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I ask the honourable member for Batman, when making a personal explanation in which he claims to be misrepresented, to refer specifically to where he was misrepresented. I ask him to do that now.
Mr HOWE-The whole thrust of the speech of the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton), was that the responsibility was at a State level as opposed to a Federal level. The

716 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Tariff Proposals

State Electricity Commission of Victoria has put that in jeopardy. The SEC is a State authority responsible to the State Government and Mr Thompson as the Premier ultimately has to wear that responsibility.
Mr Shipton-I raise a point of order. A few minutes ago I claimed to have been misrepresented. I complied with the Standing Orders and I pointed to the words, sentences and the page numbers in Hansard where 1 had been so misrepresented.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member will come to the point of order.
Mr Shipton-I referred to the confidence 1had in the Victorian Government under Lindsay Thompson.
Mr Scott-Stop making a speech. Mr Shipton-I am not making a speech; 1 am taking a point of order. As a matter of courtesy,. 1 told the honourable member for Batman that I was going to take a point of misrepresentation. With great respect to the honourable member, he has not in any way said where 1 have misrepresented him. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-That is a matter for the Chair. 1 am watching it very carefully. 1 have already made the point to the honourable member for Batman. Has the honourable member for Batman completed his explanation? Mr HOWE-Yes.
TARIFF PROPOSALS Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.27}-1 move:
Excise Tariff Proposals No.3 (1981).
Excise Tariff Proposals No. 3-1981-which 1 have just tabled formally place before Parliament alterations to the Excise Tariff. The alterations were introduced during the winter recess by Gazette Notice No. 1-1981-under the authority of section 160B of the Excise Act. Proposals No. 31981-increases the excise duty on stabilised crude petroleum oil from $174.08 to $177.53 per kilolitre operating on and from 1 July 1981. This alteration followed determination of new import parity prices by the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Carrick). The determination accords with the Government's policy on import parity pricing for Australian produced crude oil. Proposals No. 3-1981---'-also increases the excise duty on naturally occurring liquefied petroleum gas from $36.67 to $37.07 per kilolitre operating on and from 1 July 1981. This change followed a new average wholesale price

for naturally occurring LPG being set by the Minister for National Development and Energy in accordance with Government policy. 1 commend the Proposals to the House.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (4.28}-1 take another opportunity to point out to the House how absurd the methods are with which we deal with matters of excise tariff proposals. We came into the chamber at a quarter to two this afternoon, eastern standard time. It was about the first occasion we had an opportunity to look at the blue business sheet which tells us the matters which will come before this chamber today. At the bottom of the first page it is stated:
At approx. 4 p.m.-
Tariff Proposals-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) to move Excise Tariff Proposals and make speech.
We are given no advanced notice of the subject of his speech or the matters that he will bring before this chamber. Yet this is the only occasion-by responding immediately, as 1 am now, having heard what the Minister had to say and this being the first notice 1 have had of it-I will get to say anything about this matter until a Bill called a customs validation Bill comes before the chamber probably next Mayor June.
My first reaction, on hearing these few words that the Minister had to say, is that if the shadow Minister for Minerals and Energy, the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) were here with me 1 may immediately oppose the motion and call for a division. On the face of it this seems to be at the heart of the Government's discredited import parity pricing program. By unnecessarily bringing in these increased charges, it is imposing increased costs on the Australian people.
There are two matters I will briefly bring before the chamber. Firstly, 1 mention the inadequate way we are dealing with this matter. Of course, it ought to be put aside for 24 hours or perhaps one week while the matter is examined in detail. We will not learn much from what the Minister has just said. The statement contains three pretty miserable paragraphs as we read it. If possible, we ought to have a standing committee of this House of Representatives looking into all these excise tariff matters which would, on a non-party basis, examine this particular measure in detail to see what justification there is for it. We do not know whether there is any justification from what the Minister has just said. That is the first matter. Secondly, if 1 have interpreted it correctly, this proposal is just part of the import parity pricing program of this Government. The Labor Opposition is totally against these increased charges. 1 wish this chamber would deal with these matters

Export Grants Acts Amendment Bill

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 717

more adequately so that we could put our case, with some notice, in stronger terms than I have have been able to right now.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hodgman) adjourned.
EXPORT GRANTS ACTS AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 20 August, on motion by MrAnthony:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (4.33)-Just to show my credibility I will say that the Opposition will not oppose the Export Grants Act Amendment Bill 1981. Nevertheless, I have some remarks to make, some of which are of a critical nature. I do not make them lightly. I believe there is some justification for suggesting that the theme of this Bill is best summed up in that well-known sentence: 'While Nero fiddles, Rome burns.' This Bill is part of Nero fiddling. The purpose of the Bill is to restructure the Export Development Grants Board which was set up under the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974. The restructuring is done in such a way that if this Bill is passed, as we anticipate it will be, the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman are drawn from the four part time members rather than the executive member being in the chair. The Board comprises four part time members and a full time member, making a total of five members who are responsible for the carrying out of the Board's decisions and the day to day operations of the secretariat.
Although the Board deals with a relatively large appropriation, estimated at $281m for this current financial year 1981-82, the changes which flow from the passing of this Bill are, as I have already indicated, very minor ones. They represent another change. This fiddling around is not at all justified in the second reading speech made by the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) in this chamber last week.
In this case, unlike the case of the tariff proposals with which I dealt, of course we have properly been given a week's notice in which to do our homework and look at the nature of this Bill. One can only reflect on the amount of time which is wasted on a little matter like this when there are so many great issues in this nation. When this House gets going each day we hear petitions being read. I believe those petitions are longer and more voluminous than they ever have been in the history of this House. We look at the Notice Paper and see the number of questions ori notice. I believe that the number is greater than it has ever

been. In my view this reflects the fact that the Government is governing the country in such a way that the people are so unhappy that the expression of that unhappiness is in this chamber, through petitions, through the questions on notice, and through the other matters such as the matter of public importance just recently raised in this House. There is no doubt that an enormous amount of hardship being suffered in this country could be focused on by legislation which is of a material nature. But instead we get this sort of fiddling around, making the chairman of the Board one of the part time members instead of the present situation in which the full time executive member is the chairman.
Let me mention some of the other problems we could deal with. We have 500,000 people unemployed. In the face of the increased interest rates, we have people worried sick trying to make ends meet. We have people Who are under enormous pressure because of the increased health charges, increased sales taxes and all these things that are worrying people in this community. Yet we are fiddling around changing a chairman from a full time member to a part time member. These changes were introduced last week, but the Act was established as long ago as 1978. I believe the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) will have a few words to say on the Bill. He is in the House and will follow me. He drew attention to what he described then as the piecemeal and fragmentary way in which the Government deals with this important segment of Australian industry, namely, our exporters. They deserve better than that. They deserve something better than just the piecemeal and fragmentary way in which they are dealt with. I shall talk in greater depth in a momentabout what they deserve.
In June 1980, the Australian Manufacturing Council appealed to the Government to bring some measure of certainty into this area. To date that appeal has been ignored. Whereas we could have had a Bill vastly improving the lot of the various exporters of this nation, instead, I repeat, we get this little machinery measure. Let us look at the Government's record in the area of exports. It is not a good one. In 1974-75, the Labor government established the basics of the present scheme, together with taxation concessions, and these amounted to over $LOOm per annum. Between 1976-77 and 1978-79, the Fraser Government wound the scherne down, first to a very low and quite unsatisfactory $25m a year level, and then it went back to $58m. One can see the stopping and going and the changes that are taking place instead of some consistent policy for exports. We

718 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Export Grants Acts Amendment Bill

then had the report of the Crawford Study Group on Structural Adjustment. I believe that was a basically good report. Exporters suddenly were rediscovered by the Government-thank
goodness-and a considerable actual increase in the size of the payout occurred. Despite the fact that the Government budgeted for only $66m in incentives in that year, it spent $215m. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) appeared to have as much trouble estimating the size of the amount needed for exporters as he has estimating M3 or the level of tax avoidance in our country.

uncertainty for exporters instead of giving them a go and making sure that they are helping this nation in a way that sensible people want them to do so. If we are ever to have investment in export industries and the economies of scale efficiencies produced by being able to get out into those export markets, we must stop this erratic switch of policies. Let us look at the second reading speech and the Nero fiddling that has been going on here. The Minister stated:
This restructuring of the Board is consistent with Government policy on the administration of statutory bodies.

On the legislative front we also had some stopThat is the only excuse-the only explanation and

ping and going. We have had a bewildering the only reason-we are given for this change.Mr

number of changes since 1975-in fact, four in Deputy Speaker, I am sure an intelligent man

all-in this matter of legislation relating to exsuch as you agrees with me. Do you not agree that

porters. This is just the latest one. The operations this House deserves better than that? What is it

of the Board have had to be considerably rearran- .that has been recommended to the Government

ged following industry criticism about lack of that has brought about this change whereby the

speed in processing applications. The industry has Chairman is a part time member instead of, as

been quite correct in making its voice heard about hitherto, one of the full time members? Do we not

the poor Government administration in this area, deserve a little better explanation than just that

mainly because money was not available and was bland paragraph? I think it is indicative of the

not properly appropriated. This year's Budget way the Parliament is being treated by the Execu-

Papers show that enormous carryovers and enortive at present. The Government has still to make

mous delays have been suffered by exporters, and a general statement on the recommendations, for

they still have not been very .substantially instance, of the Senate standing Committee on

reduced. Just as our adverse balance of trade on Finance and Government Operations in regard to

current account begins to turn sour the Prime Commonwealth statutory authorities. Where

Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), following the recdoes the Government stand with the general

ommendations of that infamous razor gang rereporting and record keeping requirements for

port, made the following pronouncement:

bodies such as the Export Grants Development

Reflecting the success of Australia's exporters in recent years . . . the Government has now decided that on its expiry in June 1982, the Export Expansion Grants Scheme will be extended by one year to June 1983 pending review by the lAC . . .
Enormous uncertainty therefore is created again for the exporters of this nation because these sorts of programs are under scrutiny once more by the Industries Assistance Commission. The Prime Minister went on:

Board? That Senate Committee recommended the introduction of a uniform reporting code and a standardised procedure of record keeping between authorities. But if we look at clause 9 of this Bill, the chairman of the Board is to determine the form of records to be kept by the Board. Where does the Government's responsibility lie? In fact I turn to the wording of clause 9 to outline to the House my extreme reservations about that clause. It is perhaps a little too long to read on this

. . . but that grant rates will be reduced by 50 per cent occasion but I draw the Minister's attention to it

from I July 1982. The export now campaign-

and ask him, perhaps in reply to this debate, to ex-

He concluded-

plain why indeed clause 9 is needed. Clause 9

is to be terminated.

states:

At a time when our balance of trade, as I said earlier, is not g90d-in fact it is in an appalling state-at a time when the rest of the world is

(I) It is the duty of the Chairman to ensure the efficient and orderly conduct of the business of the Board . . .
That is okay. It continues:

doing a lot more for its exporters, indeed at a time when exchange rates are going upwards, making life more difficult for exporters, and indeed I can add to that and say at a time when inflation is getting worse and making us more uncompetitive,-in short when it is more and more difficult for us to get out into the export marketc-we find the Government creating more

(2) It is the duty of the Executive Member, subject to and in accordance with the general directions of the Board, to manage the affairs of the Board, and for that purpose the Executive Member-
(a) shall make, or cause to be made, such inquiries into claims or into any other matter relevant to the operation of this Act as he thinks necessary;
(b) may make, or cause to be made, to the Board such reports in relation to claims as he thinks fit; and

Export Grants Acts Amendment Bill

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 719

(c) may, determine the form of the records to be kept by
theBoa~d.
I am sure that honourable members agree that we deserve a little better than that. Indeed, we deserve something more certain than that and not to have everything left to the executive member in that open-ended way.
I end on this note: Where is the uniform code of reporting to cover the other 250 to 300 quasiautonomous national government organisations which, since the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations, we have learnt exist and about which this group of people who are so besotted about small government have had so much to say? When will we get some of the results of their thinking in relation to that Committee's report? Let us hear some arguments not only in favour of the recommendations arising out of that Senate' C'ommittee's report but also in support of the changes being made by this Bill, minor though they are. We have not been given the benefit of the Government's thinking as to why it is pursuing this matter. I believe governments must pay closer attention to the operations of boards such as this one. They must maintain their credibility with industry by seeing that boards and authorities are properly staffed and are subject to close scrutiny. I do not believe that this Bill does enough in that regard. If it does, we certainly have not been given an explanation of what is being done.
Nero fiddles and little changes like this are being made while so much more needs to be done for exporters. Our exports have been halved since 1953 on a percentage basis. We are now down to only 1.3 per cent of the world trade. It is an undoubted fact that our standard of living is closely related to our success as an exporter. Indeed, as our export performance has fallen, the standard of living has been relatively reduced in this country. At the time of Federation we were second or third in the world in terms of standard of living, whereas in 1970 we were twelfth on the league table. We are now down to No. 17 on that table. That has come at a time when our export performance has been declining. We have to do something about that. Of course, competitiveness is the key.
We cannot rely only on the energy equation going in our favour and on being a quarry for the rest of the world and exporting just those sorts of products. We must also get out and export manufactured products and do better with our agricultural products. We will not do that while competitiveness is being hit by theupvaluation of our currency. There has been an 11.3 per cent upvaluation since June of ,last year. There are

ways and means of making sure that our currency is not being upvalued at the expense of our exporters. We have to do more to specialise as well. Government must help industry to specialise so that it can get scale economies and can be more competitive on export markets, thus helping to bring about greater scale economies. We have to improve our transport system. Lastly, we have to encourage our own research and development and to build new export orders on Australian inventiveness and Australian ingenuity, and not just be happy with second hand technology. In short, the fiddling that is going on here is not proven because the Government has not given us the wisdom of its thoughts. I put that word in inverted commas with a query mark after it. The Opposition does not know enough to warrant its opposing this measure, but the Opposition takes this opportunity of saying that much more ought to be done by the Government to improve the lot of exporters so that they can export more of our products to the world markets.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (4.50)-1 support the Export Grants Acts Amendment Bill 1981, .which was brought into this House by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) ..We just listened to the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford). The honourable member certainly covered a wider field than the incentives scheme which this Bill deals with. One must agree with him that it is very important that we in Australia should do all we can to increase our exports. Whilst this Bill may not be a very large measure, it nevertheless provides certain important items which will improve our export incentives scheme.
The Commonwealth Government provides incentives to encourage exports. The Export Market Development Grants Act 197.. was introduced to operate for five years from July of that year, but it was revised to improve its effectiveness with effect from 1 July 1978. The scheme will now operate until 30 Jun,e 1982. The scheme is administered by the Export Development Grants Board, which is responsible to the Minister for Trade and Resources, and is designed to encourage exporters to seek out and develop overseas markets. The scheme covers the exporters of primary products and industrial goods and the providers of certain services, including tourism, know-how and industrial property rights, whether the exporter is an individual, a partnership, a company or a marketing organisation. The scheme operates by way of taxable grants to a

720 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Export Grants Acts Amenqment Bill

maximum of $100,000 and, in certain circumstances, $125,000 against eligible expenditure incurred on overseas market research and promotional publicity activities and development.
The Board also administers the Export Expansion Grants Act 1978, which provides for a scheme designed to reward improved export performance. Grants, which are taxable, are calculated on a formula applied to the increase in exports in a grant year over the average annual exports in the three years immediately preceding. The scheme covers a wide range of goods and services. However, some products are excluded. The products excluded under this scheme are minerals, wool, wheat, sugar, livestock, certain meats, WQodchips and hides and skins of cattle and sheep. The scheme took effect from 1 July 1977 and will run until mid-1982.
It has been mentioned by both the hQnourable member for Adelaide and me that it is important that we should do all we can to expand Qur exports. This is nQt easy tQday. FQr instance, we IQst valuable markets on the world scene when one Qf our major buyers, Great Britain, entered the European ECQnomic Community. We have lost possibly a sale of 80 tonnes of beef a year and sales Qf all other agricultural prQducts, including butter and dried fruits. This has had a very seriQus effect on our trade. It is good to. see that the Minister for Trade and ResQurces is meeting with the high Qfficials of the European Economic Co~ munity to. see what can be done to get AustralIa back into those valuable markets. NQt only is the EEC not purchasing our products but also the agricultural prQducts that it sells are heavily subsidised. This is causing great concern to marketers in Australia. .
Let us get back to the staff that are assisting the Board. On IQoking at some figures, we find that on 1 July 1979 the Board had a staff of 56 peQple. The staff ceiling, separate to. that for the Department of Trade and Resources, accorded to the Board for 30 June 1980 was initially set at 50. HQwever, following the Budget allQcations totalling $215m fQr the eXPQrt market development grant payments the ceiling was lifted to 80. I understand that, at the present time, it is slightly over this figure and that possibly further staff will be added in the near future. There are 29 staff members situated in Canberra, 20 in Sydney, 19 in Melbourne, four each in Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth and one staff member is situated in Hobart. There are part time assisting officers from the Department of Trade and Resources in Darwin.
The follQwing infQrmation will be' of great interest to. honourable members as it relates to

exports under the incentive schemes. FrQm 1974 to 1975 the total amQunt of claims determined were 13,975. Disallowed claims in full for that period totalled 1,073. The amount of claims totalled $187.3m and the total determined grants tQtalled $152.7m. In 1979-80, which was a big year for the incentive eXPQrt scheme, 3,507 claims were determined, 292 were disallowed and total claims amounted to $51.1m. Totalled determined grants amounted to ~4~.6m. ~his indi~ates that the incentive scheme IS IncreasIng and IS of great value to manufacturers and business people in Australia. MQst honourable members will have manufacturing concerns in their areas. No. dQubt there are concerns which have benefited greatly under the incentive scheme. In my electorate of Paterson, for instance, there are quite a number of manufacturers and concerns that have benefited in no. small way frQm the incentive grant scheme.
Mr Lloyd-You have helped them a IQt.
Mr O'KEEFE-That is right. We have helped them. Currently, the Board cQnsists Qf a full time chairman and fQur other part time members drawn from the Australian business community. This Bill is a machinery measure as has been mentioned by the honourable member for Adelaide. It provides fQr the restructing of the Export Developments Grants Board so that the chairman and deputy chairman are part time members of ~he Board with a full time member of the Board beIng responsible for carrying out the Board's decision and the day-tQ-day operations of the secretariat. This change will bring the Board into line with the structures of boards of other statutory bQdies which operate in this country.
There are 14 clauses in the Bill, some of which are minor in importance. However, I feel that clause 4 is an important clause. It provides fQr the structure and membership of the BQard and for the transfer of the person holding the office of chairman of the Board prior to the proclamation of this Bill to be deemed to have been appointed as the executive member upon prQclamation. Clause 5 transfers the term of office from the chairman of the Board to the newly created office Qf full time executive member. Clause 7 is important as it provides for the Minister to apPQint an acting executive member to the Board. Clause 8 provides fQr the selection of an acting chairman in the absence of the chairman and deputy chairman. Clause 9 outlines the duties of the chairman and of the executive member. These are important clauses. Although the Bill is a minQr one it does appear that most items affecting the staffing and machinery sections of the legislation. have been thoroughly dealt with.

Export Grants Acts Amendment Bill

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 721

It is a fact that, at the present time, our exports are not increasing as they should be. There are many reasons for this. We are having great difficulty on the eastern seaboard and, no doubt, in other ports in Australia, in getting our produce away. We are having great difficulty in particular with wheat and coal exports. One can go to the port of Newcastle which adjoins my electorate and one will find 30 or 40 ships off the coast which are held up because of go-slow tactics and oth~r union demands in that port. I am sure the situation is the same in other ports. The same situation applies to iron ore exports. These problems are affecting the export income of our country. The honourable member for Lyne (Mr Cowen) who flies over that port regularly will confirm the facts that I have just mentioned.
It is a tragedy that the export of our meat is under fire in the United States at the present time. The Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) is doing all that he possibly can to see that the culprits are caught and that this practice is eliminated. Not only is it affecting our .export trade to the United States but also it can affect our export of meat to Japan, Korea and to other markets which have been established throughout the world. This Export Grants Acts Amendment Bill will assist us in gaining increased export earnings for the business people and manufacturers of this country. It has the full support of honourable members on this side of the House.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (5.1)-1 wish to make a few remarks about the Export Grants Acts Amendment Bill. I do not oppose it. I took part in the debate when it was introduced. At that time. I was anxious to make the point that the whole idea of export incentive grants in this field are to be applauded where they guarantee an increase in employment because there would be an increase in productivity as a result of increased exports. Certain matters have been put to me which have caused me to make representations to the Government as to whether the administration of the legislation will be in accordance with what the House desires. I well remember that when we discussed this Bill we discussed it with a legislation committee-we were concerned as to how we might accurately draft the Bill to prevent people from getting benefits where there was no actual increase in exports. For example, would firms change their names and yet be the same firm?
Before I address myself to a couple of examples I make the point that when one looks at this year's Budget one will see some significant remarks. For example, in relation to the export expansion

grants scheme, this Budget provides $197m to reduce oustanding commitments of $247m. So that, as at 30 June 1981, we are already that far behind in oustanding commitments. That is how much that scheme has been delayed. If one looks at the export market development grants in the Budget one will see that, in similar terms, there is provision for an amount of $84m to reduce outstanding commitments of $1 09m. So there is an enormous backlog. I understand that other schemes in the world do not have this sort of delay. Obviously they are different schemes. I note that in the Industries Assistance Commission report it states that it will review this scheme. I think it ought to do that. The lAC was anxious to see that money was not held back from those who were entitled to it. Obviously the Budget has taken a guess at the situation because the demands have been so great that it cannot cope with the claims. In fact, there is a 12-month delay for those who are entitled to be paid.
I remind the House of some specifics that I think were canvassed when we discussed this matter in the legislation committee. The scheme provided for manufacturers, exporters and others to be given incentive grants. However, the question arose as to whether one might be put in a position of giving grants to people who were not, in fact, increasing their sales because they decided to sell the goods themselves or to have some other company do it. As I understand it these are some of the anomalies which have been pointed out to the Government. Let me take the case of a manufacturer selling a million dollars worth of goods through a merchant and selling direct half a million dollars worth of goods himself. The total sales are $1.5m. This scheme comes into operation so the manufacturer decides to dispense with the merchant. But, in fact, his total sales drop $300,000-they drop to $1.2m. But because he has sold them himself he gets the benefit of an incentive grant of $95,000. In summary, the situation is that although Australia loses $300,000 in sales, the manufacturer -gets from the taxpayer $95,000 under this scheme. Let us take another scheme. A manufacturer has been selling, completely through a merchant, $1.5m worth of goods. He sacks the merchant and sells the goods himself. But he sells less-only $lm worth. It can be seen from the figures that under the scheme he can claim $49,500 on the basis that there is an incentive for what he has done. I just do not think that that adds up to what we are about.
I have other examples here which show that an exporter can appoint a client as his agent and there can be some form of kick-back operation

722 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Export Grants Acts Amendment Bill

where again, by manipulation of the arrangements, taxpayers' money is given for incentives which, in fact, have not occurred. A new exporter can come into the field offering rebates but creating no new business as he only takes away busi- 'ness from an existing exporter. For example, a million dollars worth of exports could be involved and a new exporter could come into the field offering a rebate. Honourable members can see that in those instances grants of $49,500 could be made when there has been no new business at all, just a change of name. If honourable members want to look at the present position regarding who is getting the benefits they will find that most of the major big business operations are certainly getting them but that in many cases they are foreign-owned and controlled and are exporting the Australian products back to their own corporations overseas and getting an export grant for it.
I really think we have to get some guidelines which indicate that we do not mind the concept of creating employment in Australia and that ought to be one of the criteria: We want to see Australian ownership and control of the business and we do not think it ought to apply right across the board to companies that are obviously exporting to themselves particularly our raw materials and matters of that nature. I think these examples have been drawn to the attention of the Government. I make the point that they represent a serious manipulation of the scheme. Is it any wonder that the scheme is so far behnd and that the present budgetary allowance is unable to cope with the demands of it?
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources) (5.8)-On behalf of the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony), I very sincerely thank all those honourable members who participated in the debate for their sound, constructive comments and for their concern. I would like briefly to respond to a few of the points made by the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) and in particular to his comments about clause 9. The reason for clause 9 is that there has been a change in the structure of the Export Development Grants Board and it was necessary to indicate in the new legislation what would be the duties of the new officers-the Chairman and the executive member. It represents a rearrangement of functions as stated in the existing legislation and nothing has been changed or added.
The honourable member for Adelaide and the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen) indicated their concern about some of the administrative problems that had

arisen. I will ensure that the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith receives a reply to the representations he has brought to the notice of the Government. I am unaware of the particular instances he brought to my notice, but we will endeavour to get him a positive and quick reply on those.
There have been administrative difficulties and each and everyone of us as a member of parliament has been made aware of those problems by our constitutents. These arrangements will ensure that some of those administrative problems and nightmares will be overcome. The legislation provides for the Chairman to undertake the work appropriate for a man in his position and for the executive member to concentrate on administration-an area where the Government is awa.re that problems and delays et cetera have arisen. I would advise all honourable members who are interested in the operations of the Export Development Grants Board that they are made clear to the Parliament in the annual report of the Board tabled by the Minister. In effect, the Government believes that restructuring the Board will make more effective use of the commercial and management expertise of the part time members in policy matters and, as stated, will allow the full time executive member to concentrate more on the administrative issues and the running of the secretariat.
The honourable member for Adelaide indicated some concern that the Government had not been definite in its undertakings to the Parliament and to the nation on this piece of legislation. I would like to rebut some of the arguments he made. The Government, when it reintroduced the scheme-I just remind the Parliament that the Labor Party did away' with the scheme in 1974-made it operative for five years. That was a definite commitment and I think the honourable member for Adelaide was not quite accurate when he alluded to Rome burning while Nero fiddled. As part of the Review of Commonwealth Functions decisions, the export incentive schemes have been extended to 30 June 1983 and the whole matter has been referred to the Industries Assistance Commission with a definite instruction to the lAC to report back to the Government by 31 December of this year, allowing the Government plenty of time to consider the report, to consult with exporters and to announce changes well in advance of the new arrangement coming into force: It appears to me that the Government has been quite definite. It indicated what it is going to do and the changed arrangements will lead to greater administrative efficiency.

Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA to 9A)

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 723

I think it is appropriate to comment on the excellent contribution made by the honourable member for Paterson (Mr O'Keefe). It was a very practical contribution indicating that he knows the problems that confront exporters. I think he put his finger on the pulse of the significant item that the honourable member for Adelaide neglected to comment upon. The honourable member for Adelaide castigated the Government for doing things which he thought should not be done, but he forgot to mention the point made by the honourable member for Paterson who drew attention to the problems of exporters in this country in guaranteeing security of supply and that their exportswill be shipped on the day nominated. As he indicated, both he and the honourable member for Lyne (Mr Cowan) know that there are 30 or 40 ships tied up outside Newcastle waiting to take coal and wheat. I think it is a fairly deplorable situation when we have the wheat farmers of Australia waiting for returns on their product and, because of an internal union dispute-totally foreign to the Australian way of life, noUndicating to fellow workers that they ewxapnotrttsohipimmpernotvsea~tehehierldquupa.liItycoonfgralitfuela-ttehethsee honourable member for Paterson for outlining the flaw in the argument of the honourable member for Adelaide who failed to acknowledge the significantreason for a decline in our exports and the difficulties that exporters have in guaranteeing supply because of the disruptive tactics of trade unions which are completely unaware of their responsibilities to this nation.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr McVeigh) read a third time.
SALES TAX AMENDMENT BILLS (Nos. lA TO 9A) 1981
Bills presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Readings
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (5.15)-1 move:
That the Bills be now read a second time.
In my Budget Speech last week, I announced three separate sales tax changes. Two of them-an increase of 2t percentage points in existing rates and the correction of a number of anomalies and inconsistencies that have crept into

the sales tax law-are already before the Parliament in legislative form. The BiBs I am now introducing complete the legislative package and will, with effect from I January next, impose sales tax of 2t per cent on a range of goods that are now exempt from the tax.
In speaking last week, I drew attention to the clear advantage that lies in effecting some change in the mix of direct and indirect taxes. I spoke about and again emphasise the potential that such a change generates for desirable reductions in direct taxes, particularly personal income tax, as economic and budgetary conditions permit. It is said by some that the Government's Budget decision is at variance with what I put to the House in my taxation statement in March this year. Nothing could be further from the truth, as a fair analysis of that statement and a consideration of the modest change now proposed will reveal.
As honourable members know, it is, for constitutional reasons, established practice to enact nine separate Acts when imposing sales tax. The approach in each of the present nine Bills is to impose tax of 2+ per cent on goods that are identified by reference to items in the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act that at present exempt the goods from tax. These exempting items, along with a large number of other exemptions that are being retained, are contained in the First Schedule to the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act.
The technical effect of the Bills will be to tax at 2t per cent, on and after I January 1982, goods which are at present exempted by items 51, 53, 54, 58,60,82, to 90F inclusive, 96, lOS, 107, 113F, 120 and l20A in the first Schedule. The broad classes of goods which fall within the scope of the items other than 107 and 113F are books, magazines and newspapers, building materials, packaging and wrapping materials, hand tools, clothing, footwear, drapery, soft furnishings and manchester goods. The goods covered by items 107 and 113F are, very broadly, motion picture films, servicing equipment and construction equipment. I emphasise that goods falling within any of these categories will still be exempt from sales tax if they are sold in circumstances in which an overriding exemption in the First Schedule to the Sales Tax (Exemptions and classifications) Act applies. By way of example, where a school entitled to exemption under item 63A purchases books for the school's use, the books will remain exempt, from sales tax. Similarly, where a manufacturer purchases hand tools for use as aids to manufac. ture, as defined, the tools will remain exempt under the aids to manufacture head of exemption.

724 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Norfolk Island Amendmel1t Bill

I shall not go into greater detail in this connection at this stage as an explanatory memorandum covering technical aspects of the Bills is being made available to honourable members and this provides details of the goods affected by these measures. The net result of the changes will be an increase in revenue estimated at $132m in 1981-82 and $330m in a full year.
Changes in sales tax are a significant part of this year's Budget; indeed, they are an integral part of it. As I indicated earlier, the present Bills complete the legislative f~amework for the changes and it is desirable that they soon become law. I therefore trust that the Parliament will give these and the earlier Bills a speedy passage. In that spirit, I commend the present Bills-the Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA to 9A) 1981-to the House.
Mr DawkinsWhilst I do not share the Minister's confidence about the speedy passage of these Bills, or their passage at all, I move:
That the debate be now adjourned.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
NORFOLK ISLAND AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 20 August, on motion by MrWilson:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (5.20)-The Opposition does not oppose this measure. It is designed to change the structure of the Norfolk Island Supreme Court in order to permit the appointment of a justice and to bring into line the rules of appointment of justices with those which apply to other Federal courts in respect of retirement"and the removal of a judge from another Federal court. It is not' a measure which should delay the House long. It would provide an opportunity to discuss some arrangements for Norfolk Island but I do not think it is appropriate at this time. I raise only one matter, and that concerns the appointment of justices to serve in part time positions in this area. It may well be that the Government should look at the capabilities of thejudges in carrying out that function given their workloads arid their ages. The two judges on Norfolk Island at the moment seem to fit one into each of those categories.
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (5.21)-1 welcome and support this BilL It is, of course, an amendment of the principal Act, the Norfolk Island Act 1979, which is the basic framework for the introduction of self-government on Norfolk Island and which provides for the judicial

system-that is, the part of the Act which is now being amended-and the new role of the Administrator, the Executive Council and tbe Legislative Assembly. The Act divides sovereignty between the Commonwealth of Australia and the Legislative Assembly of Norfolk Island. I think it can be said that it has worked extremely well despite some difficulties since it was introduced. It schedules various powers to be administered by the Legislative Assembly while th~ Commonwealth retains other powers. It is part of the new political and economic surge in the Territory of Norfolk ~sland. It takes its place with other measures such as the Commonwealth's decision to upgrade-on the recommendation of the Public Works Committee, the airpoit on the island, the adoption by the Legislative Assembly of its flag, the decision to examine systematically the Public Service on the island and a range of other measures.
It is stated in the preamble to the Act that, within a period of five years after the coming into operation of the Act, consideration will be given to extending the powers conferred by or under it on the Legislative Assembly. Accordingly, we can expect that consideration to lead possibly to significant and major changes. Meanwhile, this Bill seeks to appoint a chief judge on the island. The Supreme Court of Norfolk Island is the Supreme Court of record for the Territory. It is the apex of Norfolk Island law. There is an appeal from it to the Federal Court of Australia and in certain circumstances to the High Court of Australia with special leave of that court. Below the Supreme Court is the Court of Petty Sessions which consists of six laymen. It is, of course, a far busier court. According to the last annual report, it dealt with 80 cases in its civil jurisdiction and 80 cases in its criminal jurisdiction -whereas the Supreme Court dealt with two cases in its civil jurisdiction and two in its criminal jurisdiction. Whilst it is not as busy as the Court of Petty Sessions it deals with issues on a legally higher level and is manned-if one may use that expression-by distinguished lawyers. At the moment it has two justices, Mr Justice Dunphy and Mr Justice Evatt, but there is no chief judge.
This legislation aims to bring the Supreme Court of Norfolk Island into line with the corresponding court in the other territories of Australia. That is a significant step forward. It is a measure which I know will be welcomed by most people on Norfolk Island. The other matters dealt with in the legislation-for example, the retiring age and the termination of an appointment in certain circumstimcesc-are also common sense

Apple and Pear Corporation Bill (No.2)

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 725

measures that will be welcomed. For these reasons, I also welcome the legislation.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading

Although this Bill does not guarantee that growers from those States will now be repres,ente? on the Australian Apple and Pear CorporatIon, It certainly gives room for them to be so elected.
. The Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Bill 1981 simply changes the box equivalents of apples

Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Wilson) read a third time.

and pears, to draw them into line, to 18 kilograms in both instances. The Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Bill relates to the levy charge which is set by regulation and which presently stands at 5c a box. I do not think there is a lot

AUSTRALIAN APPLE AND PEAR

which can be said about these Bills. The Minister,

CORPORATION AMENDMENT BILL

in his second reading speeches, which were very

(No.2) 1981

short summed up the situation very succinctly,

Second Reading
Debate resumed from 20 August, on motion by MrNixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr WILSON (Bonython-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House has a general debate covering this Bill, the Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Bill and the Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Bill, as they are associated measures. Separate 9uestions will, of course, be put on each of the BIlls at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these three measures? I will allow that course to be followed.

and there is no need for me to go into the Bills themselves.
As honourable members know, this is an off year in the bi-annual bearing cycle for the 1982 crop and it is expected to result in fewer apples being available for the fresh domestic and export markets. Consequently, domestic fresh prices are likely to rise to around$450 a tonne, while average export returns are estimated to be. only marginaly higher than the $290 a tonne estImated for the 1981 season. Processing prices are predicted to rise by about 5 per cent to average $90 to $95 a tonne, reflecting the higher fresh prices and increased demand for processing apples. Total Australian production this year is estimated to be around 300 kilotonnes, assuming average off year yields. Bearing tree numbers in Australia are stabilising at around 5.3 million trees.

Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (5.26)-On the face of it these apple and pear Bills are trivial and innocu-
ous but, of course, they do relate to .an industry with which quite a few members of thIS House are
very much concerned. It is a regional industry. ~t is an industry which is getting back to domestIc consumption with not much export. As a former apple grower and fruit grower, I take a fair amount of interest in this industry. Recently I visited various fruit growing areas in South Australia, Queensland and New South Wales. The purpose of the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Bill (No.2) is to change the number of grower members of the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation from four to six. I do not think that is very controversial and I do not expect the Australian Democrats to attempt to amend the Bill by saying that the number should be five. The industry for sometime has been lobbying the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) to increase the number of grower representatives to take into account .that the nonexport States were not recognised on the Apple and Pear Corporation. The preSsure came particularly from South Australia ,and Queensland.

Decreased availability of apples will result in about 180 kilotonnes going to the domestic fresh market, a fall of about 15 per cent. Total intake of apples for processing in 1982 is f~recast to ~e around 75 kilotonnes, 7 per cent hIgher than 10 1981. It is anticipated that stocks of apple juice concentrate will decline to more normal levels by the beginning of the 1982 season and exports of fresh apples for the 1982 season are estimated to be about 45 kilotonnes, approximately 25 per cent lower than the 1981 estimates. While these exports will face competition on European mar- . kets from locally produced fruit and other southern hemisphere produce, lower supplies of Australian fruit and better quality fruit may help to increase returns in 1982. The expected high returns on all markets will not offset the effects of the forecast decline in production, with the result that the total gross value of production may be down 2 per cent to around $104m.
The apple and pear industry is worth roughly $160m, and the balance is taken up by the pear industry. The availability of pears relates to some degree, particularly in the Goulburn Valley, to

726 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Apple and Pear Corporation Bill (No.2)

the overflow from what is canned. We need to take that into account. As many honourable members would know, the problem in the deciduous fruit canning industry, particularly the pear canning industry, is to be subject to quite a lot of discussion in the coming years as the European market substantially winds down.
I do not think there is much else I can say about this industry. The few words I have said relate to the outlook for the industry. I think people within the industry realise that they are going to have to look more and more to the domestic market and at the sorts of arrangements which take place there. The people within the industry are not all optimistic or sanguine about what is to happen and quite a few of them are being constructively critical. They say that the decline in exports that has been experienced over the past decade and the evidence of a fall-off of sales in Australia give cause for concern, because there is also a significant reduction in processing requirements. Yet there is no overall industry plan for the future producers. That is a rather dismal outlook for the industry in the 1980s.
I suppose it is up to the apple and pear growers themselves to steer their industry towards more prosperity. To do so they need to support an indepth examination of a number of issues. They must agree on sound objectives and planning which will achieve such objectives. It is not my place to be critical of the industry, but I can reflect some of the concerns of people within the industry who are concerned about irregular cropping and quality matters. Many people in the industry are concerned about industry statistics, and it is quite certain that accurate industry statistics are a necessary ingredient for industry viability. Quite frankly, the current methods used to collect statistical information are archaic, ineffective and of little real value. Often the information produced in the various apple growing areas is rather misleading or obsolete. As I said, with a production. value annually of approximately $160m and little in the way of basic, accurate information on which to plan, it is to be expected that the industry should flounder. An entirely new approach through producer organisations, guaranteeing to preserve grower anonymity, is long overdue just in this area of the collection of statistics. I suppose that, had priorities to be allocated for problem areas within this increasingly domestic industry, quality would command the top position, because no marketing system, no promotional campaign and no industry . plan or price reduction will ever substitute for quality. Earlier this year, Mr Bruce Lockier, the

Manager of the Apple and Pear Growers Association of South Australia, said:
There can be no denial that over the past few years the general overall quality of apples and pears has deteriorated. Emphasis has been, and is still being placed on the appearance of the fruit rather than condition. This has proved to be an extemely expensive exercise for the industry.
One significant contributing factor to inferior quality could be the decline in export which has forced many growers to change a life-long op()ration of growing, picking, packing and exporting to one of growing, picking, storing and marketing. This could involve varietal changes and certainly necessitates an in-depth knowledge of market requirements and the production and storage of fruit with a long.shelf life.
Top priority must be given to this great problem if the industry is to continue to prosper. Perhaps the employment of a' quality control officer by the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation should be considered. Another area in which there has been some debate is market research. An industry with such annual production and capital investment really does need some form of regular market research conducted by professional agencies. It is accepted that market research has played a major role in the establishment, success and progress of the food chains and should be used by the apple and pear industry forthwith initially to identify distribution efficiencies, changes in consumer preferences and weakness in sales outlets and generally to improve the effectiveness of publicity campaigns.
I will talk on only one other matter. Plastic returnable containers are a comparatively new innovation in the industry but are regarded by the growers who are using them as the greatest single benefit to the industry since-the introduction of bulk handling. Recently in Adelaide I saw the distribution centre. While not a problem, it is perhaps very appropriate that a warning should be sounded that unless a siugle handling system is agreed upon very soon and such agreement is supported by governments, a multiplicity of containers will emerge and a costly, chaotic situation will eventuate. In spite of the continuing decline in exports of apples and pears the word 'export' appears to have some sort of magical appeal to many people within the industry. Its future no doubt is questionable and the amount of money spent each year in the entire export area of apples and pears should be matched with its overall value to the industry. The amount being devoted to promotion is a matter that will cause more and more concern with respect to the stabilisation plan.
Let me briefly summarise what I have said. The industry must realise the potential of Australian markets and the urgent need to correct the components that are currently impeding an expansion

Apple and Pear Corporation Bill (No.2)

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 727

of sales in these areas. I would not say that the future of the industry is in jeopardy or anything like it, but it has tremendous capital investment to protect and a large annual financial goal toreach. Changes within the industry have to be brought about. to cope with the needs of the situation we face through the 1980s. All in all, the apple and pear industry is rapidly approaching cross roads as the amount for export winds down. It is a challenging future and I think that solutions are there for the industry to act upon. There is no necessity for government intervention, but there is need for government support. I hope that governmentwhichever party is in power-recognises the needs of this industry because it has undergone one of the most rapid periods ofadjustment of any Australian primary industry. I do not suppose the adjustment it has undergone has been anything like that experienced by the Australian d~iry il1dustry. If we look at the number of growers who had to give up in Tasmania because of the' fruit growing reconstruction scheme, the so-called treepull scheme, we realise the enormous changes that have gone on within that industry. We look f9rward to its continued prosperity, to the moves that the industry makes to help itself and, I am surel to' the backing and support from the Government to meet the needs of the industry as it comes forward to seek assistance from the various arms of government.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (5.38)-1 wish to talk about the Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Bill. This Bill increases the number of grower members of the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation from four to six. This .charge has been requested by the Australian Apple and Pear Growers Association which rt,presents apple and pear growers on a national basis and which nominates candidates for appointment as grower representatives to the Corporation. The Association believes that an increase in the number of grower representatives will enable the,Corporation to reflect more fully the interests of different apple and pear growing regions. The Government has accepted this view and in effect the current grower membership is sufficient only to represent major exporting areas. The growing importance of the domestic market means that there must be scope for fuller representation on the Corporation of those growers supplying the market. The difficult export situation being faced by the industry highlights the importance of the Corporation's dome,stic market promotion function and the need for a membership whichwilienable ,this function to be performed as ~ell a,s ,possible. The changes proposed in ,the Bill and in tQ.e associat~d

Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Bill are designed to increase the Corporation's capacity to carry out this task.

The purpose of the Bill to increase the number of grower members from four to six on the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation is most important. The Corporation came into being to replace the Australian Apple and Pear Board. As many honourable members would be aware, the apple and pear industry has for some seasons now been facing various problems of increasing seriousness. and c()mplexity, particularly in the export field. These-problems, of course, are derived principally from the large volume of exports which the industry has traditionally sent to markets in the United Kingdom and Europe. Because of the developments in these markets the export operation is characterised by increasing uncertainty. Each growing State needs to be represented whether it is principally orientated to export and whether or not it depends on the local market. The Corporation has a significant role to play and, of course, the input by growers is essential.

There are two directions: Firstlythe export

market and secondly the local market. The export

market with all its complexities will always have

difficulties: Many growers-l cite my' State,

Tasmania~can produce the best apple in the

world. They have proved that from the early stage

to the final time of picking they can compete with

any grower in the world. But unfortunately after

that troubles occur. I define marketing as the role

that is played from the commencement of picking

a product to the tiine it is received by the ultimate

consumer. The journey along the way requires

skill, marketing expertise; salesmanship, transpor-

tation and a business acumen that can provide the

best possible price.. '

the Corporation is made up of skilled perso~

nel who require a practical input which comes

from' growers. In, each State, the growers usually

choose-I am q:rtain that they do-the best poss-

ible person to be their representative on the Cor-

poration. They then have a voice at the level at

which the governments listen. For example, these

thr~ Bills 'have had the approva1 of the Corpor-

ation. I have not been approached by any grower

and ,no one'has objected to the changes. The role

'of the Corporation, as I mentioned b~fore, is ex-

tremely ,important. 'To increase representation

from four tei six allows, the two persons coming on

", spec,ificallyto look at the local market and to talk

, about ,the prbblems that they foresee inthat mar-

ket. Any definite input that they can make for im-
provirig the, local market is essential. As a rep-

resentative of a large State that grows apples I

"

"',

,, :

"

,

728 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Apple and Pear Corporation Bill (No.2)

know of many ways that the apple industry and the apple could be publicised and better marketed. I am not here to criticise the Corporation. But being a lay person, a practical person, I see instances every day where the apple could be publicised for the local market in a far better way. The apple industry in Australia has combated spiralling costs of labour and material coupled with high transportation costs. It has had to put up with the inconsistency of climatic conditions. The problems of transportation have now been won through by the growers and they should be applauded by every city dweller who goes into a shop, a greengrocery, a supermarket or any other place to buy an apple. He must realise that it is important to continue that industry in Australia.
Again I speak spe~ifically about my home State which is called the apple isle. It is very dependent On the image and the symbol of the apple. Sometimes I regret the fact that Tasmanians, the Tasmanian Government and the Tasmanian tourist industry get away from that symbol which I believe is the best selling point for Tasmania. Even though the apple industry may have declined to a certain degree, the symbol is still there. It is still the hook that everybody in Tasmania should attach to. It is the apple isle. It is known all over Australia and throughout the world as the apple isle because it can produce the best quality apples not only in Australia but also probably in the world.
Mr Lloyd-Where is that? In Orange?
Mr GOODLUCK-No, that is in Tasmania. Some people consider that the industry should be reconstructed. Some have also looked on the social implications, but I believe now that we have been able to pinpoint the problems. They have not been the problems of the growers. I have said before and I repeat: The orchardists of Australia are among the finest in the world. They are able to compete quality wise on any given market. I repeat that we have a corporation and expertise within that corporation. I will conclude shortly in order to give my colleagues equal speaking time. As soon as a person lands in Hobart by plane, there should be an apple for him. We could take apples into the schools of Tasmania. People buy oranges and bananas in Tasmania, why not orientate them to buy apples? Simple little things could be done in Tasmania to develop the apple industry: Simple promotion could promote the apple even better thal\ it is now. It saddens me to think that the apple industry in Tasmania is not receiving the hook it should from the Tasmanian Government. When a case of apples leaves Tasmania 'the apple isle' is printed on the side. The

words 'Tasmanian apples' are not stated, just 'the apple isle'. Let us continue to stay with that.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (5.45)-I rise to say a few words about the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Bill (No.2) which has just been covered by the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck). It appears that when we have a debate on apples we can be sure that Tasmania will get a mention from the Government side of the House. This Bill seeks to amend the membership of the Apple and Pear Corporation to take into account the importance of the domestic market. There has been a dramatic change over the last 10 years in the apple and pear industry, as there has been in all areas of rural production which are controlled by corporations and this type of legislation. We are seeing the Australian market becoming much more important to those sections of the industry that have adjusted and become more efficient because of the loss of many of the export markets and the costs involved in trying to supply those markets in far distant lands, especially with perishable products which require expensive storage facilities. The growing importance of the domestic market means that the Corporation has to represent a broader section of people producing apples for a domestic market. It is interesting to note that for many years apple growing was a large industry in my electorate but today, like some other industries that are close to city areas, it has dropped right off to practically a small industry supplying the local market. There is no doubt that the changes to the Corporation will have the effect of assisting industry in that area.
We all know that the export situation is difficult. I think some of the present moves in the economic situation, where we are seeing savage increases in interest rates, must be affecting many growers. The honourable member for Franklin spoke about the Tasmanian situation. I think the present situation Australia-wide for all rural pro~ ducers must be one of alarm. No doubt the situation in the apple and pear industry would be the same as in many other industries. The economic situation at present in any rural production has daunting prospects for many people. Anything that can be clone to assist industries at this time is very welcome. We are finding that the economic policies being adopted by the Government are not in the best interests of many rural industries. I am sure that the apple and pear industry will need all the assistance it can get to get itself through the climate that this Government has set up.
I commend the Bill. I do not think there is anything in it to which the Opposition could take

Apple and Pear Corporation Bill (No.2)

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 729

offence. It is supported by the industry. It is something that is needed. In many rural areas many adjustments are required and this is one that will be welcomed. Even though the industry has declined particularly in the country areas that I represent, many producers there still rely a great deal on the local market and would be quite happy to see the changes that will be brought in under this Bill.

Mr LLOYD (Murray) (5.49)-As previous

speakers have said, the purpose of the Australian

Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Bill

(No.2) is to increase the size of the Corporation

from four to six to allow for two more grower

members, one from each State, and to increase the

maximum rate allowed by the legislation for levies

and charges. The Minister for Primary Industry

(Mr Nixon) indicated in his second reading

speech that he had responded to the request of the

Apple and Pear Growers Association to allow

grower representation from each State. The argu-

ments used are that as 80 per cent of the apple

crop is sold locally it is important to have rep-

resentation from 'each State and in this way also

increase the understanding, through the grower

organisation and back to the growers, of the work

of the Corporation.

-

I wish to express my concern at this increase in the grower membership from four to six. I hope that it is not the start of a general and what I consider to be regressive trend to have grower membership on a State basis. It does not show any
reflection of the size of the industry in each State. The rural industry information papers indicate that there is a substantial difference in the size of the apple industry, let alone the pear industry, between the States. I believe that the legislation will increase the size of a statutory authority beyond what is sensible. I believe also that it will tend to make grower representatives, think of themselves as representing a State rather than the industry as a whole nationally. (Quorum formed). As I was about to say before I was interrupted, I hope that this increase in the membership of the Apple and Pear Corporation to allow grower representation from each State is not the start of a new trend. I would consider'such a trend to be regressive and to be a tendency away from representatives considering they are representing the industry nationally instead of just each State. I am far happier to support the second major amendment which increases the maximum permissible levy. In fact, it more than doubles it because the maximum levy charged has not been increased since 1976. I believe that carries with it a very important principle of accountability to the Corporation
and the grower members and organisations

associated with it, that is that it is for them to decide what the level of that levy or charge should be and then to justify it to their grower members.
I wish to also draw the attention of people to a few facts about the scale of the apple and pear industry in this country. Let us look at the production of fresh apples and pears in this nation. Victoria is the leading State in that industry.
Mr Good luck-No.
Mr Hodgman-No.
Mr LLOYD-Victoria is easily the leading State in the production of fresh apples and pears. I refer to the rural industry informatiom papers. In 1979-80 Victoria was the leading apple producing State. Let us get a few facts iilto this business. I acknowledge that in most years Tasmania is the , leading apple producing State, but not by very much. If we take apples and pears together Victoria is easily the major producing State. If we take apples and pears together the electorate of Murray out-produces every State in Australia, including Tasmania. I am saying this in a kindly manner, Mr Deputy Speaker, so we can get some perspective Into the whole debate. Victoria produces 100,000 tonnes out of a possible production of 127,000 tonnes nationally. One can continue to cite figures from rural industry information papers.
Mr Hodgman-Talk about quality.
Mr LLOYD-If we are to talk about quality, the pears from Victoria sell far better overseas than the apples from Tasmania. So we will not go down that track either. Let me continue with~' establishing a few facts in this debate. I do so in a kindly manner. If one looks at the number of fruit growers in relation to the industry, then the Murray electorate has more than Tasmania or any of the other States of Australia. If one looks at the scale of the fresh pear export industry, it is usually about half to two-thirds of the apples that are exported. This raises a far more fundamental question of imbalance in the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation than has been addressed by the amendments to this legislation; that is, having a grower representative from each State. With almost every situation there will be representatives of the apple industry. There is a far greater imbalance in relation to the pear and apple industry between those who represent the apple sector and those who represent the pear sector. I remind the Minister at the tab1e'that my area-which, as I have identified, is the major fresh fruit producing area'of Australia-has always been unhappy

730 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Apple and Pear Corporation Bill (No.2)

by what it considers to be the bias to the apple industry rather than the total apple-and pear industry in membership in the Apple and Pear Corporation. The unhappiness is increased by these amendments.

I also draw the attention of the Parliament to the disastrous situation that faces the fresh apple and pear export industry this season. The industry is now in grave financial difficulty. The recently enacted underwriting stabilisation scheme will obviously be fully utilised and the Minister and the Government are to be commended for its introduction. Some of the growers believe that the scale is not adequate. I understand that the Minister said to them: 'We have to allow the scheme to work its way through'-I agree with that-'and then have a look at the situation'.

I will quote a few of the prices to indicate the disastrous situation the exporters face this season. For the first week in May 1980 Victorian packham pears were being sold on the London market at $22.88 a box. In 1981 the price had dropped to $19.49. By the first week in July this year, compared to 1980 when the price was $24.34, the price was down to $11.62 and it dropped even further in Hamburg to about $7 a box.-The price for apples in 1980 was $19 a box and it had halved to $9 this year. One of the major reasons for this disastrous selling season is the ap-
preciation in the value of the Australian dollar. One has to admit that there is a carry-over and a very large increase in exports from the southern
hemisphere, et cetera. One has to acknowledge the fact and draw it to the attention of parliamen-
tarians and people throughout this nation that this export industry and others related to it, such as the canned fruit industry, are suffering and have very great difficulties because of the appreCiation of the Australian dollar. I support the legislation.

Question resolved in the affirmative.

JJiII read a second time.

"

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.

APPLE AND PEAR LEVY AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading Consideration resumed from 20 August, on motion by Mr Nixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.
. Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.
APPLE AND PEAR EXPORT CHARGE AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 20 August, on motion by Mr Nixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.
Sitting suspended from 5.59 to 8 p.m.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1981-82
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed from 18 August, on motion by MrHoward:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (8.0)-Mr Speaker, the Budget of any national government is among many things but more impo.rtantly an annual allocation of financial resources between competing community interests. In its simplest form, it is a sharing of the national cake each year between who gets what, and who has to pay. For six years now, this Government has used the Budget to distort persistently and grossly the distribution of people's taxes. At the same time, the aggregate of those taxes has reached staggering proportions. Privileged minority interests, specifically big business, have been the major beneficiaries. The Australian people, as individuals and as a nation, have been the losers. And the greatest losers have been the disadvantaged, the needy, and the less well-off. This Budget from this Government-its eighth Budget in six years-is perhaps the worst example of this insidious and threatening process. I say 'threatening', and I mean 'threatening'.
To describe t~is Budget as reasonable, fair or responsible is to prostitute the English language. It is none of these things. Mr Eric Risstrom 9f the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 731

Australian Taxpayers Association, a man of impeccable objectivity and credibility, has called it the worst Budget in 34 years. It ignores the needs of the average family. It dismisses the desperation of the disadvantaged. It persists with a callous indifference to people's security, their livelihood,. their homes, their spending power,. and their future. It threlltens the very existence of some three million Australians whom even the Government now recognise as living in poverty.
I repeat: three million Australians-one in every five of our people-live a hand to mouth, day to day existence, often in appalling conditions, in what is inherently the wealthiest country in the world, the so-called lucky country. The reality of this paradox is a national disgrace. We have exploited migrant Australians who live in over-crowded urban ghettos. We have unemployed young Australians who have not been able to find a job in four years. We have pensioner Australians who eat pet food to stay alive. We have black Australians, deprived and ignored, who must believe the so-called resources development boom is a sick joke.
All these people hear their Government brag at election time about the prosperity that is just around the corner, and then ten months later they have their immediate future decided by a Budget like this-a Budget that attacks everyone'li living standards, but which shames and humiliates those most in need in our community.
This Government, by its rigid disregard over six years for the interests of all Australians, is totally responsible for these circumstances. And no-one is more responsible than the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). This morning I sent the Prime Minister a copy of an article from yesterday's issue of the Sydney Morning Herald to read while he recuperates from his illness, a recuperation, which I trust will be speedy. It was the first of three articles on poverty in Australia, and it should be required reading for all members opposite, particularly the Treasurer (Mr Howard). I defy any member of the Government to read this shattering article by Mr Graham Williams, and then to go home and sleep confortably tonight. To make my point, I intend to quote briefly from the article. Mr Williams describes a conversation with a 15-year-old Sydney girl who has.not worked for nine months and who says she has nothing to live for. He then goes on to write:
I could have told her of the nine-year"old boy who for weeks took a block of wood wrapped in paper to his innerwestern suburbs school so his classmates wouldn't know his mother could not afford to give him a sandwich.

I could have told her of the many lone parents, crippled by their tiny pension and their big rent bill, who go for days without eating so their children can have food.
I could have told her of Sydney's 15,000 homeless who nightly herd into doss-houses, or sleep in parks, on station platforms, or in friends' flats.
Or the 14-year-old boy who recently created the dubious record of being the youngest to doss down at the Matthew Talbot Hostel for homeless men at Woolloomooloo, along with 480 men.
Those few paragraphs say more about what is happening to Australia today after almost six years of Fraser Government than anything uncovered by the barren and sterile prose of the Treasurer's Budget Speech. They suggest a harsh reality that has absolutely nothing in common with the fantasy of the Prime Minister's election policy speech just ten months ago in which he said:
Today, a new spirit, a new enthusiasm, a new dynamism, is at work in Australia. And while achieving all this, we have enhanced the dignity and self-esteem of those in need.
Mr Graham Williams did not find much dignity and self-esteem among the people he interviewed on the growing disaster of poverty in this country. And neither did a sub-committee of the World Council of Churches which visited Australia two months ago, and then reported earlier this month.
It stated:
All the good intentions contained in programs which treat Aboriginal people as the objects of charity and paternalism, are dwarfed by an over-riding reality of massive deprivation, poverty and injustice.
Aborigines have become the invisible, unseen and unheaTd people of. Australia. They neither share in the prosperity nor the promise of a free, democratic and affluent Australian nation.
These examples I have quoted suggest a massive indifference by the Prime Minister either to. the truth or the brutal harshness of his Government's economic policies. Either he will say anything at election time., or he is ignorant of the real suffering and hardship his policies inflict on so many Australians. Perhaps he prefers to double-indemnify himself by doing both. The real fault lies, I believe, in his isolation from reality. The Prime Minister is cocooned in a comfortable lifestYle sustained by a $100,000 salary and a $1 in farm property that effectively ensures he has nothing in common with 98 per cent of his 15 million fellow Australians. The Prime Minister is as remote from all the problems of getting a home loan, or finding a job, or making the average pay packet stretch from one week to the next; or adequately feeding and clothing a family, as he is from the man on the moon.
These week to week anxieties, which literally hundreds of thousands of Australian families now face all the time, simply have no real meaning for

732 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

the Prime Minister or indeed for most of his Cabinet. And] doubt that the Prime Minister has ever been anywhere near such a place as the Matthew Talbot doss-house for homeless men, or an overcrowded inner-city ghetto, or a run-down Housing Commission apartment block, or an Aboriginal shanty town in Western New South Wales or Northern Queensland. Yet this is the Prime Minister who, for six years, has presided over policies which perpetuate a system which takes most from those who can least afford to give, and gives most to. those with little need at all. Over the last five years, the Fraser Government's economic policies have taken $1 24,000m in taxes from the people of Australia. Over the next 12 months, this Government proposes to take another $37,768m in taxes from the same people. In total, some $162,000m in taxes in six years. All of it taken from the Australian people. All of it in taxes. And all of it collected by the highest taxing Government in our history. I remind the House that this is the Government that came into office promising tax reforms and tax cuts. Yet this is the Government now responsible for our highest taxes ever.

Three times the Prime Minister bribed the

people of this country at election time with prom-

ises of lower taxes. Each time, after the elections

had been won, the Prime Minister promptly

wiped out his promise with increased taxes. Tax

indexation was promised in 1975, introduced in

1976, then progressively phased out, partially

reintroduced, and now eliminated totally, A tax

cut was promised in 1977 and then, after an early

election, it was eliminated by the introduction of a

tax surcharge in 1978. In 1979, the Fraser

Government ended the surcharge and called the

decision tax reform. Last year, foul' of every fiye

taxpayers were given a miserable 90c a week tax

benefit. They were also promised half tax indexa-

tion from 1 July this year. Now, with the elections

once more behind him, the Prime Minis.ter has

again abandoned tax indexation and increased

taxes right

yet again, across the

bthoiasrdt.imIteiswaitshtahgiggehreirngsarleecsotradxeosf

duplicity and dishonesty: I have no doubt that the

same formula will be tried again before the next

elections in two years' time.

This Budget, in a nutshell, is a case of slug them now and try to bribe them later. The Prime Minister has a simple faith in the principle that he can keep fooling most of the people most of the time. But the damage has been done and it will not be forgotten. Australians have been hurt too viciously ever to trust this Government again. The Prime Minister has no credibility left on taxation. I repeat that the tax grab by the Fraser Government in six years is $162 billion. Just on $90 billion

of this is income tax. Another $11 billion has. been plundered from motorists under the Government's petrol taxing policies. It has ruthlessly exploited overseas oil prices to squeeze every dollar possible from Australian motorists in taxing petrol which mostly comes from our own crude oil in Bass Strait. This year, the petrol tax will reap the Government another $3,440m-an increase of well over 1,000 per centin six years. The increase in income tax revenue this year is just as regressive. It will go up a massive 22 per cent, or $3,349m. This represents, on average, an extra $11 a week paid by every taxpayer in this country. In fact, the Fraser Government this year will collect more in income tax alone than .the Whitlam Government collected in all taxes in its last year of office. This Government now proposes to raise almost as much tax from all sources in a single year as the Whitlam Government raised in three years.
So much for the Prime Minister's persistent fiction of his Government being a low tax government. It is not a low tax government, and never has been. It is responsible for the highest taxes in this nation's history. Even worse, it has completely reversed government spending patterns in the six years it has been in power. Table 4 on Budget outlays in the Treasurer's Speech sets out how the Government is spending the record taxes it has ripped off Australians since it came to office. It shows not only that wage and salary earners are paying more taxes than ever, but also that far less of these funds are going back to the community to benefit people directly. Six years ago, under a Labor government, our major spending priorities were health, education, housing, welfare, and urban and regional development. These priorities have been turned upside down by the Fraser Government. Compared with six years ago, and after allowing for inflation, the major increases in government spending this year are: Parliamentary expenditure-up 65 per cent; assistance to industry-up 56 per cent; police, security, and detention-up 52 per cent; and law, order, and public safety-up 34 per cent. These are this Government's priorities-the self-indulgence of Parliament, the transfer of government resources to business and industry, and the Prime Minister's fetish with security and law and order.
At the other end of the scale come all the major programs to assist people which six years ago were the priorities of a Labor government. Spending in real terms on education has fallen 2 per cent since 1975; health is down 22 per cent; transport and communications are down 53 per cent; water supply, electricity and gas are down 57 per cent

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 733

and housing is down 59 per cent. At the very bottom of the list is government spending on urban and regional development, and the environment. That has been slashed 89 per cent in real terms in six years. What this means is that big government is alive arid flourishing more than ever. All that has changed is the Government's division of the cake. High and rising interest rates have pushed savings bank home loans out of the reach of four out of every five families seeking their first home. Yet Government spending on housing has plummeted just under 60 per cent in six years. At the same time, direct assistance to industry in grants, subsidies and tax concessions goes up 56 per cent in real terms to just under $1 ,OOOm.
The Government cannot find $9m to continue funding its modest programs for unemployed young people under the Community Youth Support Scheme-a scheme that directly employs some 700 mostly full time staff and last year aided 52,000 out of work youth. But it has no problem allocating more than $22m to fund the operations of the Australian Security Intellience Organisation, not Ic of which is publicly accountable. In six years under the Fraser Government, ASIO's budget has shot up 100 per cent in real terms, with never an explanation why publicly and, I can assure honourable members, never a justification why privately. The same sort of intimidating security mentality now pervades this building, which has come to resemble more a military bunker than the people's Parliament. The Australian Federal Police, according to the Treasurer, will spend more on incidental expenditure than it will cost for a year's unemployment benefits for 1,000 out of work teenagers. They are the standards of the Fraser Government. They are the sorts of priorities it employs in taxing people at record levels while at the same time cutting back on those programs which directly benefit the community.
There is some assistance in higher family allowances for one family in every four, but nothing for I t million families with two children or fewer. There is $62m being spent this year on limited family allowances, but an extra $550m is being taken back from all families in the application of the .new sales tax increases. The Opposition opposes those tax measures and will fight them vigorou~ly in both Houses. The sales tax proposals are unfair and highly inflationary. Four months ago the Treasurer promised there would be no such broadly based indirect tax without an offsetting reduction in income tax. Now the Government is trying to sneak them into operation in defiance of its promise and without any mandate from the people. The Prime Minister's empty

threats will not change our opposition to these taxes. That opposition will be implacable. They must be rejected.
So too, at the first opportunity, must the Fraser Government's attitude to Aboriginal welfare be reversed. For six years the Prime Minister has postured as a supporter of Aboriginal welfare. He is now monumentally embarrassed by the World Council of Churches report on the eve of the Commonwealth talk fest in Melbourne next month. He should be no less embarrassed by his Government's own spending programs on Aboriginal welfare over the last six years. In real terms, spending has fallen 35 per cent since the last Labor Budget. If the Prime Minister honoured his election promise to maintain existing levels of support programs for Aborigines, this Government would be in debt to the Aboriginal people for $213m-the cumulative loss of funds in real terms over six years. Aboriginal housing programs are down, in real terms, by 43 per cent, education funding is down 30 per cent, and health funding is down 22 per cent.
Another example of the Government's erratic sense of priority is in the defence vote. It has been turned up and down over the years as domestic political factors have dictated. In 1976, the Government committed itself to a five year equipment purchase plan calling for real annual increases of 5 per cent. In fact, over the four years to 1979-80, the increase averaged only 3.9 per cent. In 1980, in a knee jerk reaction to the Russiap. invasion of Afghanistan, a new plan was stitched up calling for annual increases in spending of 7 per cent. In the event, the -last Budget managed to produce an increase of 4.8 per cent and this Budget envisages an increase of 5.3 per cent.
The effect of these shortfalls will be twofold. First, the log-jam of purchasing commitments over the next few years will put an enormous and perhaps impossible strain on our resources. To meet both firm and reasonably firm commitments the Government, by the end of this financial year, will be facing a bill of more than $5 billion. The second effect of this procrastination will be to aggravate the confusion already created in defence planning by the Government's ambivalent and cynical policies.
This Budget means more inflation, even higher interest rates, less economic growth, no joy for the unemployed, and more taxes. It is another savage attack on the general living standards of the Aus~ tralian family. Six years ago, Australians were promised sustained economic prosperity. Last

734 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

year, for the first time, there was some firm indication that this prosperity was returning. It happened despite all the best intentions of the Treasurer and the Government to prevent the economic conditions that created it. Higher wages, strongly opposed by the Government, lifted the spending power of family pay packets. This fuelled consumer spending and contributed two-thirds of growth in gross domestic product for the year. A year ago, the Government argued that strong wages growth would destroy economic growth. In fact, the reverse occurred, as the Labor Party argued it would.
Despite these indicators, the economy slowed down after Christmas. It slowed down because the brakes were applied to both wages growth and consumer spending, the two ingredients that had most helped a lift in the economy. At the same time, there was a marked easing in the housing industry and employment growth tailed off. Nonfarm product growth slumped from an annual rate of 6.1 per cent in the first half of 1980-81 to only 1.6 per cent in the second half. However, the Department of the Treasury ignored the renewed signs of another slide. It recognised that the Government prefers the sterility of its own primitive myths rather than learn the lessons of recent history. This Budget puts the economic gear lever firmly back into reverse. There will be less spending and therefore less economic activity. The wages bill is forecast to rise by more than 15 per cent, but income tax will increase much faster at 22 per cent.
Economic growth will be hauled back because money supply is set to increase 10.5 per cent but nominal growth in'the economy by 14.5 per cent, a shortfall in money supply of at least 4 per c.ent on community needs. That will certainly be more contractionary than the Government's dubious budget arithmetic admits. Costs will be higher because of high and rising interests rates. Already in the last 16 months higher interest rates will have added more than $1,OOOm to the interest bill alone on home mortgages. This is money taken away from family consumer spending-money that cannot be afforded by the home buyer, or, indeed, by the economy.
Australia now has the dubious distinction of having the second highest real rate of interest in the world, just marginally behind that of the United States. Australia business will pass these charges on to consumers, and housing costs will be pushed even further beyond the reach of despondent families. Interest rates must stay high while ever the Government continues to encourage an even larger inflow of foreign money than the extraordinary level of $6.5 billion reached last

year. More than 75 per cent of last year's inflow in the first nine months was largely speculative investment in real estate, shares and the takeover of established Australian industry. The Government accomlllodated this rampant speculation simply by cutting back on the spending power and community security of Australian families by taxing away their living standards with high interest rate increases. This processis now set to repeat itself, along with further revaluations of the Australian dollar to the disadvantage of primary producers; exporters and import replacement industries..
The forecast flood of foreign money into Australia this year, by the Government's own estimate, is counted at some $7 billion. Rather than impose immediate controls, the Government has sought to offset the impact on money supply by savage monetary policy measures and cutbacks in public sector spending through massive increases in family taxation. Thus the price of this Government's failure to limit foreign capital inflows is the proposed 22 per cent increase in income tax and the 39 per cent lift in sales tax. In short, last financial year concluded with the Australian economy winding down rapidly because of the severity of Government monetary policy. It was not a case of an over-heated economy, but of one clearly running out of steam. The contractionary impact of this latest Budget will only accelerate the run-down.
For the last four years, we have urged this Government to adopt controlled expansionary policies to get the economy moving and to sustain recovery. Each time, the Government has acted either timidly or extremely harshly. Each time it has been wrong. Its Budget forecasts have been wrong and its promises have not been met. The resultant measures, particularly in the field of taxation, have been even more restrictive and punitive on the incomes of the average family. Now it has acted completely contrary to the direction of most economic indicators.
Let me suggest what is needed. A balanced domestic budget, or even a mild deficit, is what is required at this time. Certainly, the economy can afford it and it would be consistent with falling inflation, lower interest rates, and sustained growth of 5 per cent, provided controls are imposed immediately on short term speculative money from overseas. That is, We are' talking about making domestic economic activity by Australians by allowing money to be made available to them rather than foreign carpetbaggers speculating in real estate, shares and in Australian industry to the qetriment of Australian's welfare and security.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 735

We would immediately abandon the proposed sales tax increases. This would leave $550m in family pay packets to go into consumer spending. Ten months ago, in the elections, we proposed an across the board cut in income tax. A more
generous reduction now could not be opposed on economic or moral grounds. Given the massive 22 per cent increase in income tax revenue the
Government is forecasting this year, that reduction is easily accommodable. We would also introduce a resource rent tax on mining
companies who earn excess profits. We would immediately get rid of the $500m investment allowance to industry which continues to replace jobs with machines. Both moves would begin the process of redirecting resources back from a bouyant corporate sector into public programs that assist people, particularly housing, education, job creation, urban and regional development, and Aboriginal welfare.

I repeat that we are committed to a universal health insurance scheme based on each family's
ability to pay. Basic medical and hospital insurance will, in a week's time under the Government's latest health policy switch, cost the aver-
age family $10 a week. Six years ago the same basic cover was provided as a right from general revenue. Now it is a direct tax on families, costing an estimated $1200m a year. However, instead of .paying the tax to the Fraser Government the Fraser Government has arranged that families will pay it direct to the private health funds. That is a policy we will scrap at the first opportunity.

At the heart of the Government's Budget strat-

egy is its utter abdication of any responsibility for

a wage-price policy. It has no such policy and no

constructive approach to reform of our industrial

relations system. Instead, it continues to harangue

the unions to accept further wage depression at

the same time. as it massively increases taxes,

interest rates, and health charges.

.

The Treasurer's foolish behaviour in this regard
must guarantee more avoidable and unnecessary industrial conflict in the year ahead. Confrontation with the unions will achieve nothing. Cer" tainly, after this Budget, the Government has no moral authority to insist on wage depression.

What must be attempted is a more creative and less divisive approach to industrial relations. We would propose that such measures include a thorough overhaul of the arbitration system including constitutional change by referendum to allow Australia to have a unified system of industrial regulation, including conciliation andarbitration. We would also abolish the Industrial Relations Bureau, repeal legislation designed to

harass and provoke industrial disputes and, in cooperation with the trade unions, develop a wagesprices policy to encompass prices, wage incomes, non-wage incomes, the social wage, taxation reform and elimination of tax avoidance. The Prime Minister can no longer rely on the tactics of open warfare with the union movement. His Government must attempt the measures we propose as creative and conciliatory if we are to avoid increasing industrial conflict.
Six years ago the Prime Minister promisedamongst a lot of other things-prosperity for all. Two years later, he told us that we were just about to stride into a new era of prosperity and development. Another three years later, he explained that-despite appearances-we were still poised on the threshold of this new era. The trouble is that, for most Australians, all this waiting has been a painful business. The average family is now about $17 Ii week worse off. The costs of food and other essential goods have continued to rise. Taxes are higher than they have ever been. Unemployment has doubled. The cost of homes is beyond the reach of most wage earners.
We know that the Treasurer does not spend much time in the supermarkets; his wife has told us so. And we all know that the Prime Minister is not renowned for mixing with the hoi polloLThat is a'pity. If the pair of them spent more. time in supermarkets, perhaps they might be better able to appreciate how their actions threaten the people they affect-the threat to their jobs and those of their children; the threat of ever increasing prices; the threat of losing their homes; the throat to their living standards; and most of all, the threat to their self-respect and personal dignity.
The. truth is that after six years of this kind of struggle and hardship~six years of being preached at and hectored about life not being easy-Australians deserve more than the squalid and venal conditions to which society has been reduced by the Fraser Government. We know that tens of thousands of people are literally sleeping in parks and railway stations because they have no homes. We know about the jobless and the homeless-including teenagers-who live in despair and on poverty benefits.
Mr Beazley-They wouldn't.
Mr HAYDEN-Exactly. We know the shocking and debilitating social and economic conditions of many Aboriginal Australians. We know the struggle of aged pensioners trying to survive on less than one-quarter of the average weekly wage. All this, in a society in which a businessman can make a $16m tax free capital gain in one

736 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

afternoon simply by abandoning a share raid; in Mr HAYDEN-No, we can use the same level

which the Prime Minister can unashamedly spend of taxes more fairly. I am referring to the injustice

$4m on his jaunts overseas; in which professional of the way in which honourable members op-

tax evaders are tolerated and even celebrated; and posite use them-buying off their wealthycorpor-

in which young families are forced to surrender ate supporters. There are only two groups in

their dream of buying a home so that foreign Australia who are opposed to a resource rental

money speculators can rip the stuffing out of this tax-the foreign owned mining corporations and

country.

their passive friends in the Fraser Government.

Why should the increased family allowances be based on the number of children in a family and not on its economic situation? On what basis was
it decided that $223 should be taken away from every unemployed youth in CYSS and an extra $165 given to every pupil at a private school?
Why should the factory worker pay the same sales tax on his kids' school uniforms as the company director?

But Australians want it.
More than this, we believe that the native energy and initiative of the Australian people should be released from the straitjacket of this Government so that they can work once again for the advantage of our whole society. After six years of blood and sweat it may be hard to remember, but there was a time when Australia was renowned for the products of its spirit of self-reliance, its sense of fairness, and its sheer energy. All this

Outside this Parliament-outside in the real energy-all this initiative-remains. But it cannot

world where the Government's actions are really be expected to flourish under the burdens placed

hurting people and threatening their livelihood, on it by this dreary Government and others like it.

their security and self-respect, there is frustration and anger at these double standards. There is frus-

The Australian people cannot be expected to throw themselves into paying more taxes just so

tration because, the harder most people struggle, the farther they fall behind. There is anger because, the farther this majority falls behind, the

that a lucky few can thrive and prosper. They . cannot be expected to react with enthusiasm to a
Government that is so lethargic itself, grasping at

better off becomes the minority-the friends and supporters of the Fraser Government: The share

foreign capital to solve its problems, selling off our resources at bargain prices.

raiders, the tax evaders, the directors of the transnational corporations back home in New York, London, Frankfurt and Tokyo. There is anger in the community because the people understand that, come the next election, this Government will be falling over itself shoving a few extra dollars in their pockets to try to make them forget all the distress and the adversity of the last six years.

Nowhere is the Government's depressing cargo cult mentality more clearly displayed than in its attitude to foreign investment. Three dollars out of every $4 in foreign investment is designed to take over existing Australian business and remove their profits from Australian hands. Out of every $3 in total company income, $1 goes overseas.

And the Australian people are angry because they The Fraser Government, in a supine fashion,

have done all that has been demanded of them. believes we have no choice but to accept this-

They have seen their incomes diminished in value, that we need to hand over our development to

they have seen their normal government services others because we cannot mobilise resources of

cut down, but they have also Seen the benefits of our own. But we do have a choice. We can-if we

their sacrifices taken from them.

have the will-extract greater reward from

As democratic socialists, we in the Labor Party have an alternative vision for Australians. We believe that the profound economic imbalance which burdens and threatens the people must be redressed. We believe that the undoubted wealth of this nation should be more fairly distributed through the provision of more publicly owned goods andservices. We believe that market forces alone cannot adequately guarantee the people's basic rights to self-respect, social and economic security, and access to a decent social environment. We believe the public sector should take up this responsibility.

foreign capital. We can-if we liberate our initiative-bring together domestic capital from Australian institutions and Australian individuals to invest in developments that we-can' use-to benefit all Australians. We do have a choice and we must not let ourselves be persuaded otherwise by the inflexible forces who-for the momentcontrol this country. We can sit around and wait for the future to wash over us. Or we can make it work for us. We have a choice. But it takes the kind of initiative that is missing from this Budget.
Tenmonths ago, We were informed that we were poised on the threshold of prosperity. Many Australians. had strong doubts about it but just

Mr Howard-You want bigger taxes.

enough were prepared to give the Government

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 737

another opportunity to show us how that threshold would be crossed. This Budget is the final proof that the promise of 10 months ago is to be denied.

Over a period of four dismal months-at the Premiers Conference and Loan Council meetings, through the changes to the health scheme and the decimation of the public housing program, through the Government's abdication from interest rates and wages policy, and now this austerity Budget-it has been hammered home to all Australians that this Government has no vision to guide it but only a desire to crouch and cringe beneath the economic storms. We in the Labor Party despise this insipid attitude. We believe we have the strong basis of a decent and just society in this country-a society that respects, trusts, and honours all its citizens. We have the basis here fora society of progress and prosperity-benefits that should accrue to all our people. We can ignore this potential. We can wait for others to use it and take its rewards. This is the way of the Fraser Government-jumping at shadows, stricken by inertia. Or we can do it with optimism despite all the obstacles, with a spirit of comradeship, with pride in our creative talent. This is the challenge before Australia today. It is tragic for all Australians that the Fraser Government, as demonstrated in this Budget, is too spineless to accept it.

Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley-

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs)

(9.41)-The speech by the Leader of the Oppo-

sition (Mr Hayden) could not be described as the

most stimulating reply to the Government's

Budget but at least he has laid out fairly clearly

what the alternatives are. They are the same tired

old Labor socialist policies-nothing new, nothing

original-that have failed here and overseas. I

have been able to list seven of them and they

make an interesting list indeed. The Australian

Labor Party would, first of all, have a deficit

Budget. I do not know how the Leader of the Op-

position can say that the Opposition would have a

deficit Budget and yet bring about lower inflation

and reduce interest rates; but that is the policy of

the Labor Party-deficit budgeting. The Aus-

stroa~lviaern

people should be left with that that is so. Where is

no doubt what the shortfall to

come from? It can come from only two sources-

printing money, which would send inflation

through the roof, or borrowing which would send

interest rates through the roof.

Secondly, we see the same tired old solution to social problems. There is only one solution says

the Labor Party-massive increases in government spending, which can do no more than increase the taxation burden on the ordinary wage earner in Australia whom the Labor Party continually and falsely claims it represents. The third theme which is so evident in the speech from the Leader of the Opposition, is that the Labor Party's alternative policies would lead to nothing other than increased income tax for all sections of the community. No conclusion can be drawn other than that. A further theme of the Labor Party policy is that it would impose new taxes and a heavy taxation burden on development in this country. Let there be no mistake about it; it is opposed to development. The Labor Party has opposed all the development projects that have been mooted in Australia in recent years. There should be no doubt at all that the policy of the Labor Party that is presented as an alternative is more imposition of taxation on development within this country. Again, we hear the same tired old theme-technology and technological advance are bad. The Labor Party is in complete opposition to any support or encouragement of technological progress and development in this country which probably, more than anything else, has within it the hope for greatly expanded employment opportunities.
A common theme comes up every time the socialists put forward their alternative platforms. That is what it is-socialism, pure and simple. The Australian people should have no doubt about that whatsoever. Listening to the Leader of Opposition, I was reminded of his speech to the Fabian Society in Victoria, I think earlier this year. He declared without any equivocation that the objective of the Labor Party was to bring about mOre collectively owned goods and services in Australia. If that is the sort of system Labor Patty members want, they should move somewhere else because the Australian people do not want a system of government or a society which is based upon more collectively owned goods and services. Let there be no doubt about it. The lines are drawn between the progressive policies and programs outlined by the Treasu'rer (Mr Howard) in his Budget last week and this socialist program which has been outlined by the Leader of the Opposition tonight.
I want to speak tonight about the Budget, particularly those aspects that impinge upon my own areas of responsibility. It can be said without any doubt that the 1981-82 Budget represents a further example of the Government's determination to ensure that the conditions necessary for continued and balanced economic growth are

738 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

maintained. The area of my concern is the economy and the labour market. The last two financial years have seen some very hard won fruits of this Government's economic strategy. There has been a sustained strengthening of private sector activity with marked increases in business investment. Inflation fell further' in 1980-81 and remained below the average of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries. The overall result was a 4 per cent increase in real wages in 1980-81. This combination of economic achievement has led to a considerable inprovement in employment and a reduction in unemployment.
Especially encouraging has been the significant improvement in the labour market, as I have said, as a result of those economic achievements. Over the last two-year period, we have seen strong annual employment growth averaging about 2t per cent. In 1980-81, in particular, total employment grew strongly by 2.7 per cent during the year with full time employment increasing at a very healthy rate of 2.2 per cent or 114,000 jobs. Let there be no doubt whatsoever about the number of jobs that have been generated by this economic expansion and development. In the last two years to July 1981, employment has increased by 321,000 or 5.3 per cent. The employment growth during the year was widely based. It was not confined to one area. Good increases occurred in both male and female employment. Teenage employment rose significantly. There were rises in employment in all States with Queensland, Western Australia, New South Wales and the Northern Territory recording especially strong growth. The growth was also broadly based across industries and significant rises in employment occurred in the metal industries, finance, property and business services, community services and the construction and mining industries.
We hear nonsense from the Leader of the Opposition about the unemployment rate. Let us look at some very basic figures \Yhich will indicate the improvement. We say again tonight, as we have said on every occasion when this subject has been debated, that the unemployment levels are, of course, completely unsatisfactory. But we point out that in July 1979 the full time unemployment rate was 5.9 per cent; last year it was 5.8 per cent; and this year it is 5.6 per cent. The number of unemployed young people dropped in the year. to July 1981 by 10,000. Again we emphasise that this is not good enough and that there is a .serious problem in the unemployment field. But that problem will not be remedied by any means other than sustained economic growth. It is only sustained economic growth which will generate

through the economy the jobs that are needed in Australia in the large numbers in which they are needed. It is important that the economic and labour market gains of the last two years, as I have just outlined, are not frittered away; and wrong policies can lead, of course, to exactly that.
The undedying aim of the Budget is to consolidate the process of economic recovery which is already apparent in Australia. It does this by setting itself squarely against a possible resurgence of inflationary pressure. The experience of Australia in the early 1970s, and that of many Western industrial countries, shows that there is a link between wage levels and unemployment. I made the point this afternoon-it is a basic, although to some people unpalatable, truth-that people will employ other people when it is profitable and economic to do so and when the potential employees have the skills, the ability and the experience that employers want.

It should be recognised that an acceleration of wage inflation, particularly at this time, would impact not only on prospects for future growth in employment, but on the distribution of the jobs which are available. Who would be the sufferers in that situation? The unemployed would be the
sufferers. The young people would be the sufferers. Unions, in making their demands for increased wages, and the Australian Labor Party
in this Parliament, in encouraging them in that endeavour, should remember exactly that-that it is the innocent, who suffer and it is the unemployed who will not be able to fill the jobs which cannot be created by means other than economicgrowth.

Fortunately, the recent steps that have been

taken by this Government to bring the relevant

industrial relations parties together appear to

have led to a calmer approach to wage determi-

nation. There is a recognition now that the aban-

donment of indexation has not left a vacuum and

need not create chaos. The conciliation and arbi-

tration system is still there to facilitate orderly

wage settlements which are within the interests of

the economy and the community and which can

enable the economy to develop and expand but

which will not intrude those inflationary forces

Which can lead only to the destruction of the

economy, the destruction of jobs and the dest,ruc-

tion of the hopes of the unemployed and of those

YOllng people with whom we concerned ourselves

,in a debate earlier today and who are looking for

jobs.

'"

.

It is essential that the parties to the industrial relations system exercise restraint and that the recent wave of industrial unrest is not repeated. It is another very basic principle about this matter that

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 739

employers will not take on extra employees when there is so much uncertainty in the industrial sphere. They will not take on extra employees when they have no guarantee that goods will be delivered or services can be provided. They ~ill not take on extra employees when there is no guarantee that they will be able to carry out their business and expand their business without continual industrial disputation. Those uncertainties inevitably cloud the outlook for the labour market. In line with the forecast for economic growth, however, the Budget estimates are for an employment growth of 2 per cent in this year. This growth rate, of course, is lower than that experienced in the last two years, but it compares more than favourably with the experiences of the mid1970s, when employment growth averaged less than one per cent per year.
The manpower programs and the services provided by the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs make a positive contribution to the expansion of employment within Australia. I said earlier that one of the main determinants of whether employers wi\l employ people is whether it is profitable and economic to do so. The other determinant, of course, is whether the people that are available have the skills, the ability and the experience that the employer wants. It is in that latter area that manpower policies and programs make such a powerful and substantial contribution to employment. These programs are an important complement to the economic and social policies of the Government and within this overall environment they have an important part to play in improving the efficiency of the labour market, particularly the adaptibility and suitability of the supply of labour and the employment experience of particular disadvantaged groups. Put simply, if employers cannot get the people they need or workers the jobs they want, the consequences will be costly indeed for this country and for individuals. They will be costly in terms of higher unemployment, in terms of lost economic growth and in terms of inflationary 'Wage pressures. One would hope that there would be bipartisan and universal support for the encouragement and development of those programs.
Manpower and training programs are an im~ portant means of addressing two current issues of major public concern in-the labour market: Firstly, youth unemployment problems, which remain despite some recent improvement, and, secondly, the shortages of skilled labour, which are becoming increasingly apparent. There is, not unnaturally, confusion about how these problems can exist together. There is, quite rightly, a concern that everything that can be done should be

done to train Australians for job opportunities generated by economic growth. The Government's commitment to manpower and training programs becomes a reality through the placement services of the Commonwealth Employment Service. People are able to use the Commonwealth Employment Service to get the jobs they need and advice on the range of employment and training programs available to assist them. It becomes a reality through specific programs of assistance directed at both trade and non-trade skills training. It becomes a reality through ensuring that young people have access to practical programs aimed directly at providing work experience and training opportunities.
The 1981-82 Budget represents an increased emphasis on manpower and training programs to provide, in particular, practical and positive help for young unemployed people and to increase the supply of skilled workers needed by industry. There has been an increase in the allocations to all employment and youth affairs programs to $203m in 1981-82. Within that total, expenditure on manpower and training programs will increase by nearly $50m, or 31 per cent over last year, to $197m. So there has been a very substantial increase in the expenditure committed by the Government to manpower and training programs and an expansion of the number of places available to individuals under those programs.
This increase in expenditure will provide in particular for the many new initiatives which the Government has introduced to assist those young people experiencing difficulty in obtaining employment. In 1981-82 this emphasis will continue through work experience programs, the expenditure on which will be increased from $41.3m to $65.1m, a 58 per cent increase over the last financial year. There is available a higher level of subsidy to assist longer term unemployed young people to obtain work experience over a 34-week period. This measure was introduced in February 1981 and it is expected that some 12,000 young people will benefit in the present financial year. The transition allowance was also introduced in February 1981 to provide an incentive for young unemployed people to return to relevant education and training courses in the technical and further education institutions. Expenditure on this will increase from $4.7m to $13m. It is estimated that this will enable some 16,000 young people to take advantage of the expansion in the school-to-work transition program which the Commonwealth has set as its objective in 1982.
It should now be plain, as a result of the debate which has taken place over the last few days concerning the Community Youth Support Scheme,

740 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

that the Government has a very firm and clear position with respect to its obligations towards young people. In the first place it has an awareness of that obligation and an awareness of their immediate and very substantive needs. But it should also be clear that we are now firmly on the path where we believe that what we as a government can do best, in the first place, is to ensure there is a lively, vibrant and expanding economy, which in the final analysis is the only way in which jobs can be generated within the economy. Secondly, we can make a substantial contribution' by directing young people to those situations where they can acquire the skills, the training and the work experience which they need to acq.uire and keep jobs.

There are no short cuts to employment. There are no easy solutions. It is a matter which requires very sensible thought and serious consideration. That is the reason why a great deal of thought has been put into the programs that my Department administers. It is the reason why we believe we are on the right track now. We say the emphasis now must be put on skills training, on young people acquiring work experience. We say that the money is there because of the increased commitments by the Government in this Budget. The places are there because of the increased and expanded range of opportunities for young people under
those programs. We say that if young people are directed to and advised of those areas where they
can take part in programs they will be able to acquire the skills which they need.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-

Order! The Minister's time has expired.

.

Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (9.1)-That was a pretty poor performance from a new Minister, the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown), a person who is supposed to have a future in the Liberal Party of Australia and a future in the Government. Until he got on to the speech which was written for him by his Department we heard the same old muck we had heard for years from the drones of the back bench of the Government. Weheard how the Australian Labor Party would have socialism and how it would increase income tax. He said that under Labor interest rates would go through the roof. They are now at the highest point in Australian history. Commercial loans which apply to any-
body doing anything in this country outside the housing industry, are 17 per cent. Income tax is at the highest in dollar and real terms in Australian history. It will rise by 22 per cent by the GovernmenCs.estimate in the Budget.

Mr Dean-Come on, Paul. Don't be so silly.

Mr KEATING-I ask you, Mr Deputy Speaker, to give me some protection from the clown who has not even read his own Budget Papers.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I remind the honourable member on my right that interjectionsare out of order.
Mr KEATING-The increase in taxes will be 22 per cent by the Government's own reckoning. The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs talks about youth training schemes. He has no concept of the yawning gap between the privileged and the poor in this country which we have seen emerge in the six years of Fraserism. He has no regard for the fact thll.t the egalitarian concept which was very much in vogue in this country through the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s is being eroded in Australia under the Fraser .Government; the concept of egalitarianism of a very equal society in Australia which kept this country in a socially secure position is being eroded. He has no concept for that because he is part of the group which brought the miserable politics of the mid-1970s to Australia. The attitude was: 'Look after yourself. The rich prosper; the strong prevail' or, as the Prime Minister used to put it, 'freedom to spend your own money'. That is what the Government is all about.
The Government is not concerned about the fact-that the fabric of our society is breaking down, that poor and underprivileged people are living in dire circumstances. It is not concerned about the fact that people cannot house themselves any more, that whole generations of young Australians will never know home ownership. They will be doomed to a lifetime of renting from other people. In Australia the people with capital get all the rewards under the Fraser Government. The Minister, who spoke with his jargon about socialism, increased income tax and all the rot which we hear from the Government during election campaigns, has no real concept for the state of Australia at this point.
He talked about employment. The Government does not even have an incomes policy. When the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) came home from tripping around the world in his Boeing 707 he had a conversation with the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) on the tarmac at Canberra airport and decided that the next day he ought to put on a flurry of activity and call a summit cenference on incomes. He gave one day's notice. He decided to call the meeting off the top of his head. He came off the plane, had. a discussion and decided: 'Oh, yes, we had better have a summit conference on incomes'. He had that

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 741

abortive meeting a couple of weeks ago about an incomes policy. Of course it broke down. The Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission told the Government where to go. What was the Government's response to this problem of trying to have an anti-inflation policy and a decent and humane incomes policy? What it will do is tighten down the economy. It will squeeze it down and kill all the growth because it thinks that if employers cannot pass on price increases they cannot grant increases in wages to their work force. This is the way the Government will have a de facto wages or incomes policy. That is what the Government is all about.
The Government has no ideas. It has had six years in Government, and all the prosperity that we were promised has never arrived. We have had a 2.2 per cent average rate of gross domestic product for the first five years of the Fraser Government. The banana republic can do better than 2.2 per cent. The gross domestic product of all of the Orginisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries is between 4 per cent and 6 per cent. Without that growth, we ca!1not get growth in employment. We cannot give young people jobs. We cannot get growth in wealth or growth in incomes. We will never get growth while we pursue the policies that the Government is pursuing.
Let us look at all the strategies we have seen. When Mr Fraser came to power we had the investment-led recovery. After that it was the consumer-led recovery. Honourable members will remember Charlie Court's idea at the Premiers Conference about the wages-prices freeze. Then we had the wages-prices freeze for three weeks, which fell apart. Then there was a tax-cut recovery. People were told to ring up and find out how much their tax cuts were. The cuts were given in February and were taken away in July. Then, without any mandate, we had the $3,000m petrol tax. Then it got round to the big fix, the sell out to the foreigners, the resources boom. We see various aluminium propects hitting the fence because there is not enough demand for aluminium. We see that some of the coal projects are notstarting. We see massive associated capital inflow and the implications for higher interest rates,. yet, the Deputy Prime Minister this week said 'Australians expect too much. They have got to be patient to get something from the boom. We will get the behefits but they have to be patient'. During the election campaign the Government told us of $30,000 billion worth of projects and that the great El Dorado had arrived. The EI Dorado is not arriving. There will not be anything like $30,000 billion worth of projects, and now the

Government is recanting about the real economic benefits.
To date what Australia has really got out of the resources boom is a whole lot of high interest rates which have impacted on every family mortage and which cost anyone with a $30,000 loan about $20 a week more. As a result of the Government's policies people are paying about another $10 a week for petrol. From this week people will be paying $10 a week for health protection. What have we got out of all the years of Fraserism? The Budget estimates say that this year inflation will go up 2 per cent to 11 per cent. So we are back to the 11 per cent that prevailed in this country when Fraser came to power-when the Prime Minister came to power; let us not be pedantic. When he came to power he spoke of the reprehensible circumstances whereby he had to tip out the Labor Government. We are back at an inflation rate of 11 per cent. We have had five years of 2.2 per cent economic growth. We have massive cuts in government services. The poor are much poorer. People cannot house themselves. Their standard of living is going down, yet Government members have the hide to talk about 'your strategy'. What is the Government's strategy worth? It is worth nothing. Last year the Government talked about how it got some growth in the economy. We will tell it how last year it got some growth in the economy. There was some growth in the economy last year. Why? It occurred because the Arbitration Commission granted a 3 per cent real increase to employees which went over into retail sales, and picked up the retail industry. The Government opposed the move at the Arbitration Commission and because there was ajump in retail sales and because the Government's opposition was ignored by the Arbitration Commission we got a little growth.
The money supply jumped the rails. The Government has a tight monetary policy, which keeps growth and the money supply down. It is the old Chicago school line. Try to starve them out and hold inflation down. What happened? The money supply blew up. There was some money around so people invested in buildings. Home units, fiats and houses were built and the building industry picked up and things started to go again. Property started to move. People said: 'Maybe there is a bit of growth around.' But all these things happen despite the Government, not because of the Government. It is the Government which argues for a tight monetary policy, not for a loose one. The Labor Party has argued for the mild stimulus. We are the only people who can take any solace out of what has happened ih the last financial year; the Government cannot do so.

742 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

What happened in the last financial year? In the first half of the year we heard Government Ministers talking about an increase of 6.1 per cent in non-farm ,gross domestic product, which was true for the reasons I have just stated. But after that the Government started to screw down again, to tighten up its monetary and fiscal policy and to increase the price of the tap stock so that it could drain money out of the economy. What did we see in the second half of the year? Growth fell to 1.6 per cent. It is all ,right talking about a year's figures but when we look at the trend line we see that towards the end of the last financial year the activity was coming back very fast. In the June quarter of the last financial year-thret: months ago-there was an actual decline in productivity. There was no growth but a negative factor of 0.1 of I per cent. So the government is not looking at the position of growth and trying to restrain or in any way to complement growth with this Budget. It is looking at a period of restrained economic activity which it will now absolutely kill with one of the most miserable and hardest Budgets in Australian economic history. We will see that any growth which may have given people some cold comfort in the past will just disappear and activity will be tightened right up.
Who is to pay for all this? We just heard the Minister talking about how the Government is going to run a domestic Budget surplus. He thinks this is something to brag about. In simple terms, the Government has collected more than it is spending. I do not see al1Y fQle, for the Government in pinching more money from the public than it needs. I do not see any value in that. What is to happen? The Minister is trying to chip in again. Honourable .members on the Government side are a bunch of economic illiterates. The result has been that the Government has .had avery poor performance in this country for, five years. The Government is now talking about a domestic Budget surplus of $1.5 billion. All that means is that it has taken $1.5 billion worth of spending and activity out of the economy. What, pray tell, is to come from that? T1:lis is simply an antigrowth Budget. It becomes blatantly apparent to everyone in Australia that this Government is scared stiff of prosperity and scared stiff of growth. It is going to tighten down the economy and hope like hell that inflation goes with it.
oWhen we look at this dOm,estic Budget surplus we wonder where it came from. First of all there have been all sorts of cuts in the sor:ts of services that the Australian Labor Party has been interested in. I refer to cuts in housing, in, health, in urban and regional development, in help for cities and local governJ11~nt, in sewerage and

welfare-all the things Australians need. They have all been cut. There is always plenty of help for business. What do we find? When this Government took office Budget receipts were 25.1 per cent of gross domestic product. The only way one can measure tax is to measure it against gross domestic product in anyone year, to measure the size of the Budget tax take against the total size of the economy. What are the Budget receipts today with the small tax, small government party in office? They are 27.5 per cent today. They are up 2.4 per cent on what they were at the supposed dizzy spending heights and dizzy tax heights of the Whitlam, Government. They are 2.5 per cent larger in real terms than they were in those days.
This Government is the biggest taxing government in real terms in the history of this country. At least when the Labor Party was in Government it dealt with the Postmaster General's 'Department-telecommunications-in the Budget. This Government has hived all these things off out of the Budget so that its sins are not so public and increases, which the Labour Government would have had to wear in the price of stamps and in telephone charges, and which would show up in the Budget, are decided outside the Budget context. These things are hidden.
Mr Armitage-They call it fiddling the Budget, Paul.
Mr KEATING-Exactly. It is a fiddle of the Budget, trying to disguise it. We find that that is the tax take. Personal income tax is up by 22 per cent this year on the Government's own say so. As well as that the Government broke its promise on tax indexation. Tax indexation has now gone. When the health changes were brought in this year the Government used the camouflage of the health package to announce its withdrawal of tax indexation. That means that what Mr Fraser called the secret tax of inflation-taxation by stealth-is now to be an art form practised by the Fraser Government. It has now dropped any pretext of tax reform. It has given up on tax indexation, so as incomes are inflated and as people move into higher tax brackets, more money will be taken from them without any indexation of the' scales. This has come' from a Government which would, to use Mr Fraser's words in the 1975 election campaign, put money back in the pockets of the people who earned it.
The Government has broken that promise blatantly. Since then pay-as-you-earn tax collections hav increased by 144 per cent whilst wages over the same pe~iod have increased by only 98 per cent.So taxes increased dramatically through all those years since 1975. Indirect taxes are even

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 743

more staggering. They have increased by almost The only concession we see in this Budget is an in-

as much as 135 per cent. Oil taxes alone have crease in the family allowance for the third child

increased by a massive 1,200 per cent in five years, in a family. But when one looks at the reality of

without any mandate. Sales taxes this year will in the system one sees there has been no increase

crease by 38 per cent. In the last election camsince 1976. A two child family is now $24 worse

paign the Government was saying: 'The Labor off a week; a three child family i~ $28 worse off; a

Party is going to have a capital gains tax' and four child family is $32 worse off a week; and a 5

showing pictures of the houses that were to be child family is $37 worse off a week. Those figures

taxed. That, of course, was a lie. It said that it take into account the current Budget increases for

would not be introducing any tax and that it the third child of the family and later children.

would not lift taxes. But what do we find? Within There is no relief for the unemployed, for pen-

weeks of the Government being returned there sioners or for large families. Everybody is clearly

were discussions about broadly based indireCt worse off. Inflation, unemployment and interest

taxes. The Cabinet was leaking and floating off rates are increasing and the prediction is for more

things in newspapers to the effect that it was conof the same. Any hope of increasing growth rates

sidering a broadly based consumption tax to get has been stifled.

some measure of public support. After that, in the earlier part of this year, when the speculation was finally too much, the Treasurer (Mr Howard) came out and said that the Government did not wish to:

What does the Government do to get rid of the deficit? It says by its own admission that it wants to control the domestic money supply and it will do this by a massive dose of capital inflow. The whole of the .Government's Budget strategy is

. . . move towards grellter reliance on indirect taxation wreidtuhcotuiot~sp.roviding a noticeable offset in personal tax

built around $7,OOOm of capital inflow coming to Australia this year. If interest rates in the United States of America happen to move up any further

That was said a few months ago. Now we find that there"is to be a 2.5 per cent across the board increase in sales tax and selective sales tax increases of up to 15 per cent. If that is not a broadly based indirect tax I do not know what is. Where is the noticeable offset in personal tax reductions? They are not there. The Fraser Government is not like the Reagan Administration which, while it is cutting outlays, is at least handing the tax cuts back to the public. The Fraser Government is. cutting services to the needy and at the same time lifting outlays, lifting taxation and hanging on to the tax which would have been occasioned by any cut in certain kinds of services. It is another blatant broken promise. Again we get back to the whole rhetoric about low tax and small government. This is a taxing, not an axing government.- The Liberal Party is a high tax party and a big government party. Outlays to GDP and receipts to GDP are both higher.

or if international investors believe that there is a prospect of a depreciation of the Australian dollar that money may just evaporate. That mercurial flow of foreign capital may just move away from Australia. Where would the Government's strategy be? It has cut back on all the domestic lines of credit. It has tap stock soaking up money out of the economy at a fast rate of knots. The foreign investors are given an open go-open sesame to
buy up real estate, existing assets, portfolio investments as well as the new investments in productive plant and equipment for the mining industry. This year we see a total reliance on this strategy on foreign investment. Without it, of course, the whole strategy of the Budget would
fall apart. We do not see any prospect of the Government refusing to curb the rate of capital inflow into Australia to give Australians some respite from high interest rates. We see a continuing, growing influence of foreign investment in this country, profits being repatriated abroad and no

What happened to the promise of small governresource rent taxes.

ment? Where are the personal tax reductions? The long and short of it is that we are seeing a

We get the Government's rhetoric about the need yawning gap between the privileged and the poor

to decrease the size of the Government sector but in this country. This is a great shame because the

there is never any evidence of it. We get the arguconsensus which existed in politics over 30 years

ment that a balanced Budget or a smaller deficit from the Second World War was to try to hold

means small government, but there is'no evidence Australia together with an egalitarian concept of

of it. What it means is higher taxes, a cut-back in fairness in terms of the financial policies of a suc-

expenditure, no relief for the poor and disadvan- . cession of governments. That has gone with the

taged and the handing of F"edetal\ responsibility Fraser government. The prizes now go to the

over to the States in an effort to fudge the books strong, the greedy, the rich and those who are not

again by shuffling responsIbilities to the States~ well enough off. The middle income people with

744 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

two, three or four children cop it in the neck. I do not know how they can possibly survive. They cannot house themselves any more. Mortgage repayments are up. It is a shocking Budget and the House should reject it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BRADFIELD (Barton) (9.22)-Before moving to some of the positive aspects of this Budget--
Mr Armitage-Which ones?
Mr BRADFIELD-If the honourable member stays there he will hear them. Firstly I will place in context some of the arguments put forward by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). I am not sure whether the Leader of the Opposition is a magician or believes in fairy tales. When one analyses in depth the economic arguments put forward by him, they just do not add up. The Leader of the Opposition played heavily on the poverty of people. We realise that some people are living in poverty in Australia. This Government is concerned about that. To correct poverty is not a matter of going out and, with two hands, handing out dollar notes to people; it goes a lot deeper than that. Certainly this Government is interested in correcting that situation. It is not as easy as the Leader of the Opposition pointed out.
Let us look atsome of the Leader of the Opposition's main economic measures and his suggestions. He said that if the Opposition were in power it would abandon the sales tax increases just imposed in this Budget, including an amount" of $500m. He said that income tax would be reduced but he did not say by how much or how. In looking at some of the areas where this money would come from he said that he would eliminate the ongoing investment allowance, bring in a resource tax and give free health care to everyone: Back in Labor's reign from 1972 to 1975, free health care for everyone cost approximately $2,OOOm. Goodness knows what it would cost today. It might be all right in principle, but in practice it is an absolute impossibility. It's not possible to give everyone everything for nothing.
The Leader of the Opposition then went on to say that he would eliminate tax avoidance. His Government has no record of showing any sincerity towards eliminating the tax avoidance industry in Australia. The only Government that has shown any sincerity towards this is the Liberal-National Country Party Government. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) delivered his Budget Speech only last week. He has done more to eliminate tax avoidance in this country than any other

Treasurer or any collection of Treasurers. Mr Deputy Speaker, tax avoidance in this country is coming to an end. That means a better share of taxation amongst all Australians.
The Leader of the Opposition tried to put a popular choice to the people without having regard to economic reality. I could not help but formulate a picture in my mind as he was delivering his speech of a man standing in the middle of a busy supermarket handing out dollar notes with both hands. In that situation one would have throngs of people around who were willing to take dollar notes, saying, 'Good on you, mate.' When they walked away they would think, 'What a fool that fellow was. Why would anyone be foolish enough to stand there and give me a dollar note for nothing?' In the middle of his speech the Leader of the Opposition said something which showed the fine economic record this Government has.
The honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) criticised the economic policies of this Government, yet the Leader of the Opposition stated that if he were in government he would run a mild deficit. He went on to say that this country can afford it. If this country can afford a' mild deficit that, in itself, is proof of the economic situation created since this Government came to power in 1975; the fact is that the economy has improved and is sound.
At Budget time the country seems to go into mild turmoil. People speculate before the presentation of the Budget as to what could happen. When the Budget comes out everything is written about the good and the bad of it. This Budget is a little different. There was not a lot of Budget speculation before the event. When one analyses what has been said in the media, there has not been a lot of wild speculation. I take that to be an acceptance by the Australian people that deep down, even though the Budget may not have a lot of goodies in it, even though it was not a Budget handing out dollar notes with both hands, they realise. that the Budget echoes the continually improving economy of Australia, an economy from which everyone will benefit.
Let us look at some of the economic activities, economic indicators and inflation. Inflation gets a mention all the time because it is so important. It is important to our future, to investment and to all the people of Australia. Many people have forgotten how they were hurt when, in 1972 to 1975, inflation was running at 17 per cent. Many pensioners have forgotten how their pension payments were eroded and were losing their buying power. You would know, Mr Deputy Speaker,

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 745

that with a high rate of inflation not Qnly is there eCQnomic instability, and an unwillingness Qn the part of the people to invest, but also it makes the difference between the rich and the poor greater. If one happens to have assets those assets appreciate with inflatiQn. The people who do not have many assets or who. have no assets at all lose out cQmpletely.
In 1972 to 1975 that is exactly what happened. The gap between those that had it and those who did not became greater. That is why this Government is concerned to contrQl inflation and places it as No. 1 in priority. That is the way to. reduce the gap between the rich and the poor. Among the Qther indicators is our balance of payments. It has been very strong and that has been recQgnised by Qverseas investors. That is why the Australian dollar is so strong on the international currency markets and that is why people are wanting to invest in Australia.
The investment indicator alone shows the tremendous confidence that these peQple have in our co~qtry-a confidence that has been created by thi~Government. I know that members of the Opposition detest foreign investment. I know they have some magical theory about stopping foreign investment which perhaps they think is appealing to. the Australian people. They talk of buying back the farm and about buying back Australia; but nowhere do they say where this mQney will come from. There. is no. magic pot of money in Australia. There is no huge uninvested sum of money that belongs to Australians. If we stop foreign investment, we stop a tremendous part Qf Australia's expansion. We must make sure that foreign investment is controlled and that Australia is treated fairly by those peQple who want to invest here because they feel confident about our economy. We must ensure that we get our fair share of taxation from thQse people investing in Australia and we must also be sure that we always exercise sufficient control Qver those people.
Mr Deputy President, we can look at the business surveys. An Australia and New Zealand Banking GrQup Ltd survey speaks in glowing terms of the Australian economy. Surveys conducted QVer the last two Qr three years by all sorts of business organisations have all come up with one finding: The business outlook on the future Qf Australia is sound. Let us lQok at what has happened over the years to the increased competitiveness of Australian manufactured goods. The fact is that we have a textile industry that is on the way back up again. It was destroyed during the years 1972-75. It is the sound economy that has given these industries the impetus to get up off the

floor again and be world competitivecQmpetitive with the costs of Qther countries that years ago we had no hope Qf matching. Looking at the employment statistics mentioned by the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) who preceded me in this debate, we see that Qver Qne million more people are emplQyed in Australia tQday than were employed in 1975 when we came into office. That is quite an achievement. At the same time, unemployment has gone down, and it has gone down while we have absorbed 130,000 new schoolleavers a year. When Qne looks at the indicators, one sees that the Australian eCQnomy is not in bad shape. I purposely leave until last among those indicatQrs interest rates. The honourable member for Blaxland mentiQned them; the Leader of the Opposition mentiQned them.
Mr Uren-I will mention them too.
Mr BRADFIELD-The honourable member for Reid will mention them tQO. Interest rates are at a level which is not acceptable to this Government or to the people of Australia. The Australian people deserve some sort of explanation why interest rates have come up and why we must do our best to return them to a mQre acceptable level. Throughout this economic activity, there has been an increased demand for mQney, for home construction, industry and the development of our resources. We have become unbalanc~d. We have reached the stage at which too many people want to borrow money and not enough people are willing to lend money. That is also unacceptable. That cannot continue. We cannot continually allow only the privileged to. get money. The only way in which to bring that situation back into order is to. let interest rates come up to a realistic level, a level that perhaps deters some people from borrowing money unnecessarily, and a level which at the same time encourages more people to lend mQney.
Another serious situation that has cQntributed greatly to the unacceptable rise in interest rates over the last 18 months has been the greedy borrowing by State governments, local governments and semi-government authorities. They go to the market, regardless of what interest rates are available, and they pay them. The reason they pay these rates is that directly or indirectly the public is paying their interest bills. When the electricity commission of whatever State it may be wants to borrow mQney, it pays its 14 per cent or 15 per cent and then it loads the cost Qn to the public by way of charges. The Government in my State Qf New South Wales is a prime example. When it wants money to go ahead with a program it pays the ruling in~erest rate. It charges that coSt back to

746 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

the people of New South Wales. So, the greed of State governments and of semi-government authorities has been a great contributor to interest rates. When the Premier of New South Wales complains about this matter at Premiers confer" ences, his own conscience must tell him that he has been the number one contributor to rising interest rates in Australia because his Government has been prepared to pay the rate. If people are not prepared to pay high rates, interest rates will not go up.
Let us look at some of the advantages of this Budget and at some of the measures which show that we care for people. The family allowance is to be generously increased. This is an important increase that goes to the heart of our Australian way of life because there is no more important unit in Australia than the family. This increase in family allowance helps by way of an additional $13 a month for the third child and the same amount for the fourth child. Let us look ,at the rebate of 32c in the dollar for hospital cover. That is an assistance to those people who are paying these fees and who need private hospital cover. This probably has not been fully ,realised yet because we have not reached the end of the tax year when people get the advantage of that 32c in the dollar rebate. A matter that has been mentioned rarely since the Budget was presented is the, increase in the tax free threshold of personal income tax. It has increased from $4,041 per annum to $4,195 per annum. At the same time the rate of increase in the income tax scale also has been adjusted. People are just starting to realise the, generosity of the adjustment to the spouse allQwance for income tax purposes. The spouse allowanc,e was recently increased from $597 per annum to $800 per annum. That is a rebate-a discount-off one's tax. It is not a deduction or a reduction of taxable income; it is far more important than that. That $203 extra rebate is the equivalent of increasing the tax free threshold of a person's income by $635. When one makes calculations regarding a one income family; one will see that the breadwinner of that family is now able to earn $6,695 per, annum or $130 a week before the taX: scales apply. People have not yet fully realised the great relief to Australian families that that increase, in the spouse allowance will mean.
There is a matter in this Budget which I reg~rd as a milestone for the Australian people and, for the, Government. We virtually ,have anend tei the deficit-adeficifthat has been plaguingAustraHa since 1974 and thIS Gcivernmentsince it caine to office. No longer do we have this worry. The deficit virtually has gone. that is quite an achievement. Anyone \Vho looks at the'accumUlation of

annual deficits that this Gover,nment has had to cope with over the years will see that it totals $20 billion. That is money that has been borrowed from somewhere. It is economic stupidity for the Leader of the Opposition to get up anQ say that it is all right to fI~n at a deficit. The people of Australia, through the government of Australia, have to, get that money frQm somewhere. The fact that there is no deficit in the Budget framed by the Treasurer last week is quite an achievement. It is an achIevement that heralds future relief for all AustraliaJ}s. No longer'do we need to obtain revenue to cope with a deficit. This means that less money will have to be collected from the Australian people in the revenue collection area in the future;
Finally, let me take this Parliament back to the, Speech ,o( the Governor-General at the opening of this Parliament. In that Speech the Governor General said that this Government placed great recognition on the individual Australian. This Governme\lt does place great recognition on the indiviQual Australian. That is why, through the Budget, we have brought about economic stability. That iswhy in the future the individual Australian can look forward to greater prosperity and a lower taxation base. I applaud the Budget. It heralds economic stability for Australia and ensures our' future.
, Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired;
Mr ARMITAGE (Chifiey) (9.42)-The honourable member for Barton (Mr Bradfield) talked a while ago of the efforts of this Government in relation to tax avoidance. He neglected to rnention, of course, that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) and the Minister for Industry and Cominerce(Sir Phillip Lynch) were among the people who had family trusts and who, until the Government altered the laws of this country, were some of the prIze tax avoiders in this country. In other words, it is one thing to talk of ending tax avoidance and it is another 'thing to put it into practice. We must recall at all times that this Government is a Government of greed before need.
'The"honourable member for Barton just sh6we~ his complete lack of understanding of national accounts. when he talked of deficit b~dgeting. He forgot; of course, that this Government is a great llupporter ()f the United States of 1\m~rica. The honourabl,e member for Barton apparently does not' even realise that the Budget deficit inthat country ranges from $50 billion to

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 747

$75 billion, not millions of dollars. If the honourable member sat down and started to learn a little about national accounts he might not make such extraordinary claims. As I said, this Government is a government of greed before need. It is a government which has brought forward a nogrowth Budget, a Budget which is deliberately setting out to bring about higher unemployment and is deliberately setting out to bring about a redistribution of income from the lower and lower middle income groups to the higher income groups. This policy is being followed very deliberately by this Government of greed before need.
I start off by looking at what is happening to young people today. Only this afternoon we witnessed some of the greatest exhibitions ever in this Parliament in the debate about the abolition of the Community Youth Support Scheme. The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) apparently did not even know that this was to happen as he went around the sticks saying how he would provide more insofar as CYSS is concerned. A new arrangement was to be introduced, but along came Budget night and the Treasurer (Mr Howard) said: 'Sorry, CYSS is abolished'. Even the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs did not know about it.
The young married couples who are starting out in life and getting their first homes are the people who are being hit harder than probably any other section of the community by the deliberate policies of this Government on interest rates. I am seeing examples of it all around me. The newly married young people who are getting their first homes are copping it harder than anybody. This applies particularly to the young people who have a first mortgage, a second mortgage and a personal loan from a credit union or bank. I have seen examples of this very close to my own family. I understand what is going on with these young people. They just cannot afford the continual increases in their monthly payments brought about by the increase in interest rates. The dream of every young person of owning his own home is becoming more and more an impossi. bility because of the deliberate policies of this Government.
Let us look at the question of family allowances. For the first time since 1976-for the first time in five years-there has been an increase in family allowances for the third and subsequent children in a family. But the young people who are starting to build their families and who have one child or two children will not get a razoo extra. They will still receive the rates of five years ago. If ever a thimble and pea trick was performed

it was performed five years ago when the Government said: 'All right, instead of giving you a tax rebate for your children we will give it to you as afamily allowance increase. The women will get it. That way the men will not get to spend it.' That is the way the Government went about it. For a start it did not even give the equivalent of the tax rebate in the way of an increase in the family allowance. Secondly, whereas the tax rebate would have been indexed time and again since then, the family allowance has not been indexed. In other words, as I said, it was a thimble and pea trick. We say that we want the young Australians to have families. It is when they are starting off their families and when they are starting to buy their own homes that they need assistance and that is the very time that they are not getting the assistance.
I will not be purely negative in this regard and say that this is purely because of the Government's deliberate policies of increasing interest rates. Let us face reality and accept that the interest rate situation has got to the stage of the dog chasing the tail. Because of the continual increases in interest rates, people expect those rates to increase even further. Therefore, they wi1l not put their money into long term securities. They put their money instead into the short term money market because they know that they can get at it quickly and go back and reinvest as the rates increase time and time again. It becomes an issue of expectation of increased interest rates, of the dog chasing the tail. Yet the Treasurer says that he thinks that this will be the last time that they will increase. That is what he said the last time. It wi1l happen again and again until this Government alters its policies.
Accepting the need, first of all, to control the increase in the money supply-an increase which has gone Jar beyond the Budget estimate of last year; once again the Government's indications in the Budget were completely ill-inFormed-and accepting the need to control inflation and, in particular, the inflation in house prices, which is making it harder and harder for our younger people to obtain their first homes, what policies ought to be followed? What should be done? first of all, the Government should utilise its existing powers under the Banking Act and get the Reserve Bank to call in statutory reserve deposits; in other words, cream off excess funds from the trading banks and put them into the Reserve Bank through the use of its existing powers under the Banking Act. Secondly, why has the Government not proclaimed the whole of the Financial Corporations Act introduced by the Whitlam Government. The first section of it was proclaimed in order to get the necessary statistics.

748 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

By that time the Government had changed. This within its means to block these Government pro-

Government then did not proceed to proclaim the posals which are anticipated to raise over $500m.

second section of the Financial Corporations Act This tax is being introduced as a means of direct-

because, once again, that would be similar to the ing taxation away from the higher income group

Banking Act and similar to the use of SRDs in to the lower and middle income groups. It is done

creaming off excess funds of financial institutions this way. Just as parity pricing on petrol was a

to the Reserve Bank of Australia. Once again that broad-based tax which hit the poor, the middle-

would assist in the fight against inflation. It would income earners ahd the rich alike, so this sales tax

mean that the necessity to increase interest rates falls into exactly the same category. It is a broad-

would not occur.

based tax which will hit the poor, the middle-

Furthermore the Government could control, under the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations the induction of speculative overseas capital. That inflow of speculative overseas capital is one of the main causes of the recent blowing out of the money supply. Let us face reality about what happened in June of this year. The various large corporations which normally go to the banking system to borrow funds to meet their tax debts, this year, because of rising interest rates and
the cost of money in this country, went overseas and borrowed. They brought the funds in from overseas thereby blowing out the money supply. In other words, the very policies which this Government had introduced to try to stop the growth of the money supply created that very problem and exacerbated it. Those are the sorts of policies which ought to be carried out. If these

income earner and the rich alike. Under the income tax system the higher the salary one earns, the higher the tax one pays and the lower the salary one earns, the less one pays in tax. That is why these so-called broad-based taxes are the most unfair method of taxing of all.
If honourable members recollect, the Treasurer said that sales tax increases will be introduced in three categories. First of all items which are not presently taxed will be taxed at a rate of 2.5 per cent. Secondly, there are items which are in special categories. I think he called them anomalies. They will be increased. He did not say the extent to which they would be increased but I will read them out in a few moments. For all the other items, apart from those not at present taxed-the anomalies-there will be an extra in. crease of 2.5 per cent.

sorts of policies were carried out there would be Let us have a look at a few of them non-

no need to increase interest rates. But these are returnable containers, for example, bottles and

matters of principle, the Government always says. cartons, used in marketing soft drinks which are,

It is a market force government. There must be no at present, exempt from the tax will attract a tilx

governmental intervention whatsoever. There of 17.5 per cent. Television picture tubes, exempt

must not be the types of controls which I am sugat present, will attract a tax of 30 per cent. One

gesting. It must be the market place at all times. It will not be able to afford to feed one's pets be-

is the young people who are being sacrificed on cause pet foods which are exempt at present will

the high altar of these monetarist theories of the be taxed. at 17.5 per cent. Motor vehicle safety

Government. It is as simple as that.

belts which are exempt at present will be taxed at

We should look also at the small businessman, the man who has an overdraft of under $100,000 and who has to pay 13.5 per cent per annum on his overdraft. When this situation is reached he has to make a decision. He either has to go out of business or he has to increase his prices. What will he do? The answer is obvious. He will increase his prices. That once again adds to the pressure of inflation. I make the point that increased interest rates, are in themselves, inflationary. If one looks right across the board one sees that they have to be inflationary. I have given a number of examples here today.

17.5 per cent. Oil and greases for road vehicles and other oils and greases not used for industrial purposes which are exempt at present will be taxed at 17.5 per cent. Motor vehicle windscreens and windows exempt at present will be taxed at 17.5 per cent. Saddlery, harness and rugs, for horses which are exempt will be taxed at 17.5 per cent. Glace fruit and .drained fruit, exempt at present, will be taxed at 17.5 per cent. Felt-tipped
and nylon-tipped pens which are at present taxed at 15 per cent will go to 30 per cent. One will not be able to afford an alarm clock to wake one up in the morning because an alarm clock at present taxed at 15 per cent will go up to 30 per cent.

Once again, in considering this Government of greed before need, let us look at the proposed sales tax. The Opposition will do everything possible to stop the sales tax legislation from going through this Parliament.. It will do everything

Goods of a kind used exclusively or principally in sport or games' presently taxed as household goods at 2.5 per cent will go up to 17.5 per cent. One will not be able to afford to get rid of the cockroaches because household insecticides and

Adjournment

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 749

insect repellants, at present exempt, will be taxed at 17.5 per cent. Road vehicles and vehicle parts used for bulk handling of grain, at present exempt, will be taxed at 17.5 per cent. Forklift trucks used in stevedoring which are not carried as ships' equipment and which are at present exempt will be taxed at 17.5 per cent. Certain protective equipment not for use in the course of industrial operations and which are exempt at present will be taxed at 17.5 per cent. The next item is a beauty. Photographs manufactured by dispensing chemists, selling only by retail, which are at present exempt will be taxed at 30 per cent. There will be a few smells around because dog soaps which are exempt at present will now be taxed at 17.5 per cent. Those are exarhples of these extraordinary increases which are to occur under this Budget.
If the Government gets these proposals through this Parliament it will recoup over $500m which will be taken straight ou.t of the taxpayers' pockets. Of course, this is just one of the many, many broken promises made by this Government. An example is tax indexation. It was said: Keep the Government honest. Where has tax indexation gone? It has been forgotten. It was purerhetoric. The Prime Minister promised that he would not interfere with tax deductibility on home mortgages which would have helped young people. That has gone with the wind. As the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) knows funds for urban development have gone with the wind. Again the Prime Minister promised that that would not be interfered with. In 1975 he said that he would not interfere with Medibank. We are now up to mark V or mark VI-I am not sure. We do not have any Medibank or a universal health scheme at all. It is costing the ordinary, everyday wage and salary earner more and more to obtain the essentials of health care. The Prime Minister promised also that the children's services program would not be interfered with. In real terms funding for that service is down 50 per cent of what it was in 1976. He said that there would be a job for everyone who wanted one. Now, in this Budget, the Cpmmunity Youth Support Scheme has been knocked out. The various proposals to assist people to get employment are becoming less and less. Of course, as I said earlier-this is a government--
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
'Lake and Stream' Radio Program-Interest Rates-Community Youth Support Scheme-Education--Sales Tax

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! It being 10 p.m., under sessional order. I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (1O.0)-There is a saying that old fisherpersons never die, they just smell that way. A very similar sort of fishy smell emanates from the circumstances surrounding the Canberra Australian Broadcasting Commission's axing in mid July of the very popular fishing radio program called Lake and Stream. Nearly four years ago, the program was conceived by Graham Pike, a highly experienced angler and journalist. Since then, twice a week on ABC radio 2CN Canberra he has informed, interested and involved a conservatively estimated total of six million listeners in fish, their lake and stream habitats and associated environmental matters. The Lake and Stream program was as popular as ever when suddenly it was cast out by the ABC in Canberra last month. There is sufficient evidence to show that the program was the indirect victim of the pressures the Fraser Government has applied and is applying to the ABC generally. It was a victim of the conservatism, perhaps even paranoia, increasing within the ABC in response to these Government pressures. The ABC is as frightened of this Government as a trout would be of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) stumbling down the middle of a creek in bright blue, striped waders. Worse still, it appears that at least some ABC management and middle management officers feel they should curry favour not only with government but with our rod wielding international angler, the Prime Minister himself.
What I am saying is supported by the background to the demise of Mr Pike's Lake and Stream program. Several times in the past, Mr Pike has taken a: satirical cast at the Prime Minister, without any offence being meant of course and apparently without it being taken by the Prime Minister. Certainly the local ABC management of those times did not even raise and eyebrow. Then, fairly recently, there came to the ABC a change of management and with it a new negative attitude to Mr Pike's fishing program. This new attitude first found expression about seven months ago in a memo from the ABC Canberra management to 2CN technical staff instructing them that they were not to record Lake and Stream or put it to air before Mr Pike's script had been vetted and. approved. by the program supervisor of radio. The vetting soon became.censorship as parts of the script of the sort which were quite often used. in the program's first three years were cut out.

750 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Adjournment

On 26 June this year, Mr Pike opened the Lake and Stream program by jocularly suggesting that the Prime Minister's visit to North America at that time amounted to a fishing holiday. That program had already been substantially censored by ABC middle management before it went to air. Mr Pike was told that despite what his research had shown, it was not proper to satirise the Prime Minister. Further, a joke at the Prime Minister's expense was ordered to be cut. Even taken out of the context of the program's script, it is hard to see why the ABC's management objected to the joke. The joke had it that President Reagan was going to compare his fan club membership with that of Mr Fraser. It was suggested that Mr Fraser would be at some disadvantage. President Reagan's list included the entertainers Bob Hope, Johnny Cash and Stevie Wonder. However, on the Prime Minister's fan club list, there was no hope, no cash and no wonder. Despite the fact that this joke was censored and the program that day further watered down, Mr Pike was told in a hand delivered letter nearly immediately after the program went to air that Lake and Stream was to be dropped by 2CN. The reason given in the letter was that the ABC did not have enough money to keep the program going. It -was costing $35 per week. Mr Pike then offered to do the program free of charge to save the ABC this huge amount. But after two days' consideration, management replied that if the ABC accepted free programs, it would not appear to the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair), that the ABC was hurting from the Budget cuts and the ABC wanted to appear to be hurting from those cuts.
Since Lake and Stream has been dropped by 2CN there has been much public opposition to the ABC's decision and management has given in writing several different reasons for its actions, none of them, however, listing money as a reason. I close with a warning: People may well wonder what the end result will ~e for the ABC and for themselves if the sort of censorship to which a fishing program has been subjected is extended to other programs or, worse still, is allowed to occur at all within the ABC.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (10.5)-On a previous occasion in the adjournment debate, the honourable member forHotham (Mr Kent) chose to read to us a very interesting letter from one of his constituents relating to home ownership and interest rates. It is quite strange that I now have the opportunity to read a letter that I received today. The letter states:
Dear Wilson,
Mildred and I have been reading the paper about interest rates. You blokes are sure getting some Hack. I feel very sorry

for the young ones with the big mortgages and I hope you can help them. However, compared to me they at lea,st have a job and their unions to keep pushing up their pay. Sometimes I wonder if the young ones expect too much. When our Jenny married young Bob they bought a block of land before the engagement ring. That house of theirs has got everything in it you know, and Jenny had to keep her car after they got married. Anyway, Bob says he's not worried. He says he could make a tax free $20,000 on the place already. Well, good luck to them. Bob is a good worker. What I wanted to tell you about was Mildred and me. Don't shout it too loud, but your interest rate policy has just brought us back above the brea.d line. You remember the settlement I got in '75 after the accident-$65,OOO. Well, I got the part pension too. You know Mildred, I might have taken a risk but she said only sure investments. We put half into the Australian savings bonds and the rest into savings investments with the Commonwealth Bank. When we worked it out, things looked pretty good. In 1976 we. averaged 8 per cent interest-about $5;200 for the year. Now we had to pay some income tax and there was still a bit on the house, but it worked out that the pension covered most of that and we could have our daily living from the interest. Mildred said we would never touch the capital and we haven't, not that it will buy much now. But I'll tell you something, while you blokes were keeping interest rates down for the home buyers and the Government you sure made it hard for us. Mildred and I sat down with some old bills the other night-you know how she keeps the accounts to the cent. Well we worked out that in 1976 our living cost was about 90 bucks a week and that was $4,680 a year. That would be about right too as we had a bit over that year. So even though I would never be able to work again everything looked okay. The 90 bucks included a few beers and the odd night out and petrol for the car. Anyway, so as not to bore you, we also added it up for the nex t few years. 1977, we got the same interest-$5,200, but our living costs went up to $5,400. In 1978 interest rates went down a bit. We averaged 7.5 per cent which was $4,875 for the year. But our living costs went up to $6,000, that is, if we lived that way as we did in '77. I know this because we woke up early in the year and had to cut back, had to still use some of Mildred's savings to make do. In 1979 we got 7.75 per cent or $5,037, but by calculation, our living costs for the same things were $6,500. Boy, did I get cranky not having a drink. Didn't buy too many clothes either. Well, things are a bit better now and I've just written out the figures. 1980 the interest rate was 8.75 per cent for a return of $5,687 but by then our estimated cost of living was $7,049 for the same things. In 1981 it went up further to $7,718. So you can see we've caught up a bit but ifinHation is $10,000 this year it will still be $600 short of where I was in 1976. Okay mate, we haven't starved but I think you've got a responsibility to people who've saved a bit for a rainy day to see they earn a reasonable return on their savings. Mildred and I aren't getting any younger and really I should get a bit more pension as you haven't changed the means test business on my earnings for a lot of years. Hope you're enjoying Parliament and keep up the good work but make sure they know there are two sides to the story. By the way, if you can get inHation down we'll be happy to take less interest.
Bert
Mr Beazley-Mr Deputy Speaker, I ask that the letter be tabled.
Mr TUCKEy-It will not be tabled. It is mine. No letter was given out the other day.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-The honourable member does not respond to the invitation.

Adjournment

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 751

Mr HA:WKE (Wills) (10.10)-1 take this opportunity of exposing the fact that this House earlier today was sUbjected to gross misrepresentation by, the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown). Apparently there is something endemic in this portfolio. Honourable members will recall that the previous oc~upant, after cross examination and investigation from this side of the House, had to concede that he had been guilty of misleading the House. Today I pu~ to the House in the debate on the matter of public importance that 55,000 young people in Australia in the last year had enjoyed the benefits of the Community Youth Support Scheme. I said that the attempt by the Government to explain away and justify its decision to discontinue the program was that more than enough additional programs would be provided under the Special Youth Employment Training Program and other manpower and training programs that would take up the 55,000 people.
The argument was clearly put. One would have thought that even the Minister could have understood it. He replied that I had come up with some imaginary figures. He did not know where I had got them. I got those figures from the Minister's own Department and publications. In particular, they came from the publication that was put out on Budget day by the Minister. It was headed Big Increases for Manpower and Training Programs'. It stated:
. . . 235,000 people-a record number-would be assisted by the Government's manpower and training programs in 1981-82, 23,000 more than 1980-81. The great majority would be young people.
In other words, in his own publication he stated that the additional number of new positions from the new expenditure would total 23,000. He conceded that only a portion would be additional new places for young people. The Minister also told the House that there would be approximately 70,000 new training places. His own statement released on Budget day said that at the most there will be 23,000 new places and ofthose only about 20,000 will be available for youth. How can the Minister justify talking in this House about the 70,000 new training places when his own news release stated that the absolute increase will be 23,000 and at the most 20,000 new places will be available for young people?
The situation is quite clearly exposed by the Minister's own Press release on 18 August. He has misled this House. There will not be 70,000 new places. At the most there will be 20,000. In 1980-81, 55,000 young Australians took advantage of the CYSS program. Simple arithmetic shows that in terms of coping with the continual

flow of new people into training programs, having looked after them, as a result of the Government's Budget decision, only 20,000 new places at the very most will be available. Therefore, 20,000 out of the 55,000 who have used CYSS will have the opportunity of taking up new places. This leaves a balance of over 30,000 who have been discarded by this Government in the abandonment of the CYSS program. Is it any wonder in those circumstances that in the Launceston Examiner of 22 August the following statement was made:

The 19 Community Youth Support Schemes in Tasmania are being wound up, contrary to a promise made last month by the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, Mr Brown.

I quoted from the Advertiser of June which

showed that the Minister deliberately

misrepresented the CYSS program in South

Australia.

.

The Examiner on 22 August, four days after the Budget, stated that contrary to the Minister's promise the 19 community youth support schemes in Tasmania are being broken up. The Minister has misled the House, either deliberately or through gross incompetence. On either ground he should, with any decency, tender his resignation to this House.

Mrs CHILD (Henty) (1O.15)-It is clearly obvious that in the tertiary sector the Government wants to reduce the .number of student places available. What else can be behind the decision of the razor gang to eliminate 30 colleges of advanced education? The Tertiary Education Commission has said that there is a need to transfer some of the student places in teacher education to new areas such as business studies and technologies but clearly this Government intends to go much further. The Government has a manic determination to discipline schools and the people who work in them. Some of us thought and all of us hoped that the Liberals' attack on schools was simply part of a passing phase as they discovered new villains to take the responsibility for their increasing high rate of youth unemployment. It is obviously the view of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) that young school leavers lack the personal qualities and basic skills which confer employability upon them. If only the schools would do their part in correcting these deficien-
cies, the problem of youth unemployment would vanish, accordingto the Prime Minister.

The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) continues totell us that there are plenty of jobs available if only the young will go to some of his training courses and then get out and look for them. There are nojobs, as we know, but the Government will not admit that it

752 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Adjournment

presides over the worst unemployment this country has ever experienced. I point out to Government members that education is not simply about learning to get a job. It is also about learning how to live. The Government seems to have ignored much of the advice given by the Tertiary Education Commission and has twisted and deliberately misinterpreted other parts of this advice. The Government sees inefficiency where it
does not exist. It makes unsubstantiated accusations and decisions which are quite contrary to the evidence in the reports of the Tertiary Education Commission. The Government appears to know nothing or at least care nothing about the notion of investing in human capital as a resource for the future. It seems bent on encouraging a downturn in tertiary enrolments in any way it can find-and it has found plenty.
In its anxiety to break its last election promises-I will touch on two of them-it assured us that it did not intend to reintroduce tuition fees. It has done so. It assured us that funding for centres of excellence for research would be additional to existing grant levels but this is not true. Even the overseas student program has been attacked. This has been a way in which Australia has contributed to the development of the new world countries as well as generating a lot of goodwill for itself. Our Prime Minister who likes to postulate on foreign soil as the great statesman who has so much interest in the Third World countries will be interested to know that many students have been forced to abandon their studies mid-course. They cannot afford the fees of $1,500 to $2,500 per annum. The Prime Minister says one thing overseas but at home he says another. He is never consistent at any time.
I will speak specifically about the decision by the razor gang to force an amalgamation on Melbourne State College. Perhaps the Government does not know that the College was formed by an amalgamation. It was formed by the consolidation of the former Melbourne teachers' college which prepared the primary teachers, the secondary teachers' college and Kay House in which
teachers of secondary arts and crafts were prepared. Teacher education has continued at Melbourne State College for over 100 years. It is a large multi-disciplinary college. It teachers major studies in more areas of the creative arts, liberal arts, business studies and science than most other Victorian colleges of advanced education. It should continue to be funded as an autonomous institution with its own governing body. The range and mix of courses currently available at Melbourne State College provide a high degree of flexibility within teacher education and allow

ready response to changing needs for specific types of teachers. There is already on the college staff the expertise to extend this flexibility to professions related to teaching. All that is required is the recognition of a general studies degree. In the ad hoc approach taken by the Minister for Education (Mr Fife) towards getting rid of 30 colleges of advanced education, he has lost sight of the fact that it is essential that additional time is made available for proper consideration of amalgamations and possible alternatives. The Australian Council for Educational Research is currently investigating the educational needs of the western suburbs of Melbourne. Action should not be taken which could affect the ability of Melbourne State 'College to help meet these needs. Action should not be taken against Melbourne State College which could in any way deprive students who have already embarked on courses there.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CAMPBELL (KalgoorIie) (10.20)-Mr Deputy Speaker, as you know, I represent a very large country electorate. It is an electorate from which comes a very large percentage of the wealth which honourable members opposite are always so ecstatic about. It is interesting to reflect on how the people living in this isolated area have been treated by this Government in this worst of all Budgets. The other day I had a representation from a constituent who lives 300 miles from KalgoorIie in an isolated area. Two and a half weeks ago this gentleman bought a motor vehicle in KalgoorIie. When one lives in such isolated conditions one does not buy a motor vehicle off the shelf. One has to get it sent up from the capital city. This is just one of the prices we pay for living in isolation.
The gentleman paid a very substantial deposit on the vehicle and returned to the bush. He came into Kalgoorlie one day after the Budget to find that his vehicle now would cost him almost $300 more than he had intended to pay for it. That is the sort of recognition given by this Government to, and one of the rewards bestowed by this Government on, people working in isolated areas and winning the wealth which this Government prizes so highly. Country people, of course, are affected in another way. Because this Government applies sales tax to the freight component, country people pay far more than people living in the city. It is the policy of the Australian Labor Party to discount the freight component from sales tax calculations. But this Government is notorious for the way in which it disregards the interests of country people.

Adjournment

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 753

This Government also prides itself on its help to the mining industry. What has it done? It has now levied a 17.S per cent tax on the construction of private railways. In this country private railways are constructed almost entirely by mining companies, and they are the ones affected by this tax. When we'look at the increased cost we can see that it is not just a straight 17.5 per cent; they are payirig 17.5 per cent on rolling stock, on locomotives, on railway lines and on railway sleepers-a tremendous cost. I do not know whether the Government would even be aware of the cost of transporting concrete railway sleepers over the distances involved. This Government also introduced a sales tax on vehicles used in the mining industry. They are mainly four-wheel drive vehicles, off-road vehicles or vehicles with high ground clearance which are essential for winning the wealth that this country needs. There was no attempt to tax four-wheel drive vehicles used in primary industry although in many cases their use is not warranted. But in the mining industry the Government has seen fit to impose this sudden 17.5 per cent slug. It certainly is a strange way to show appreciation of and regard for an industry which this Government purports to support. .
We see also in the Budget under the heading 'Anomalies' a sudden increase in the sales tax on such things as dog food. There will now be sales tax of 17.5 per cent on dog food. Does the Government realise what this is going to do in terms of raising the. cost of living for a lot of people in remote areas-a lot of pensioners who actually eat the stuff? It is going to impose on these people a significant reduction in their standard of living-they will no longer be able to enjoy the luxury of the dog food which they have been forced to buy by this highest taxing Government of all time. I would like to reflect on how anomalous it is that the Government can impose quite arbitrarily these taxes which clearly are going to penalise country people far more than city people. It is a disproportionate and unfair tax, and it is a thing to which the Government should give very serious consideration. If honourable members opposite want people to live and work ih the country, to fuel the resources boom that they are always talking about, they have to be prepared to do something for them. I suggest to them that this Budget is going to do nothing at all.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (10.25)-1 commend the expressions of concern and the feelings of distress that some members of the Opposition have expressed in relation to the Community Youth Support Scheme. I commend them for their newfound interest in the scheme now that it

is about to end. But I say with sincerity that the concern for many of the younger people who have been receiving a degree of benefit from CYSS is not exclusive to their side of the House. The issue seems to me to be: How will that money best be spent for the benefit of young people in Australia? ' It seems incontrovertible that there is a better prospect of doing things that are useful for the young people of Australia through the job support schemes which were introduced after CYSS was introduced than in fact by maintaining CYSS. The 60-odd per cent increase in the schemes going to assist young unemployed people to obtain prior work experience, practical job skills or otherwise prepare them for employment is a far more tangible and effective way of improving the lot of young people than CYSS unfortunately turned out to be.
However, I must say that there is a small group of people who were assisted by CYSS and who will not ?e in a position to be picked up by the other work training schemes which will in general be a far better and more sensible way to spend the money. This small group of people are those who are not in a situation in which they are capable of getting the benefit of pre-training schemes and in effect need some sort of pre-pre-training scheme or some kind of social support rather than the schemes which were provided for them at the periphery of CYSS. It seems to me to be important for honourable members opposite to recognise that that is the area of real need. To talk about maintaining CYSS in its old form while there are -these other much better programs seems to me to be missing the point entirely. I simply hope that the Government will be able to find an appropriate program-CYSS, I think, tended to be inappropriate-to pick up the small number of people from the CYSS program who will not be coped with under the work training schemes. Of course, most will be picked up by these excellent work training schemes. I heard from the honourable for Henty (Mrs Child) the most extraordimiry remark that there are no jobs available. The honourable member for Henty apparently has forgotten that in the last two years 330,000 new jobs were created in Australia.
Mr Scott-Part time jobs.
Mr BAUME-Full time employment in Australia has gone up more in the last two years than in any time in Australia's history. There have never been, in a two-year period, as many new jobs created as there have been in the last two years in this country; and the figures absolutely establish that. There is no point in the Opposition quibbing or misbehaving about it. It is a fact, no matter how much it might upset the Opposition.

754 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Adjournment

Of course, I could remind members of the Opposition of how effective their policies were in the job area. I could remind members of the Opposition that in the period between February 1974 and February 1975 the number of people at work in the private sector in Australia fell by 151,000. Yet honourable members oppostte have the hide to tell us that policies that have created 330,000 new jobs are wrong whereas their policies, which wiped out 150,000 jobs, somehow magically are right. Certainly they are the right sorts of policies to destroy the job opportunities of thousands of Australians-I agree with them that their policies do exactly that-but the fact is that there are more people at work now and more jobs have been created than ever honourable members opposite dreamed of.
The job creation activities have resulted from the lively level of activity in private enterprise. It was in private enterprise that jobs were lost under the Labor Government. These facts are clearly established. Sure, they went up in the first romance year of the Labor Government-there is no doubt about that-but then they fell sharply. The number of jobs in Australia have risen consistently in the last couple of years under this Government because of the sensible policies assisting the private sector rather than belting the hell out of it, as took place under the Labor Government.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m., the debate is interrupted.
Mr N. A. Brown-I require the debate to be extended.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The debate may continue untillOAO p.m.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Employment and Youth Affairs) (10.30)-1 am indebted to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, and to the House. Earlier in the adjournment debate the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), who extended the courtesy of informing me beforehand that he was going to raise a matter relating to my portfolio, accused me of misleading the House in a debate that occurred earlier today. That was quite incorrect. There was no misleading, intentional or otherwise, of the House on my part. This eveing the honourable member referred to some remarks which he maintained I had put in the debate. Let me refresh the memory of the House as to what I said in the debate. I said:
Firstly, there will be 70,000 new training places.
After I had explained to the honourable member for Wills that the Special Youth Employment

Training Program did apply to youth, Iwent on to say amongst other things:

Hwe have established that let us establish that there are approximately 70,000 new training places under that program this year.

The honourable memper for Wills, as I apprehend his argument, says that that was misleading the House because my Press release on Budget day contained the statement:

More than 235,000 people to be assisted by manpower and training programs, 23,000 more than 1980-81.

The point of the argument is that the honourable

member says that I am misleading the House be-

cause our material, the new release, says that

2t3h~0n0i0n

more people are 1980-81, whereas

to on

be the

assisted this other hand I

year said

in the debate that there will be approximately

7th0~0t 0w0 e nweweretrtaailnkiinngg

places about,

under the program namely, the Special

Youth Empioyment Training Program. I make it

plain to the honourable member and to the House

that this year there will be approximately 70,000

new training places under that program. I repeat

therefore what I said in the debate this evening. I

think the explanation for the problem that the

honourable member for Wills has is that he does

not understand the working of the scheme. In-

stead of asking for my resignation, Opposition

members might like to ask themselves whether

they have, as their spokesman on this matter, a

person who understands the schemes which oper-

ate now and which have operated for some time.

I will explain it this way. If the honourable member would listen for a moment he might be
better informed even if no wiser. What is explained in the publication 'Employment and Youth Affairs Programs 1981-82' is that the work experience program has three parts. The first is what we know as standard SYETP, the second is extended SYETP, and the third is Commonwealth. This year there will be 54,000 approvals under standard, 12,000 under extended and 3,600 under Commonwealth, that is, places in Commonwealth establishments. The t9tal is 69,000, which is my justification for saying approximately 70,000. They are new training places. I cannot think of any simpler words to use to explain to the honourable member, who might stop talking for a moment and listen, that these represent 70,000 new training places. They are new approvals which will be made this year. Can the honourable merrlber understand that? There are approximately 70,000 new training places this year. If the honourable member were prepared to look at the publication 'Employment and Youth Affairs Program 1981-82' he would see that that is the true situation. There will be 70,000 new training

Adjournment

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 755

places under this scheme. In addition to that-the honourable member would have known this if he knew .the slightest detail about the way this scheme works-there will be approximately 20,000 in addition to that 70,000 whose training period overlaps the financial year. I ask the honourable member to pay attention; he may learn something. I could have said 90,000 new training places but I said 70,000 because there are 70,000 new training places. I conclude by making two remarks. Firstly, I would be grateful to the honourable member if he could indicate where I or any other Minister in this Government indicated that irrespective of the Budget some program would be continued. Secondly, I have not misled the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The Minister's time has expired. If no other Minister is seeking to respond to matters raised in the adjournment debate, the Minister may speak again.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Employment and Youth Affairs) (10.35)-Very briefly, without detaining the House, I make the simple point that the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) is very keen to throw abuse around this House. I do not think it contributes much to the debate. He has accused my predecessor of misleading. He has impugned the integrity of senior officers in my Department and now says that I have misled the House. (Quorum formed). I will make these two points: If the matter is to become an argument on figures-and ] do not believe it is-l say that in addition to those training places I have spoken about there is also an increase in the number of transition allowances which will be payable to young people this year. Last year-perhaps the honourable member for Wills has not read this so 1 will tell him-8,800 allowances were paid. This year 16,000 allowances will be paid. Assistance under the Commonwealth Rebate for Apprentice Full-time Training scheme will help 95,000 apprentices, 3,000 more than last year. The case on the figures, if it is to become an argument about the figures, is beyond argument.
Finally-and I think this is something all members should attend to-I ask members of the Opposition to ask themselves, in view of this crass amateurish performance we have seen from the member for Wills, whether they really, seriously, genuinely believe they have as the Opposition spokesman on employmentand youth affairs someone who knows anything at all about our schemes, the needs they meet and how they work.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The debate having concluded, the House stands adjourned until 1.45 p.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 10.39 p.m.
NOTICES
The following notices were given:
Mr Sinclair to move-
That the proposed expenditures For the departments and services contained in Schedule 2 of the Appropriation Bill (No. I) 1981-82 be referred, as indicated, to Estimates Committees A, B, C, D, E and F for examination and report by 23 September 1981 :
Estimates Committee A Parliament Prime Minister and Cabinet Foreign Affairs Defence
Estimates Committee BSocial Security Health Veterans' Affairs Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Aboriginal Affairs
Estimates Committee CCapital Territory Home Affairs and Environment Science and Technology Communications Administrative Services Attorney General's
Estimates Committee DTreasury Finance Advance to the Minister For Finance Transport Primary Industry
Estimates Committee EEmployment and Youth Affairs Industrial Relations Education Housing and Construction
Estimates Committee FIndustry and Commerce Business and Consumer Affairs Trade and Resources National Development and Energy
Mr Sinclair to move-
That, unless otherwise ordered, government business take precedence of general business on each day of sitting until the Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82 and the Appropriation Bill (No.2) 1981-82 have passed all stages in the House.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 25 August 1981, pursuant to statute:
Audit Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 230. Christmas Island Act-Ordinances-1981-
No.6-Penal Code. No.7-Criminal Procedure Code (Amendment). Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1981, No. 226.

756 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Notices

Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 235.
Customs Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 225.
Defence Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1981, No.129.
Judiciary ActRule of Court, dated 6 August 1981.
National Health Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 232.
Naval Defence Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, Nos. 227, 228.

Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act-

Regulation-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 233.

Public Service Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1981,

No. 234.

States Grants (Petroleum Products) Act-Amendment of

the schedules to the subsidy schemes in relation to the States

of New South Wales and Queensland, dated 4 August 1981,

and South Australia and Western Australia, dated 31 July

1981.

Superannuation Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1981,

No. 231.

.

Answers to Questions

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 757 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Leaching of Ore Bodies
(Question No. 589)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(I) Has his Department or any other Commonwealth department or authorities made any examination of (a) the general environmental impact of the process of leaching of ore bodies to obtain minerals and (b) the specific environmental impact of the leaching process if used to recover uranium from the Beverley uranium prosl'ect in South Australia.
(2) If so, what was the nature of this examination giving (a) the Commonwealth departments or authorities concerned and (b) the names, substantive gradings, salaries and qualifications of the specific personnel involved.
(3) Did any examination involve (a).scientific literature reviews and (b) actual physical testing of the process; if so, what are the details.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) I have been advised that the CSIRO is collecting data relevant to the environmental assessment of the leaching process on ore bodies. My Department has recently examined in situ leach mining in relation to the proposed Honeymoon Uranium Project in South Australia.
(b) The specific environmental impacts of the leaching process if used to recover uranium from the Beverley uranium proposal will be examined under the provisions of the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act.
(2) The proposed Honeymoon Uranium Project was examined through the preparation of an environmental impact statement by Mines Administration Pty Ltd in accordance with the Administrative Procedures under the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act.
(a) The following Commonwealth instrumentalities were consulted:
Australian Atomic Energy Commission Australian Heritage Commission Australian Radiation Laboratory Bureau of Mineral Resources Department of Aboriginal Affairs Department of Health Department of National Development and Energy Uranium Advisory Council
(b) No record has been kept of the name, substantive grading, salaries and qualifications of the specific personnel involved.
(3) (a) Yes.
(b) No physical tests of the process were undertaken by Commonwealth instrumentalities; this was undertaken by the Company and provided 'commercial in confidence' for the purposes of the environmental assessment.
Robert Holmes a 'Court:Trading Profits
(Question No. 920)
Dr Everingham asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 March. 1981 :

(I) Has his attention been drawn to reports of millions of dollars in profits being acquired in recent years by Robert Holmes a 'Court from trading in shares.
(2) Are these profits taxable as income; if not, why not.
(3) Is he able to say whether a major part of this profit was acquired by increasing the cost of Ansett Transport Industries (ATI)by$lIm.
(4) Can he say whether customers of ATI have to service this extra cost by paying increased charges to be levied upon thembyATI.
(5) Will he take steps to ensure that the Government preserves free competition by requiring ATI to disclose publicly all those details that are required to be published by its chief competitor, the Australian National Airlines Commission.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Because of the secrecy provisions of the income tax law, it is not possible to provide information about the taxation affairs of any person.
(3) and (4) I have no direct knowledge of such aspects of the financial affairs of Ansett Transport Industries.
(5) The 1981 Airlines Agreement, which was recently ratified by the Parliament, imposes virtually identical reporting obligations on both Ansett and T AA. In particular, under Clause 13 both organisations are required to furnish to the Minister separately, for presentation to the Parliament, appropriately audited financial information in respect of trunk and ancillary passenger, and total airline, services. This information is required as soon as practicable after the end of each financial year, but no later than 31 December each year unless otherwise agreed by the parties.
Underspending of Estimates: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. fll2)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(I) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 21O-Administrative and (b) 212Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly.
(2) Has there been an underspending in each of these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, 'Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142Appropriation Acts (Nos. I and 2) 1980-81; if so, what are the reasons.
Mr Hodgman-I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Treasurer on behalf of the Minister for Finance to Question No. 1101, which appeared in the Hansard of 13 May 1981.
Departmental Air Travel: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 1127)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 7 Apri11981:

758 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) How many travel warrants have been issued for his Departmental officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980t031 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) My Department does not maintain the information sought by the honourable member in a readily indentifiable form.
I am not prepared to authorise my Department to commit the considerable resources that would be necessary to furnish the honourable member with the details she is seeking.

Departmental Air Travel: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No, 1147)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(I) How many travel warrants have been issued for his Departmental officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 30 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) 750; (b) 860; (c) 797; (d) 625; and (e) 371.
(2) $385,812.94

Employment of Private Consultants: Department of Trade and Resources

(Question No. 1259)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

(I) Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80; if so,

(a) how many were employed (b) who were they (c) for what purpose was each employed, and (d) what" payments were made to each consultant or con-
sultancy firms.

Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I)(a)4.

(b) (i) Altergo (Australia) Proprietory Limited.

(c) AD P consultants providing Automatic Data Processing

consultancy Services to the Commonwealth.

.

(d) Amount paid $21,063.98

(b) (ii) Dr P. D. Drysdale.

(c) Provide oral and written advice and assist in drafting

papers on the supply and market potential for processed raw

materials; factors affecting the viability of further processing

of raw materials in Australia; the economic feasibility of

proposed processing projects.

(d) Amount paid $553.00.

(b) (iii) Nuclear Exchange Corporation of San Francisco.

(c) Provide market assessment covering attainable prices

for Australian uranium.

(d) Amount paid $4,881.95.

(b) (iv) J. Woollard and Associates.

(c) Assessor of Cost or Rehabilitation of Ranger Project

Area.

(d) Amount paid $30,713.33.

Industrial Action: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs
(Question No. 1373)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many officers or employees of his Department have been
(a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other re-
strictive work actions, in each of the last 2 years.
(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.
. (3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.
(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The information you have requested is not readily available in departmental records.
I am not able to devote staff resources to undertake the task of identifying the particular information requested.
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 1415)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his department in 1979-80
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by his department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents, and (c) officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by his-Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (4) I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Prime Minister to the House of Representatives Question on Notice No. 1414 Hansard, 5 June 1981, page 3315.
In addition, expenditure on official entertainment at Commonwealth sponsored international conferences in Australia sponsored by my department in 1979-80 totalled $445.48.
Expenditure on official entertainment outside Australia incurred by officers of my department on short term visits overseas amounted to $15,586.90 in 1979-80.
Torres Strait Visit by Quarantine Officials
(Question No. 1712)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

Answer~ 10 Questions

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 759

(I) Wha\. islands and areas were visited by quarantine officials aboiIrd navigational aid vessel Lumen in Torres Strait and off the Queensland coast late in 1978.
(2) Were any animals, insects, plants or material of quarantine concern nllted; ifso, what were they.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The following islands in the TorresStrait area were visited: Deliverance, Moa, Badu, Mabuiag, Gabba, Saibai, Dauan, Yam, Mt Ernest and Thursday.
(2) Much of the fauna on these islands is capable of sustaining exotic disease organisms of concern to quarantine authorities, should these be introduced. Fauna in this category, the presence of which was noted during the visits, included deer, pigs, dogs, cats, goats, fowl, and mosquitoes.
Australian Capital Territory Surveyors' Board
(Question No. 1810)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upo~ notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Did any members of the Australian C'apital Territory Surveyors' Board attend any national or -international conferences during 1979-80 as an official expense; if so, what was the cost to the Commonwealth Government of the attendance.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No member of the Australian Capital Territory Surveyors' Board attended any national or international conference during 1979-80.
Australian Capital Territory Surveyors' .Board
(Question No. 1811)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What was the total cost, including support services, of running the Australian Capital Territory Surveyors'Board in 1979-80.
(2) What fees were paid to members and what income was received by or on behalf of the Board
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The total cost, including support services, of running the Australian Capital Territory Surveyors' Board in 1979-80 was $12,870.
(2) (a) $900 was paid as fees to non-government members of the B.oard.
(b) $3,820 was received as income by or on behalf of the Board.
Dr Guy Pauker: Meeting with Prime Minister
(Question No. 2009)
Mr Armitage asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 30 April 1981:
Further to my question without notice to him on 21 August 1981 (Hansard, page 588) concerning Dr Guy Pauker, my telegrams to him concerning this matter dated 27 August 1980 and 3 April 1981 and his reply to me dated 13 April 1981, where was the meeting between him and Dr Pauker held in May 1978 and who was present at the meeting.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The. ans~er to the honourable member's question is as follows:

My meeting with Dr Pauker took place in my office in Parliament House on Friday 5 May 1978. Dr Pauker was llCcompanied by his assistant, Dr Kirk Smith. Mr Petro Georgiou, a Senior Adviser on my personal staff at that time, also attended the meeting.
National Semiconductor Corporation
(Ql!estion No. 2092)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) Will he provide a list of the types of jobs that will become available to residents of the Australian Capital Territory from the implementation of the National Semiconductor project and the approximate numbers involved in each type of job.
(2) What assurances have been given by National Semiconductor Corporation of the numbers of jobs that will be available for local persons.
.Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) It is not possible to provide detailed lists of the types and numbers of jobs which will be generated by the National Semiconductor project. Further information is likely to become available during the course of the feasibility study. At present it is expected that the manufacturing plant itself will employ from 1,150-1,250 persons.
Approximately 20 per cent of the positions created will represent highly skilled jobs requiring the equivalent of tertiary qualifications in science and engineering. ApJ?foximately 30 per cent will comprise positions requiring technical or trade qualifications and approximately 50 per cent will comprise unskille<! and semi-skilled positions. This represents a broad, general classification and will be subject to variation when planning for the project reaches a more advanced stage.
Construction of the project will create additional jobs as will the multiplier effects on the rest of the Australian Capital Territory economy. -In addition, experience in centres of high technology in ()ther countries indicates that other private enterprise developments of a related nature are likely to be attracted to the Australian Capital Teritory once the NATSEMI project commences.
(2) NATSEMI has not given assurances on jobs for locals. However, the magnitude of the project is. such that a favourable impact on employment opportunities in the Australian Capital Territory will occur. Officials are curently examining the Govern~ent's position.on many issues associated with the staffing of the plant and these include the question of making employment opportunities available for disadvantaged groups including the disabled and the long term young unemployed. These matters will be pursued with the company during negotiations following the completion of the feasibility study.
Shopping Hours: Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2094)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, oi16 May 1981:
(I) Why was action taken to deregulate shopping hours in the Australian Capital Territory.
(2) What studies were done prior to this decision to evaluate its likely effects.
(3) Were small business owners consulted.
(4) Were the recommendations of the Members of the House of Assembly considered.
(5) Were the views of employees (lrganisations considered.

760 REPRESENTATIYES 25 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(6) Will estimates of the increased cost of goods resulting from de-regulation of shopping hours be made available to the public; if so when.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The decision to deregulate shopping hours in the Australian Capital Territory was taken as part of the Ministerial Review of Commonwealth Functions and conforms with the Government's philosophy of minimising direct involvement by Government in the activities of the private sector.
(2) In recent years the Department of the Capital Territory has undertaken detailed research into the problem of trading hours in Canberra. Further research on the question of the regulation of trading hours has been undertaken by employer and employee organisations and was also the subject of a recent report by the Bureau of Industry Economics.
(3), (4) & (5) Representatives of employees, employers and small businesses have been consulted by the Department of the Capital Territory during consideration of this issue over recent years.
Neither these organisations nor the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly were consulted in the context of the Review of Commonwealth Functions.
However, officers of my Department have, at my request, had further discussions with groups representing employers, employees and small businesses on the question of implementation of the decision.
I have supported the establishment of a consultative committee comprising representatives of interested groups to monitor the effects of de-regulating trading hours in the Australian Capital Territory.
The establishment of this committee however has been overtaken by my undertaking not to recommend commencement of the legislation to repeal the Trading Hours Ordinance 1962 until the matter has been considered by the Joint Parliamentary Committee on the Australian Capital Territory.
(6) Information about price levels of goods will be published in the normal way by the Australian Bureau of Statistics.
Sale of Belconnen Mall, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2100)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) When is the Belconnen Mall, Australian Capital Territory, to be sold.
(2) How many alternative plans of management were considered before the decision was made to sell the Belconnen Mall and what were they.
(3) In view of the Government's commitment to free enterprise and business competition, will he take steps to ensure that companies controlling other retail centres in Canberra are not able to monopolise retailing in the Australian Capital Territory.
(4) Has consideration been given to the proposal that the small business owners form a body corporate to lease and manage the Belconnen Mall.
(5) What is the current value of the Belconnen Mall complex.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Arrangements are being made to sell th~ Belconnen Mall as soon as possible.
(2) The decision to sell the Mall was made ,as part of the Review of Commonwealth Functions. The issue of different management plans did not arise at that time.
(3) The Government will take into account normal commercial considerations involved in such a sale as well as factors relevant to the public interest.
(4) The proposal that small business owners form a body corporate to lease and manage the Mall has been raised with me. I have had discussions with relevant groups and will give this proposal, and others, careful consideration.
(5) It would be premature to anticipate a value for the Belconnen Mall at this stage. The process of sale will determine a market value for the complex.
Sale of Canberra Retail Markets
(Question No. 2103)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Ter~itory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) What is the value of the Canberra Retail Markets Trust facilities and when are they to be sold.
(2) Will the trader co-operative mentioned in the Government decisiofl regarding the Trust (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1842), allow the existing storeholders to share in the management and administration of the markets.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Canberra Retail Markets Trust's Annual Report for 1979-80 sets out the cost of the leasehold land and improvements at the markets at $762,265 with accumulated depreciation of $116,909. The Government is currently examining the conditions for sale of the markets, including their valuation and timing of the sale.
(2).It is hoped that the existing stallholders would share in the management and administration of the markets. However, the precise form the controlling organisation will take is a matter for negotiation.
Milk Authority and Showground Trust, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2107)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
What sums will be saved by the (a) Milk Authority and (b) Showground Trust, of the Australian Capital Territory assuming responsibility for their staffing requirements (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1842).
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The decision of the Government to require the Milk Authority of the Australian Capital Territory and the Canberra Showground Trust to take responsibility for their staffing requirements will allow these bodies greater flexibility in utilising staff resources.
In conjunction with the Public Service Board and within expenditure constraints, each authority will be able to tailor its staffing appointments to suit its requirements. It will not be' clear for some time what alternative ar'rangements the authorities will seek to introduce. Any savings made by the Authority and the Trust will depend on these arrangements.

Answers to Questions

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 761

National Semiconductor Corporation
(Question No. 211,1)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) Will the proposed National Semiconductor Corporation project in the Australian Capital Territory be continued, given the Review of Commonwealth Functions,
(2) Will this private enterprise firm be subsidised; if so, why,
(3) When will this project be completed,
(4) What type of employment will it make available to local residents,
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Review of Commonwealth Functions has not affected the National Semiconductor Corporation project.
(2) Government assistance will take the form of land and buildings which will remain the property of the Commonwealth but will be leased to NATSEMI for a peppercorn rentaL The assistance represents recognition of the substantial benefits to Australia from the project including transfer of technology, the training of Australians and 'most favoured customer' status for Australian purchasers of NATSEMI products. The assistance also recognises the substantial benefits to the Territorial economy from such a project.
(3) Once the feasibility project is satisfactorily completed the project will proceed in a number of stages. It is anticipated (hat major investments would be completed within eighteen months of commencement. However, there will be potential for further expansion.
(4) There will be employment opportunities in building and construction and in the manufacturing stage for Australian Capital Territory residents with suitable qualifications. Types of employment will include highly skilled occupations requiring tertiary qualifications in science and engineering, occupations requiring technical and trade qualifications and semi-skilled and unskilled occupations, A study of the labour needs of the project, the availability of suitably qualified labour and the capacity of education and training facilities in the relevant skilled areas is being undertaken. See also my answer to Question on Notice No. 2092,
Sale of Australian Capital Territory Public Enterprises
(Question No. 2112)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
What profits did each of the Australian Capital Territory public enterprises to be put up for sale as a result of the Review of Commonwealth Functions (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1842) make in each of the last five financial years and what is the estimated profit for each in the current financial year.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Canberra Retail Markets Trust:

Year

Profit

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

$
13,321 25,763 36,649 52,987 97,249 100,OOO( estimate)

Canberra Commercial Development Authority:
The Canberra Commercial Development Authority commenced trading during 1978-79. Its annual report for that year recorded a loss of $283,573, However, negotiations are continuing between the Authority and the Auditor-General about the appropriate accounting standards to apply to the MaiL Accordingly, the final profit or loss for each year of operations has not been finalised.
Mugga Quarry and Hotmix Complex:
This is the responsibility of my colleague, the Minister for Housing and Construction. You should direct any questions on this enterprise to him.
AbolitiQn of Advisory Bodies, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2113)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Does he propose to abolish any advisory bodies additional to those to be abolished as a resu It of the Review of Commonwealth Functions (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1842) on which the people of the Australian Capital Territory are represented by Members of the House of Assembly; if so, what are they.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No.
Service Housing: Darwin
(Question No. 2243)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
What is the status of the works progrilm being undertaken in Darwin, Northern Territory, to bring service housing up to standard and to complete the full restoration of those houses damaged by Cyclone Tracy in 1974 that were only temporarily repaired,
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Navy and Army houses in Darwin which were damaged by Cyclone Tracy were either restored to their pre-cyclone standard or, in the case of severely damaged houses requiring substantial re-building, upgraded to cyclone standards, This restoration or upgrading was done by the Darwin Reconstruction Commission.
(2) RAAF houses damaged by Cyclone Tracy were initially only temporarily repaired, because of uncertainty about the future location of the RAAF airfield. About three quarters of the houses have since been permanently restored to their precyclone standard, or rebuilt to cyclone standards, Permanent repairs to those (67) RAAF houses which have not yet been fully restored will be considered in the ligh(of a current study

762 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Answers to Ql1,estions

to assess the economics of upgrading older houses to cyclone standards.
Commonwealth Development Bank
(Question No. 2290)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
What (a) amount and (b) percentage of Commonwealth Development Bank lending has been placed in each State and Territory in each of the last five years and what formula was used to determine the distribution in each case.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Managing Director of the Commonwealth Banking Corporation has advised that figures on the distribution of Commonwealth Development Bank lending as between the States and the Territories are not made available because of possible misinterpretation. As a supplementary lender, the Development Bank relies largely on its agent banks for acceptance and submission of applications for finance. Thus, the elltent to which its facilities are availed of in a particular State or Territory depends substantially on the level of referrals from the various trading banks. Comparison of the levels of approvals in dilferent States or Territories would therefore be inappropriate and could be misleading. Moreover, the problem could be complicated by the small number of loan approvals encompassed by some of those figures and the consequent implications for protecting traditional banker/customer confidentiality. It is for these reasons that the Development Bank does not make available statistics relating to lending in an individual State or Territory.
Military Research and Development Projects
(Question No. 2317)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 26 May 1981:
(I) What contracts for military research and development projects were let by his Department to commercial firms in the last 10 years.
(2) How many were let to Australian firms.
(3) Were all contracts let completed and delivered on time and di,d they meet an acceptable standard.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
To provide precise figures in response to the honourable member's question would require a very substantial research elfort in tracing the complete history of each of the many military research' and development contracts placed with commercial firms over the past 10 years. However, within the limits of readily available records, the following information is provided:
(I) The value of military research ~nd development contracts let to commercial firms over the past 10 years totals approllimately $ 106m. This figure comprises many hundreds of separate contracts with individual values ranging from a few thousand dollars to several million dollars.
Major projects involved were the BARRA Sonobuoy; KARINGA Cluster Bomb; MULLOKA Sonar System; JlN-, DALEE Over-the-horizon Radar; .Field Commllnications Systems; Design Evaluation and Feasibility Studies relating to Aircraft; Naval Vessels and Weapons Syst'ems; and a variety of other research and developnienttasks associated with Australian defence requirements.

(2) Approllimately 91 per cent, by value, of the above contracts were let to Australian firms.

(3) Comparatively few completed contracts failed to

achieve an acceptable standard. Although a somewhatgreater

number did not meet stipulated delivery requiremerits, !,he

majority of contracts were also completed on' time: Some of

the contracts included in the figure quoted in (I) above are

still continuing.

'

Cost ofLhe-in Hospital Facilities
(Question N". 2363)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 28 May 1981:
What would be the estimated usage and cost if the Commonwealth allowed or supported a benefit to be paid for charges levied on mothers who wish to live in with their hospitalised child.
Mr MacKellar--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows: '
All State and Territory health authorities have advised that limited live-in facilities for parents of hospitalised children may be provided where circumstances require it and such accommodation is available at the time. However, in some States live-in accommodation is limited to particular hospitals.
At the present time, charges for accommodation vary between the States/Territory viz:
New South Wales-$4 per night Victoria-$5 per night (this can be varied) Queensland-$6 per night (Brisbane Royal Children's Hospital only) South Australia-ranges to $6 per night Western Australia-$I 0 per night Tasmania'-no charge Northern Territory-no charge Australian Capital Territory-$3 per night.
In some hospitals the charges are all inclusive and in others meals are elltra., Where charges are raised they are generally met by parents.
Detailed information is not available regarding the extent of utilisation, but, from that provided by the States, it does not appear that extensive use is made of this type of facility. From the limited information available, it is not possible to'determine accurately the likely cost to the Commonwealth of any benefit which might be paid to parents who may wish to live in with a hospitalised child.

Work Value of Household Work

(Questi9n No. 2365)

Mr Barry Jones asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 May I 981 :

(I) Is it a fact that the National Accounts do not measure

the economic value of work performed within the home,

especially by housewives.

'

(2) Has his attention been drawn to the .study published by
Statistics Canada entitled 'Estimating the work value of household work in Canada by Oli Hawrylyshyn.

(3) Will the Government provide funds to the Australian
Bureau of Statistics to conduct a time use study among house-
holds to determine the value of household work in Australia and take steps to end the statistical discrimination involved in ignoring it when calculating the national accounts.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member'squestion is as follows:

Answers to Questions

2S August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 763

(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) The suggested study of time use in households is considered by the Australian Statistician to be of lower priority than other topics For household surveys, such as Family relationships, income studies, health conditions and household expenditure patterns. In any case, such a study would not determine the value of work done within households. Even if it were decided For some purposes to accept as a guide the value of services carried out in a market situation, relating the value of activities within households to the value of activities in a market situation would be subject to wide variations depending on purely subjective judgements.
The definitions of production and related national accounting aggregates which are used to construct the Australian national accounts are consistent with those recommeded in the United Nations publication 'A System of National Accounts' which is the internationally accepted national accounting standard. The Statistician is not aware of any country which currently includes the value of household work in its official national accounts.
Middle East Peacekeeping Force
(Question No. 2379)
Mr Scholes asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 2 June 1981:
(I) Will new equipment be bought specifically for any peacekeeping Force which Australia sends to the Middle East; iF so, what is the estimated capital cost of the equipment.
(2) Will this cost result in any deferment of el(isting equipment acquisition programs.
(3) What would be the cost of maintaining a peacekeeping Force oF(a) 200, (b) 700 and (c) 1400 men in the Sinai.
(4) Will this cost be appropriated especially for this task, or will this cost be charged against the el(isting DeFence budget.
(5) If new equipment is not acquired, what will be the source and arrangements For the provision of modern equipment of sufficient capability to ensure the selF protection of forces in the Middle East.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (5) The position remains as stated by the Minister for Foreign Affairs in the Parliament (26 May 1981, Hansard page 2537-2542)
East Timor
(Question No. 2387)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
( I) Did Australian observers attend el(ercises by 10,000 Indonesian troops in East Timor in March 1981.
(2) Is he able to say whether (a) 18,000 troops are engaged in a clean-up offensive to wipe out Fretilin dissenters, (b) 5000 political prisoners are confined to Atauro Island and (c) army atrocities are continuing in East Timor.
(3) Does Australia support the Portuguese proposal for a United Nations Commission to negotiate a peaceFul settlement in East Timor despite Indonesia's opposition; if not, why not.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Australian Defence Attache, together with a number of military attaches From other countries resident in

Jakarta, observed a recent major Indonesian joint exercise which involved the development of some 35,000 men together with naval ships and aircraft, in eastern Indonesia. The exercise was held From 18 March to I April 1981 in three separate exercise locations: Timor, Maluku and Irian Jaya.
(2) (a) Fretilin guerrilla remnants are reported to be still actively hostile towards the authorities in the Indonesian Province of East Timor. It is For the Indonesian Government to decide how to deal with this threat to security there.
.(b) The Government is aware of press reports that 5,000 prisioners are being held on Atauro Island but has no inFormation to substantiate this allegation.
(c) The Government is aware of recent reports of Indonesian army atrocities in East Timor, but has no evidence to substantiate them. The Australian Government's position on violations of internationally-accepted standards of human rights is of course well known. The Indonesian Government is aware of Australia's views.
(3) The Government is closely watching developments relating to the Portuguese proposal. The proposal is however in the early stages of its development. In considering its approach, the Government will need to take account of the attitudes of both the Indonesian and Portuguese Governments.

National Disaster Relief (Health) Committee: Survey of Medical Practitioners
(Question No. 2493)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on SJune 1981:

(1) Has the National Disaster RelieF (Health) Committee recently completed a survey of medical practitioners. '

(2) If so, how many owned a kit of surgical instruments with which, in a national emergency, they could perform a (a) craniotomy, (b) amputation of the limbs and (c)
thoracotomy.

(3) Is the Committee satisfied with the result of this survey.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) The National Disaster Relief (Health) Committee maintains a Register of Medical Practitioners in Australia for
possible national emergency relieF purposes. The Register has existe!,j since 1950 and is being regularly updated. All practising doctors are approached, usually every three years, to vol-
untarily submit information for incorporation into the
Register.

(2) Of nearly 24,000 practitioners surveyed, 2,111 doctors
have indicated that they possess a kit of surgical instruments. The quantity of kits for purposes listed in the honourable member's question are-

(a) Craniotomy-227 (b) Amputation of the limbs-2,16 (c) Thoracotomy-I 55

(The remainder are available For general surgery use, inc,1ud-,

ing laparotomy.)

,

(3)' Whilst the current level of co-operation, with over 80

per cent of practising doctors supplying the information

requested, Is encouraging, further improvement in the near

future is expected. Update procedures have recently been

reviewed and during the last quarter oFthisyear all practisi,ng

doctors from whom information has not been received will be

specifically approached.

'

764 REPRESENTATIVES 25 August 1981

Answers to Questhms

Trade Practices Commission Investigation of Stockbroking Industry
(Question No. 2610)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that, despite the decisions taken at a recent meeting of the Council of Ministers, the Trade Practices Commission investigation into the stockbroking industry is still iIi a state of limbo.
(2) Will action be taken to respond to criticism from, among others, the Merchant Bankers Association, that the regulatory distinctions currently made by the Government between the activities of merchant bankers and stockbrokers are discriminatory; if so, what action.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to further criticism from the Managing Director of BT Australia Limited who described the decision to halt the Commission's investigation of stockbrokers as one which smacked of delaying tactics by the Government under lobbying pressure from the securities industry to allow the continuation of the existing exorbitant fee scales and club membership of the stockbroking industry.
. (4) If so, is allowing these criticisms to go unanswered unfair to the stockbroking profession and does it deserve an objective assessment of its functions and methods.
(5) Was a deCision taken at a recent meeting of the Council of Ministers that all changes to the new legislative package governing company and security legislation must be passed by a unanimous vote of the Council.
(6) Is it also a fact that the New South Wales Government has stated opposition to placing the stockbroking industry under the auspices of the National Companies and Securities Commission.
(7) If so, then if the industry is to be effectively examined and audited to ensure the public interest is being served will he again give the Trade Practices Commission authority to proceed with its investigations.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as foIlows:
As I announced on 5 August 1981 the Government has decided that the Trade Practices Commission will retain responsibility for the competition provisions of the Trade Practices Act insofar as they apply to stock exchanges.
Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Ltd
(Question No. 2619)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) Following the decision announced in the ministerial statement on the review of Commonwealth Functions (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1841) with respect to the recommended transfer of certain functions performed by Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services (CACS Ltd) to private enterprise, is it the Government's intention to wind up the activities of CACS Ltd altogether; if so, when will this occur.
(2) What are the estimated savings involved as a result of the transfer of the operation of migrant centres and other operations from CACS Ltd to private enterprise and how are these savings made up; if no savings are involved, what is the estimated cost in transferring these functions.
(3) Will the transfer involve additional public servants over and above those already involved in monitoring the operations

to be transferred to private industry; if so, how many and at what cost.
(4) Was the Government approached by a particular organisation prior to reaching its decision with an offer to take over all or some of the functions currently being performed by CACS Ltd and were discussions held between this organisation and departmental officers at that time.
(5) If so, 'what information regarding the structure and financial operations of CACS Ltd, including the arrangement with the Commonwealth, was given to that organisation.
(6) Did that organisation submit a proposal to his Department or the Committee of Re,view of Commonwealth Functions for the operation of any of the functions being performed by CACS Ltd; if so, on what basis was this proposal made.
(7) Has any subsequent contact been made or discussions held between the Government and that organisation following the handing down of the recommendations; if so, on what basis.
(8) Have any other private enterprise organisations been contacted or have they contacted the Government regarding the takeover of some or all of the functions ofCACS Ltd; ifso, what (a) financial or (b) other information has been given to them
(9) Was the information given to these organisations identical to that given to the organisation referred to in part (4).
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The functions of CACS Ltd fall into four groups: migrant centres, non-departmental food (and other) services, guest houses for public servants in the Australian Capital Territory, and departmental food services. As indicated in the Prime Minister's statement of 30 April 1981, the first two functions are to be offered or transferred to the private sector; one guest house is to be placed on the market and the future of the others reviewed; and departmental food services are to be reviewed. As no final decisions have been reached on transferring all these functions to the private sector, neither has any final decision been reached on the future of CACS Ltd.
(2) In advance of the activities being advertised for transfer, and offers being received, it is not possible to say what savings or costs will result.
(3) See answer to (2). Any additional public servants required are likely to be offset by staff savings in the present CACS Ltd management.
(4) An approach was made to my Department by Nationwide Food Service Pty Ltd on 28 September 1979.
(5) The Company was given such information on CACS Ltd as was publicly available, including the 1978-79 CACS Ltd Annual Report and relevant extracts from the 1979-80 Estimates Explanation.
(6) On 28 April 1980, Nationwide Food Service Pty Ltd submitted a proposal to manage the CACS Ltd food services on the basis that it could achieve savings fpr the Government.
(7) Following the Prime Minister's statement of 30 April 1981, my Department notified Nationwide Food Service Pty Ltd of the non-departmental food services to be transferred to the private sector and that the operation of departmental food services was still under review.
(8) I am advised that my Department has not initiated contact with any private enterprise organisations, either before or after the Review of Commonwealth Functions, regarding the takeover of some or all the functions of CACS Ltd. Enquiries have been received from a number of organisations and have been handled in a similar manner to those received from Nationwide Food Service Pty Ltd. My Department has been

Answers to Questions

25 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 765

carerul to ensure that no private operator has gained any unrair advantage over other prospective tenderers.
(9) See answer to (8).
Public Service: Industrial Disputes
(Question No. 2621)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
What was the saving in public service salaries and wages resulting rrom industrial disputes in each year rrom 1975-76 and what is the estimated saving ror 1980-81

Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am inrormed that details or the saving in public service salaries and wages resulting rrom industrial disputes ror each year since 1975-76 are not readily available.
In order to provide the inrormation sought, examination or
personnel records held by each department would be necessary. Allocation or the resources needed to undertake this task is not considered warranted.


