House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 123, 1981 Wednesday, 10 June 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3399

Wednesday, 10 June 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10.30 a.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) the proposal to introduce fees for higher and second degrees will mean that access to post-graduate and r,ecurrent education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and ability to cope with technological change will suffer; this proposal must be seen as a step in the direction of the introduction of fees for all tertiary students.
(ii) the proposed introduction of a loans scheme for students will mean graduating with a heavy debt burden or being denied a tertiary education if loans are refused because a student is seen as a 'poor risk' (particularly affecting women and those doing non-vocational courses); only the rich will be able to get a tertiary education without course restrictions and the burden of indebtedness.
(iii) in regard to the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the light of the availability of loans it should be noted that any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate, can only further limit access to education.
(iv) the proposed restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance to those needing qualification for emplAyment will severely restrict access to a full high school education and necessary bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school early.
(v) the proposal not to fund 30 Colleges of Advanced Education if they are not rationalised is an attack on teachereducation. Given that 70 per cent of teacher-education students are women, these cut-backs will have a disastrous effect on women's access to education. This attack will create teacher shortages in the mid 1980s, restrict access to education now and endanger the future quality of teaching available to Australian children.
Your petitioners therefore pray that: (1) post-secondary tuition fees not be introduced for any
courses or for any category of students. (2) that the TEAS scheme be extended so as to more fully
meet the real financial needs of students. (3) that a comprehensive loans scheme not be introduced. (4) that there be no restriction of Adult Secondary
Assistance. (5) that the proposal not to fund 30 Colleges of Advanced
Education unless they are rationalised be rescinded. And your petitioners as in duty bound shall ever humbly
pray.
by Mr Beazley, Mrs Child, Mrs Darling, Mr Dawkins, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Young.
Petitions received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of

the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:

(i) the financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial iricrease in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.

(ii) the imposition of post-secondary tuition fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1971 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study from doing so.

(iii) those students and potential students from social groups currently under-represented and disadvantaged in the post-secondary education system would be most severely affected by the reintroduction of fees for post-secondary education.

Your petitioners therefore pray that:

l. post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any

courses or for any category of students

2. the visa charges upon private overseas students be re-

moved immediately

.

3. the Minister for Education immediately clarify the

Government's attitude to the reintroduction of post-

secondary tuition fees.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mrs Darling, Mr Dawkins, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Kent, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Mountford.

Petitions received.

Foreign Bases in Australia
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners believe that:
We the undersigned believe it is the duty of our government to promote peace. We believe the greatest threat to peace lies in the division of the world into two blocs grouped around the United States and the Soviet Union. These two blocs are locked into an escalating arms race. Unless this can be halted, it will inevitably destroy people of both sides.
We therefore call upon our politicians to work towards:
a non-aligned foreign policy non-nuclear Indian and Pacific Oceans the nuclear disarmanemt of the two major power blocs the development of exchanges of people, information and ideas between the two blocs;
and to oppose:
the creation of foreign bases over which the Australian citizen will have no control
the use of military facilities on Australian soil for nuclear armed planes and submarines
by Mr Duffy, Mr Howe, Mr Innes, Dr Jenkins, Mr Milton and Dr Theophanous.
Petitions received.

Trans-Australia Airlines

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of

Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet-

ition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully

showeth.

.

Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.

3400 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Petitions

The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in--
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
by Mr Beazley, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of children's services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value offunding allocated in the 1975-76 budget, and further, that annual budget allocations in the area of children's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Taxation: Superannuation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That we the undersigned are strongly opposing the proposed taxation scheme of the Australian people's superannuation moneys being 30c in the dollar after termination on retirement.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House take action.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Armitage.
Petition received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
A substantial contribution to Australia's economy by the payment of taxation and to the quality of life of fellow Australians, is made by parents in the work force who have preschool children.
Taxation relief for adequate child care is necessary to enable these parents to avail themselves of child care facilities in order to take paid employment.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in

the same way as other taxpayers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. The club industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of the three basic needs of life: a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The club industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The club industry is entirely within the private sector and makes a contribution to the government in laxes of various kinds.
4. The club industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The club industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports thal the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian club industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the club industry to pass on such increases to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
11. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The club industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House ofRepresentatives:
1. Recognise the importance and place of the Australian club industry in the social and economic life of the nation.
2. Accept that the viability of the club industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the club needs of the nation in this period ofgrowing popUlation and increasing tourism.

Petitions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3401

And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bradfield.
Petition received.
Moranbah: Day Care Centre
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the need for a Neighbourhood Day Care Centre in the new Mining Town of Moranbah has been well established and acknowledged by the Office of Child Care, and should therefore receive high priority.
Your Petitioners therefore hereby pray that the Federal Government provide sufficient increase in the coming budget, for the allocation of Child Care, to ensure construction of a Neighbourhood Day Care Centre in Moranbah.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Braithwaite.
Petition received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. The hotel industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of the three basic needs oflife: a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The hotel industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The hotel industry is almost entirely within the private sector and makes a large contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The hotel industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The hotel industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry's 5811 hotels in Australia.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian hotel industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the hotel industry to pass on such increases to the. consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
II. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other

factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The hotel industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:
1. Recognise the importance and place of the Australian hotel industry in the social and economic life of the nation.
2. Accept that the viability of the hotel industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the hotel needs of the nation in this period of growing popUlation and increasing tourism.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell.
Petition received.
Department ofBusiness and Consumer Affairs
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That grave concern has developed within sections of the Australian community following the announcement of the Government's decisions to:
Abolish the Prices Justification Tribunal despite representations from the ACTU and other organisations,
Reduce the activities of the Trade Practices Commission by more discriminatory investigation of complaints, reduced adjudication work, less educational work, and less monitoring of safety and information standards,
Reduce staff in the Trade Practices Division of the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs,
Reduce staff in the Industries Assistance Commission Reduce staff in Industries Assistance Division of the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs.
YaUf petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will reverse these regressive and highly provocative decisions which abrogate the Government's role in consumer protection and reduce staff in vital areas of public service.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) the financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) The imposition of tuition fees for second degrees and post graduate degrees will deter many able persons from enrolling-such courses and further preserve higher education for the rich.

3402 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Petitions

(iii) The introduction of a loans scheme, subsequent review of the level of TEAS and the tightening of the eligibility criteria for TEAS will cause great financial hardship and will deter students from enrolling in tertiary institutions.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
1. post-secondary tuition fees not be reintroduced for any courses or for any category of students.
2. the visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately.
3. the Government reverse its decision to introduce a loans scheme and instead increase and extend TEAS scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Overseas Aid
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That Australia, as an affluent and developed nation, should be able to expend more of its resources on the alleviation of human suffering and deprivation in other less developed countries.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will:
Increase overseas aid to 0.7 per cent of Australia's GNP. Increase to 4 per cent the proportion of overseas aid channeled through recognised non-government organisations such as world vision.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Health Care Services: Queensland
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we strongly condemn any action taken by the Federal Government which will lead to the destruction of the Free Hospital and Medical Services of the State of Queensland.
And your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Parliament reject the proposed health cost sharing arrangements between the Commonwealth and the State governments and guarantee the maintenance of the present scheme whereby all Queenslanders who wish to avail themselves of these services may do so.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Curfew at Eagle Farm Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That noise levels created by aircraft using Eagle Farm Airport already constitute an annoyance and inconvenience to those residents living near the airport and along flight paths. That relaxation of the Eagle Farm Airport curfew to allow any aircraft including TAA's airbus to fly into and out of Eagle Farm Airport between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m. would-

(a) substantially increase the inconvenience and annoyance caused by aircraft noise because the operation of aircraft at this time would seriously disturb people's sleep;
(b) contradict and negate a commendable undertaking made by the Commonwealth Minister for Transport, the Hon. Ralph Hunt, in reply to a question on notice in the Parliament, that the curfew will remain on the runways at the existing site at Eagle Farm Airport.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will not approve the application of TAA-or any other airline-to relax or withdraw the curfew at Eagle Farm Airport.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That public investment in tertiary education in the form of Federal Government funding is an investment in Australia's future and enables Australia to meet the demands of technological innovation.
That grave concern has been generated as a result of the Government's decisions to:
(a) abolish the Education Research and Development Committee;
(b) terminate special support for educational research; (c) scale down in-house and contracted research activities
of the Department of Education; (d) scale down participation in international education
activities, particularly UNESCO and OECD; (e) further tighten already restrictive eligibility guidelines
for TEAS; (f) supplement TEAS assistance by means of a loan
scheme; (g) phase in tuition fees for students undertaking degrees
and diplomas subsequent to an initial tertiary qualification; (h) reduce grants to universities and colleges to take account of fee income; (i) completely abolish 30 colleges of advanced education and (j) scale down various engineering schools in colleges of advanced education around Australia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will rescind these regressive decisions and desist from obvious attempts to pave the way for a complete reintroduction oftertiary fees.
And your petitioners as in duty hound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling. ,
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That, as ex-servicemen are eligible (0 receive a service pension five years earlier than other Australian males are eligible to receive an age pension, subject to certain conditions, so too should the age at which the means test is applied to pension increases be reduced for service pensioners by five years to age 65.

Petitions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3403

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will, in recognition of the service they have performed for their country, and because of reduced life expectancy as a result of that service, reduce the so-called means test [rce age limit for service pensioners from 70 years to 65.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

Crown Property: Municipal Rates

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That the concentration of Commonwealth and State property in the City of Fremantle constitutes a burden on ratepayers to a degree not experienced by most municipalities in
Australia.

That the non-payment of general rates by the Commonwealth and State Government imposes a 39 per cent higher rate in the dollar on Fremantle ratepayers.

That the 1980/81 Western Australian Grants Commission allocation to Fremantle of $460,000 does not adequately compensate for a loss of rate revenue conservatively estimated at $900,000.

That we support the efforts of the Fremantle Council to correct this inequitable treatment of its citizens and to resolve the contradiction whereby land owned by the Crown does not pay rates but property leased by the Crown includes a rate component.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:

That the Government give immediate effect to Recommen-

dation 14 of the House of Representatives Standing Com-

mittee on Environment and Conservation Report of May

1978 which calls upon ".

the Commonwealth Govern-

ment to recognise explicitly its obligation to compensate

municipalities for loss of general rate revenue as a conse-

quence of Commonwealth Government immunity in respect

of Crown property" and that Commonwealth statutory

Authorities ".

be required as a matter of course to fol-

low overall Commonwealth Government policy".

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Dawkins.

Petition received.

Proposed New Constitution
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we believe that Australia's constitution is undemocratic and should be replaced by a democratic constitution, particularly as regards the new standard for regulation of vitamin and mineral supplements.
We believe:
1. This legislation will curb our individual freedom to care for our own health according to need, environment, climate, etc.
2. These substances have proven their efficacy in maintaining health rather than destroying it and should remain freely available.
3. Why curb these suhstances while other noxious and toxic substances are freely available to the obvious thorough detriment of our society-e.g. commercial alcohol and tobacco.

This new constitution should be drafted at a representative directly elected people's convention following extensive public debate, and then put to a referendum of the people. The petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament, as a matter of urgency, will help to promote such public debate and will arrange for the holding of such a people's convention and referendum.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Good luck.
Petition received.
Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Owing to an overwhelming and continuous demand by the Australian people for a cruise service within the economic scope of the working man and his family, we request the Government to lift the ban placed on Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels entering Australian Ports.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should take action as it deems appropriate to ensure the continuing functioning of the Betsy Women's Refuge and the network of shelters in Australia.
We ask that the Federal Government acknowledge that 'Betsy' and its counterparts provide housing and care for women and children in violent situations, and the Government agree to meet the financial responsibilities for continued and effective Refuge functioning.
The Federal Government should be informed that one in every five applicants are not accommodated at the Betsy Refuge due to overcrowding or full occupancy.
We therefore petition for full and adequate funding, and as petitioners for this we humbly pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(1) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-classified under Therapeutic Agents (not under 'Cosmetics' as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct

3404 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Petitions

usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users. (3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton.
Petition received.
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
1. Note that legislation establishing plant variety rights in other countries has had adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilizers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
2. Recognise the maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take al: necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic material from falling into private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant variety rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton.
Petition received.
Trade Unions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we are gravely disturbed by the actions of militant unions, the ACTU and the failure of the President of the ACTU to assist positively in settling the dispute which has caused massive losses to Qantas our national airline, and we applaud the action of the Government in using RAAF planes to rescue Australians stranded abroad.
Your petitioners therfore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament and the Government should be of firm resolve not

to permit such unions to hold the country to ransom and continue to take a forceful and resolute stand against such union militancy.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
Garden Island, Western Australia
To the Rt. Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That although cottages Numbers 11, 12, 13, and 14 on Garden Island in no way impede construction at HMAS. Stirling, they are now required by the Department of Administrative Services to move by 30th June, 1981.
Your Petitioners humbly pray that:
Cottages Numbers 11, 12, 13 and 14 on Garden Island be allowed to remain and to move only when the remaining northern end cottages do so.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Parramatta respectfully showeth.
That beer is the drink of the working man and that any increase in the excise on beer will place it in the luxury bracket and beyond the means of ordinary people. Australians are already the highest beer taxed people in the world; further increases in beer prices will both harm the brewing industry and fuel inflation.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government not proceed with any proposals it may have to increase the excise on beer in the 1981/82 Federal Budget as such a move would be unacceptable to all beer drinking voters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr John Brown.
Petition received.
Staging ofAmerican B52 Bombers
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned in the Northern Territory respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base for American B52 bombers:
Jeopardizes the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA. and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52s: (a) Carried nuclear weapons (b) Were engaged in bombing missions against another
State.

Petitions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3405

Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy.
Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region.
Jeopardizes the welfare of the Citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents.
Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of Peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.
Your Petitioners therefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 Bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US. Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrKent.
Petition received.

That this House calls on the Federal Minister for Aboriginal Affairs to effectively intervene on behalf of the Aboriginal people of Yarrabah and neighbouring communities (a) to prevent proposals that land traditionally held by them be developed for tourist purposes and (b) to provide effective Federal land rights legislation which will enable Queensland Aborigines and Islanders to pursue land rights claims in their own right.
VIETNAM VETERANS Notice or Motion
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports)-I give notice that on the next day of sitting I shall move:
That, in view of the continuing problems facing Australian Vietnam veterans, their wives and families allegedly caused by numerous herbicides, pesticides and other chemicals used in the Vietnam war, the rising costs of the Commonwealth Institute of Health epidemiological study and the difficulty of establishing control groups for study, this House calls on the Government to establish immediately an independent judicial inquiry to allow all of the scientific and medical evidence already available to be properly tested.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

Nana Glen: Telephone Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The signatures on this petition indicate the disgust felt by the citizens of Nana Glen and surrounding areas towards the non-service received by Telecom Australia.
Since 1974, the communications system of this area has steadily deteriorated, while the growth rate has increased to such a level that the school enrolment has gone from 47 to 95 pupils in the same period.
With new residents receiving telephone connections as well, the congestion problem has also increased.
'A major project, necessary to eliminate the congestion problem, is programmed for completion in December 1980, this will provide an additional twelve trunk circuits between Nana Glen and Coffs Harbour.'
The above quote, was taken from correspondence received from the District Telecom Manager, Grafton, dated 10th October 1980.
The effect of this major program is yet to be seen, if it was ever implemented.
Although this is a rural area, we were under the impression that, as Australian ratepayers, we were entitled to a communications system as advanced as our urban counterparts.
Our system is medieval, and in 1981 is a disgrace to the Government of Australia. Do we have to experience a tragedy in our community to receive the service Telecom boasts of, or is this boast just a case of misrepresentation?
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ian Robinson.
Petition received.
ABORIGINAL LAND RIGHTS Notice or Motion
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports)-I give notice that on the next day of sitting I shall move:

SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE Mr BEAZLEY-My question is directed to the Minister for Defence. In view of the considerable strain that would be placed on Australia's armed forces by an open-ended commitment to a Sinai peacekeeping force of half a battalion or full battalion strength, will the Minister oppose such a commitment? Does he remain committed to his often stated priority for the defence of Australia and his planning of force levels, equipment and structure? Will he in this context define Australia's area of strategic interest?
Mr KILLEN-As to the last part of the question asked by the honourable gentleman, that has been defined on a number of occasions by me in this House in the last 12 months. As to the other aspects of his question, when I first came into this House it was clearly laid down that questions of policy directed to Ministers were not answered, as such. The honourable gentleman has asked for information relating to Government policy.
SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE Mr McLEAN-Is the Prime Minister aware of reports from Argentina indicating that our Deputy Prime Minister has stated that Australia would not take part in a peacekeeping force in the Sinai? Was such a statement made? Is such a statement a correct assessment of Australia's position on this matter or is the Government's current position the same as that outlined by the Minister for Foreign Affairs in his statement to this House on 26 May?

3406 REPRESENTATIVES to June 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-When I first saw that report this morning I believed that it could not be correct because it did not represent Government policy which, as the honourable gentleman rightly has indicated, was outlined by the Minister for Foreign Affairs in a definitive statement to this Parliament. That statement indicates the serious nature of the question before the Australian Government and the nature of arguments both for and against Australia's participation which have to be weighed with the utmost seriousness before a final decision is made one way or the other. The Press Secretary of my colleague the Minister for Trade and Resources was in touch with him earlier today and I understand that a notice has already been put up in the Press Gallery indicating that the report was incorrect.
SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE Mr MORRISON-My question is directed to the Prime Minister. In view of Israel's reprehensible action in Iraq, will the Prime Minister deny the supply of Australian forces to a non-United Nations force in the Middle East? Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I think it is generally realised that what has happened in recent days, or even hours, in the Middle East will only add to tensions. I would have thought that many governments would want to do all they could to reduce tensions. Israel and Egypt have been in pursuit of peace between them. Ten years ago that would have been regarded as an impossible achievement, but it has been advanced by the Camp David Accords. They may not have gone as far as many people would like; nonetheless the situation is a vast improvement on the state of open hostility and warfare that had existed between Israel and Egypt in the past. If things can be done to advance the cause of peace in the Middle East, I believe that any government should weigh the consequences seriously. There should not be a necessary connection between the events of the last day or two and the furtherance of the Camp David Accords. I hope that honourable members of this House will be able to keep the two things separate in their own judgments.
POLISH REFUGEES Mr COLEMAN-I direct my question to the Minister representing the Acting Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. I refer to my speech in this House on 13 May concerning the refusal of the Polish authorities to permit the immigration to Australia of the wives and children of recent Polish refugees in Australia. Can the Minister inform the House whether any progress has been

made in negotiations between the Australian and Polish governments on this matter?
Mr WILSON-The House is well aware of the interest and concern of the honourable member for Wentworth in this matter. The House is also aware that the Government is currently accepting approximately 4,500 East European refugees in this financial year. This is the highest intake of the program which has been running for some years and which has always included a high proportion of Polish refugees. At the time the refugees are interviewed by Australian immigration authorities they are advised to expect considerable difficulties in the achievement of family reunions in the event of their settling in Australia. This is not the making of the Australian Government but rather reflects difficulties that members of the refugee families can expect in being granted exit authorities by the Polish Government. Reports received by the Government early this year suggested that since the events of late 1980 the Polish authorities were becoming more liberal in the issue of passports for travel to Western countries. According to one recent report, the number of travel documents issued so far this year is 45 per cent higher than in the corresponding period last year. However, it now appears that this general liberalisation is not always being extended to the families of people whom the Polish Government regard as being illegally abroad.
The Australian Government has received complaints that passport applications are being refused and of attendant difficulties being experienced by family members of Polish refugees. The House can be assured that the Government is concerned about an early and acceptable solution to the problem of family reunions and is conscious of the anxiety of members of the Polish community. We will continue to make representations to the Polish authorities in such cases where these are seen to be helpful and appropriate.
SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE Mr SCHOLES-The Prime Minister will recall that in a cable to General Haig the Minister for Foreign Affairs stated that the area to be covered by the Sinai multilateral military force is beyond the area of direct strategic concern to Australia. In the same cable he also drew attention to the commitment of Australia to providing troops for a United Nations force in Namibia. I ask the Prime Minister: Is it appropriate that Australia should commit its limited military resources to an area which the Government indicates is of limited or no strategic concern to

Questions Without Notice

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3407

Australia and for a purpose that the Foreign Minrevolution before something is done? Can I in-

ister informed General Haig the Government did form my constituents that the present words are

not consider necessary?

now official, or has the Government something

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I will not comment on the substance of questions based on com-

else positive in mind? If so, when will the long awaited decision be made?

munications between my colleague and Secretary Mr WILSON-Yes, I am aware and other

of State Haig. I am disturbed at the persistent members of this House are well aware that in

thrust of questioning by members of the Oppo1977 a poll was taken to get the view of the Aus-

sition. Quite plainly the Middle East area has tralian people as to which tune they preferred for

been disturbed by hostilities for decades. We a national tune. The majority of people at that

know quite well that a major disturbance or poll indicated that they wanted the tune known as

difficulty, a further movement by the Soviet Advance Australia Fair. Since that time there

Union from Afghanistan to Iran using what it has have been many suggestions as to which words

gained in Afghanistan as a foothold, would have should be used, for there are at present no official

possibilities of enormous consequence for the words for that tune. In 1979 the Government es-

whole world. Whilst that area might be beyond tablished the National Australia Day Committee

Australia's direct strategic area of concern-let and sought from that Committee its views on the

me emphasise the word 'direct'-it is quite clear words which might be used for the tune. That

that events could happen in the Middle East Committee considered the traditional words by P.

which would be of vast consequence to all the McCormick. It also sought the advice of the

Western world, including Australia, and of vast Literature Board of the Australia Council, and a

consequence to the peace of the world. It is contemporary poet was asked to put forward

against that background that I think any Aussome suggestions. Many suggestions were received

tralian government ought to look seriously at the from people around the country.

arguments for and the undoubted arguments against any possible Australian involvement. There are legitimate and honourable arguments on both sides of this equation. It comes, finally, therefore, to a matter of judgment by the Australian Government as to what is in the best interests of Australia and of our contribution to peace.

I am aware of the great interest of the honourable member for Fadden and constituents within the electorate of Fadden whose words he has sent to me for consideration. There are continuing representations on the matter. I am aware that there is great interest in a decision as to what words should be adopted, and the matter is under consideration. I am not in a position to indicate when

We have been involved in other areas beyond a decision can be reached as to what will be the

our direct strategic interest. We have said that we official words. When that decision is reached one

are prepared to contribute to the United Nations would hope that a conclusion can be achieved

peacekeeping force in Namibia. That is not in our resulting in words that will be generally accept-

direct area of interest, but it will help to advance able to the Australian people.

the common cause of peace and well-being of peoples if the United Nations proposals for

SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE

Namibia can be put into effect. That will involve a Mr MILTON-My question is directed to the

multination peacekeeping force. On many Prime Minister. Is it still the Australian Govern-

occasions we have been involved in areas beyond ment's view, as stated in a cable to United States

our direct strategic interest because we have a Secretary of State Haig on 27 April, that

concern for the well-being and peace of mankind. European Community countries have a major

NATIONAL TUNE

stake in a peaceful settlement in the Middle East? Is it also still the case, as stated in that cable, that

Mr DONALD CAMERON-Mr Speaker, the Australian Government is particularly con-

that was a very statesmanlike reply, to the precerned that no major European countries appear

vious question. Does the Minister for Home to be under active consideration as possible par-

Affairs and Environment recall that some years ticipants in the proposed United States-organised

ago, at the time of the referendum to choose a peacekeeping force in the Sinai? In the event that

national tune, the nation was advised that in due Australia agrees to' join the peacekeeping force,

course a suitable form of words would be chosen? does this reluctance by nations with an established

Is the Minister aware of my forwarding to his prestake in Middle East peace to endorse the

decessor several word form suggestions received American proposal expose an Australian con-

by me from people right across the nation and my tingent to the charge that it is a mere rump force

asking his predecessor whether we are awaiting a and part of a United States strategic ground

3408 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

presence in the area? In view of these considerations, and in view of the serious escalation of violence in the Middle East arising from the Israeli raid on Iraq, will the Government declare unequivocally that Australia will not take part in the Sinai peacekeeping force and become embroiled in a situation that is becoming increasingly dangerous?
Mr MacKELLAR-It seems that today the Opposition has a series of prepared questions with which it will continue despite the answers in relation to this matter given by the Prime Minister and by the Minister for Foreign Affairs before he left Australia. Australia's attitude towards the peacekeeping force has been elaborated inside and outside this House. A series of questions has been asked in relation to it. Our attitude is utterly clear and we do not propose to depart from that stated attitude.
ASIA DAIRY INDUSTRIES
Mr IAN ROBINSON-I direct my question to the Minister for Primary Industry. T refer to his answers to previous questions in which he indicated that he would make a full report to Parliament on matters raised as a consequence of the audit inspection of the accounts and records of Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd when all inquiries were completed. I ask: Did the Minister announce that he would table papers relating to this matter? Can the Minister inform the House of the current position in regard to the matter?
Mr NIXON-I had hoped to be in a position to table the relevant documents and make the appropriate statement today. Unfortunately, as late as last night the Australian Federal Police informed my Department that one or two aspects of the investigation required further work. Therefore, I am not in a position to make the relevant statement. Of course, when the appropriate time comes I will table the relevant papers and make the appropriate statement.

is swabbed for foot in mouth disease before reentering Australia?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I call the honourable member for Mitchell.
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
Mr CADMAN-Has the Treasurer noted the intention of the Queensland Government to avoid demands on infrastructure borrowing by having private enterprise build a power station complex? Is the decision an example that other States could follow? What would be the effect on the economy of States seeking alternative methods of financing projects rather than borrowing funds themselves?
Mr HOWARD-I have seen some Press reports this morning of a disposition on the part of the Queensland Government to encourage private enterprise to construct some power stations in that State. Not having seen the fine print of the
decision, all r can say at this stage is that, if in fact
the Queensland Government in future is going to adopt the practice of encouraging private enterprise to do things that private enterprise is able to do, this Government can only welcome that decision. As honourable gentlemen will know, projects such as power stations, if undertaken by private enterprise, are subject to the test of profit, which is a very important consideration so far as undertakings of this type are concerned.
As the honourable gentleman will know, the Commonwealth has invited the States to examine what parts of proposed infrastructure projects could be carried out by private enterprise. We understand that that matter is currently being considered by the States. I can further say in reply to the honourable gentleman only that, if indeed the Queensland Government has decided to place a greater emphasis on encouraging private enterprise to undertake these things, that is to be welcomed, and if in fact it is carried through to action it is an example that could properly be followed by other States.

SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE
Dr KLUGMAN-My question, which is directed to the Prime Minister, follows his answer to the question asked by the honourable member for Perth. In view of the statement allegedly made yesterday in Argentina by the Deputy Prime Minister, previous statements made in Singapore by the Deputy Prime Minister that sending arms to Afghanistan guerrillas would be helping subversives, and statements made in Cairo opposing an Australian participation in the Sinai force, will the Prime Minister consult with his Minister for Health to ensure that the Deputy Prime Minister

SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE
Mr HAYDEN-Does the Prime Minister recall a secret cable from the Minister for Foreign Affairs to the United States Secretary of State, Mr Haig, on 27 April? I ask whether the Minister for Foreign Affairs said, inter alia:
Our initial view is that if we received such a request--
That is, to participate in the Sinai multinational military force-
and if we agreed to make a contribution there could be advantage in such a request coming in the name of Egypt and Israel, being the countries on whose territory the force is to operate.

Questions Without Notice

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3409

I ask the Prime Minister whether the Minister Mr Hayden-This is misrepresentation. This is

also said in that cable:

end-of-term dishonesty.

I realise that the previous American Administration made a commitment to establish the force but I would be glad to know whether you would see any difficulty in the formal request coming in the name of your two partners.
I ask the Prime Minister: Why is it necessary to resort to this sort of deceit against the Parliament and the public, redolent in some important ways of the manner in which a previous conservative government of which he was a member--
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the honourable gentleman not to comment in relation to past events. He will proceed with his question.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The right honourable gentleman will resume his seat. The Leader of the Opposition is entitled to speak only if he has a point of order, not if he has an objection to what is being said. Is it a point of order?
Mr Hayden-It is a point of order. I am claiming that there is a misrepresentation. I am drawing a parallel between the behaviour of the Government then, a decade and a half ago, and now. I am not relating it necessarily to the circumstances in the Middle East. It is a pity that the Prime Minister could not be a little honest for a change.

Mr HAYDEN-I will put it as a direct question. Does he agree that this sort of deceitful tactic is redolent in some important ways--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is not entitled to use the word 'deceitful' in the course of his question.
Mr HAYDEN-I am sorry. Does he agree that this undesirable device is redolent in some important ways of the manner in which a previous conservative government of which he was a member incited United States military escalation in the Vietnam war and then contrived an invitation from the then South Vietnamese Government to participate in that military engagement?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER--The honourable gentleman has more than once in this Parliament tried to peddle that kind of argument. But let me say only that I would have thought that any Australian government would want to know quite plainly, since the Camp David Accords relate to peace between Egypt and Israel, that if there were to be a peacekeeping force the total membership of that force would be completely acceptable to both Egypt and Israel. The best way to achieve that is quite plainly to follow the course that the Minister for Foreign Affairs outlined. But at the same time that communication makes it perfectly plain that no decision has been made. The response of the Secretary of State to that also acknowledges quite plainly that no decision has been made by the Australian Government, as indeed it has not up to this point. I have no doubt that the attempts by the Leader of the Opposition to relate the circumstances in the Middle East to circumstances in Indo-China will be noted.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, on a point of order-
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-This will not be a point of order either because the Leader of the Opposition--

Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order. Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable gentleman can ask his left wing questions, but when he asks those left wing questions he needs to understand that he will get the appropriate response. The attempt by the Leader of the Opposition to equate circumstances in the Middle East with circumstances as they then existed in Indo China will be noted very clearly by many tens of thousands of people in this country. Mr Hayden-I raise a point of order. The Prime Minister is trying to re-erect a defence for the very devious device he is resorting to. Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. He knows there is no point of order. Mr Hayden-I am not talking about circumstances in the Middle East; I am talking about the devious behaviour of the Prime Minister. Mr SPEAKER-I wish to draw to the attention of the Leader of the Opposition that he is bound by the Standing Orders, as is every other member of the House. I certainly give him greater tolerance than any other member of the House, but I ask him not to transgress upon my tolerance. He knows the Standing Orders, and what he has been saying is not a point of order at all.
TOWNSVILLE AIRPORT Mr DEAN-My question, which is directed to the Minister for Transport, concerns developmental work at Townsville airport. Did the 1980-81 Budget allocation of $5m allow for certain planned work to be undertaken to provide initial facilities for the introduction of international services at Townsville airport? Has the cost of the works escalated to $5.6m and has the additional $600,000 been provided by the Government? Have any of the works been abandoned? Are the works to be completed in about mid-July, as provided for in the main project contract? Is the

3410 REPRESENTATIVES to June 1981

Questions Without Notice

Government considering financing additional centre, could hand out questionnaires outside

work not originally planned last year? Will the Commonwealth Employment Service offices?

Government go ahead with planning and providCan the Prime Minister advise the House whether

ing new domestic airport facilities at Townsville? this new policy of secrecy has been introduced

Mr HUNT-I am not sure of the over-run of expenditure at the Townsville airport, if there is

only since the honourable member for Kooyong resigned as Minister for Industrial Relations?

any over-run, but I would like to assure the Mr N. A. BROWN-[t is extraordinary that

honourable member that none of the works reone has to wait until the last day of this parlia-

ferred to has been abandoned. Construction is mentary session to receive a question from the

proceeding to schedule. Only one or two minor Opposition that relates to employment, unem-

items are expected to be completed beyond the ployment or the employment difficulties of Abor-

end of July. All the initial works have been iginals or disabled persons. But at least we now

completed or will be completed by then, to facilihave one question, the first question for the

tate the limited number of international flights session. Let me say that there is no policy of

from and to Townsville at the present time. A secrecy in this matter at all. With respect to

number of other works are currently being conthe--

sidered by the Department. One of them is the construction of additional apron for domestic air services. There is provision for a shelter between the international airport and the domestic facilities and additional car park facilities for international traffic. Quite a lot of planning is being done to improve the total facility at that airport.
The Government, in the course of its budgetary considerations, will take a decision on the level of expenditure and the level of priority which will be accorded to that expenditure within the overall expenditure for airports throughout Australia. I might say that the Government is facing a very substantial capital outlay in airport expenditure right around Australia. The latest estimates indicate that it could be somewhere between $1,300m and $1,400m over the next decade in order to accommodate the wide-bodied jets and to provide upgraded facilities at some of our major capital city airports. Townsville, now being an international airport, will of course be receiving the priority necessary to maintain a growing degree of

Dr Theophanous-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. The Minister's statement is completely wrong. I asked a question on employment last week.
Mr SPEAKERThere is no point of order. I suggest to the Minister that he remain relevant to the question.
Mr N. A. BROWN-The honourable member's question was ignored by everyone in the House and the media, so far as I recall. I repeat that it is extraordinary, when the Government emphasises the importance that it attaches to employment and unemployment issues, that one should see a complete lack of interest by the Opposition in these subjects. With respect to the specific question raised, there is certainly no policy of secrecy in this matter. I will raise with my officers the specific matters which the honourable member raised about New South Wales. If there is any information that is appropriate [ will certainly pass it on to the honourable member.

traffic from that airport. I would like to thank the honourable member for Herbert, as the local member for that area, for the co-operation that he has given me in relation to plans that have been developed.

DRUGS TASK FORCE Mr RUDDOCK-Can the Minister for Administrative Services advise the House of the progress and achievements of the Federal-New South Wales police task force established in 1979

YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT

by the Commonwealth and New South Wales

Mr LEO McLEAY-I ask the Prime Minister: Is it a fact that Mr Turnbull, the Director of Regional Administration of the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs, refused to cooperate with the New South Wales Health

governments following the recommendations of the Williams and Woodward royal commissions into drugs? In particular, can he give details of the costs incurred in mounting this task force and the number of officers involved?

Commission in a study of the effects of unemployMr NEWMAN-Organised crime, and par-

ment on youth? The basis for the refusal was: 'It is ticularly drug trafficking as a part of that

departmental policy not to co-operate with reorganised crime scene, presents very large prob-

searchers'. Is it also a fact that the Department of lems to this Government and to various State

Employment and Youth Affairs even questioned governments. Therefore, the Commonwealth

whether Mr Chris Lennings, a psychologist workGovernment, in co-operation with State govern-

ing with the Marrickville community health ments, is determined that it will develop its

Questions Without Notice

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3411

policing agencies, particularly the Australian Federal Police, so that the people involved in organised crime and drug trafficking can be sought out and eventually brought to justice. The formation of the joint task force with the New South Wales Government was a joint initiative following the Woodward and Williams royal commissions. The honourable member asked about the number of people involved. We have 15 Australian Federal Police officers attached to the task force, as well as three administrative officers who are provided by the Department of Administrative Services. I am told that the net cost up to the end of this financial year is estimated at about $380,000. That is after allowance is made for the cost-sharing arrangements between the two governments.
The methods that have been used by the task force are those that were recommended by Williams and Woodward. Basically, the task force is targeting its efforts on those people who are central to drug trafficking or drug trafficking groups. Of recent months the Commonwealth directed that the task force extend its activities to looking into drug trafficking associated with the Nugan Hand bank and people involved in drug trafficking who may have had associations with the Nugan Hand bank. The work of the task force will take a long time. I am advised that up to 1 May the task force can claim the following achievements: Five groups involved in the importation of heroin have been broken up. Another four groups supplying heroin have also been broken up, as well as a minor group that has been supplying morphine. In all, a total of 66 offenders have been charged on a total of 186 counts, including 40 persons in relation to the importation and supply of heroin and three in relation to the supply of morphine. Until 21 April this year a total of 718.5 grams of heroin had been seized by the task force.
I reiterate that the commitment of the Government, in co-operation with State governments, to attacking those people involved, particularly those central to organised crime, is something that we intend to pursue with all the vigour we can. I have spoken about only one task force. Other task forces have been established or are intended to be established with the New South Wales and Victorian governments. I hope that as the months unfold the sort of success that the New South Wales-Commonwealth task force is having will also be evident in those task forces.

FREQUENCY MODULATION BROADCASTING
Mr WALLIS-Is the Minister for Communications aware of commitments made by his predecessor to establish an Australian Broadcasting Commission frequency modulation radio station in the area near Port Pirie to provide an FM radio service to the northern areas of South Australia? Have these plans been either deferred or scrapped as a result of the activities of the razor gang? If so, when is it anticipated that the station will be established to provide this service to this area?
Mr SINCLAIR-As a result of the Broadcasting and Television Act amendment a capacity has been provided to the Government to allocate FM commercial stations throughout regional areas of Australia. It is my intention, once the legislation has passed through Parliament and been proclaimed, to produce a policy proposal, which will be distributed for public information, on the general ambit of the program for extension of FM broadcasting beyond the city areas, where it is now operating on a commercial basis. The next stage certainly will take into account the area to which the honourable gentleman referred. I am aware that there are pockets in that area where significant difficulties are experienced in getting adequate alternative channels on most household radio sets. At the same time, public broadcasting licences are also being issued in a number of areas.
There is no impact at all, either on the issue of public broadcasting licences or on commercial FM licences, from anything that was decided in the Review of Commonwealth Functions. Our intention is to proceed with those in due course, and I hope that before too long there can be a reasonable extension to the honourable gentleman's electorate. The Australian Broadcasting Commission FM stations depend on the overall funds to be provided for the ABC. As I indicated in this House yesterday, they are matters that are still to be concluded in discussions between the ABC and the Government and, of course, will be announced in this Parliament in the Budget context.
TAXATION: SUBSIDISED HOUSING Mr BRAITHWAITE-I refer the Treasurer to questions that were asked in this House last week concerning further amendments to section 26E of the Income Tax Assessment Act. The Treasurer will be aware that there is a similar concern by other employee taxpayers, particularly those staff engaged in sugar mills, who were notified by the Taxation Office on 5 September 1980 that, pending further clarification of the basis of valuing subsidised housing accommodation for income tax

3412 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

purposes, as an interim measure tax would be most insidious part of the legislation is the estab-

based on the values applying before the valuation lishment of the inspectorate, which will be able to

made in 1977-78. Can the Treasurer advise look into the books of political parties, with the

whether, in the absence of any review, notification resulting invasion of privacy involved and then

or amending legislation, the values previous to the possible use of the information that will be

1977-78 will be applied in the income tax assessthus gained.

ments of these taxpayers for the year up to and including 30 June 1981?

Mr Young-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. It is a good point of order, Mal. Just wait

Mr HOWARDThe Commissioner of Taxand hear it.

ation has informed me that the interim arrangements to which the honourable member for Dawson referred in his question, and which base pay-as-you-earn deductions in respect of those employees on values prevailing several years ago, will continue pending the introduction of the legislation.

Mr SPEAKER-I call the honourable member for Port Adelaide on a point of order.
Mr Young-I asked the Prime Minister whether he believes that the systems applying in all the countries I mentioned are corrupt. As President Reagan received $US21 m for his election, is President Reagan corrupt? Is President

PUBLIC FUNDING OF POLITICAL

Mitterrand corrupt?

PARTIES

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable

Mr YOUNG-I refer the Prime Minister to his member for Port Adelaide will resume his seat.

statement that the 'system of public funding of There is no point of order.

political parties is corrupt'. Is the Prime Minister aware that the system of funding of political parties applies in the United States, Canada, France, Austria, West Germany and Sweden, amongst other countries? If the Prime Minister is aware of these things, does he believe that all these countries have a corrupt electoral system? If he does believe this, will he assure the I-louse that he will not raise these questions when he visits these countries and thus make Australia look mean in

Mr MALCOLM FRASER My comments have related to the New South Wales Government's legislation and the intent of that legislation. The Australian Labor Party ought to be ashamed indeed of this use of public funds. We are debating the political systems in this country, not those in some other country where different customs and practices prevail.
Opposition members interjecting- .

the eyes of the other countries?

Mr SPEAKER-Order! I ask honourable

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-- What I have said, of course, is that the legislation in New South

members on my left to remain silent while the answer is given.

Wales will be corruptive and corrosive, and it is. It Mr MALCOLM FRASER How could we

means quite plainly that every time Mr Wran canexpect them to remain silent when they know

not build a pre-school and cannot do something quite well that the purpose of the legislation is

for a school or hospital he is saying that the fundindeed corrupt?

ing of the Australian Labor Party with taxpayers' dollars is more important than that pre-school, that women's refuge and all the rest. If that is Mr

AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING COMMISSION

Wran's and the Labor Party's exhibition of politiMr SINCLAIR (New England Minister for

cal priorities, quite plainly it is not ours. In adCommunications)-For the information of

dition to that, the Wran socialist legislation honourable members, I present the report of the

establishes an inspectorate which will make it Committee of Review of the Australian Broad-

possible for the New South Wales Government to casting Commission, together with typewritten

discriminate against individuals and corporations copies of consultants' reports on: Audience re-

that provide funds to other political parties. It will search studies, parts I to 3; financial management

also make it possible for the New South Wales ABC records; ABC engineering services, parts 1

socialist Government to give that information to and 2; industrial relations and statf management,

trade unions, which would then use their unparts 1 to 3. Bulk copies of the report are available

doubted power to destroy the corporations that in limited numbers in the Table Office. Limited

might be involved. The purposes of this legislation copies of the consultants' reports are also avail-

are certainly of very doubtful merit. They will be able now in the Parliamentary Library and the

corruptive of the political processes in New South Table Office. Final printed versions of the con-

Wales. They represent a condemnation of the polsultants' reports will be made available as soon as

itical priorities of the Wran Government. The possible.

Planning Council/or the Housing Industry

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3413

Motion (by Mr Killen) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.
PARLIAMENT HOUSE FACILITIES
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Corio has indicated he wishes my indulgence.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-Yes, Mr Speaker. I wish to raise with you a matter which is of some concern to honourable members. It was reported in the weekend Press that every member of this Parliament was provided with a new refrigerator last week. I ask whether you could have some investigations carried out to find out where those refrigerators went.
Mr SPEAKER-I do not need to carry out any investigation to know that that report is incorrect. J did not see the report, but if it were so reported, it is totally incorrect.
AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL COUNCIL
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-For the information of honourable members, I present the resolutions of the one hundred and tenth meeting of the Australian Agricultural Council, February 1981.
ABORIGINAL LAND COMMISSIONER
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)--Pursuant to section 50 (1) of the Ahoriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976, I present a report by the Aboriginal Land Commissioner on the Finniss River land claim, together with the text of a statement by the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs relating to the report.
NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON DISCRIMINAnON IN EMPLOYMENT
AND OCCUPATION
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Employment and Youth Affairs)- For the information of honourable members, I present the seventh annual report of the National Committee on discrimination in Employment and Occupation for 1979-80.
SUPERANNUATION FUND INVESTMENT TRUST
!VIr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)- Pursuant to section 162 of the Superannuation Act 1976, I present the annual reports of the Superannuation Fund Investment Trust and the Commissioner for Superannuation for 1979-80.

INDICATIVE PLANNING COUNCIL FOR THE HOUSING INDUSTRY
Report and Ministerial Statement
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Indicative Planning Council for the Housing Industry report 1981. I seek leave to make a statement.
Leave granted.
Mr McVEIGH- -The Indicative Planning Council is an independent and authoritative advisory body which forecasts short, medium and long term trends in the housing industry. Membership of the Council is drawn from builders' and industry organisations, orgllnisations in the housing finance sector, trade unions, the real estate industry, materials suppliers, the Reserve Bank of Australia, Commonwealth departments and individuals prominent in the housing industry. Council Chairman, Professor Noel Drane, is Professor of Economics at Macquarie University, Sydney. Besides the national Council, committees operate in each State and the Australian Capital Territory. It is impressive to see the way that members of the industry with such varied backgrounds have worked hard together to produce such a timely and relevant report. Sectional interests have been set aside so that an impartial overview of industry prospects could be compiled. I thank Council members, and particularly the Chairman, for their work.
The report concludes that due to the impact of the resources boom, higher overseas migration and the emerging widely-based recovery in the economy, demand for housing will show a gradual increase over the coming three years. Further growth in demand is likely during the 1980s. The report also predicts that housing activity will increase not only this financial year but also in 1981-82. Dwelling completions are forecast to increase from 129,300 in 1979-80 to 135,500 in 1980-81 and to 139,000 in 1981-82. Dwelling commencements, after showing strong growth in 1979-80, will increase to 136,000 in 1980-81 and 139,000 in 1981-82. Such forecasts, which are good news for the housing industry, are given added weight by the calibre and composition of the CounciL But the Council also notes that this relatively strong picture for activity is dependent on housing finance institutions being able to compete for funds at interest rates which do not choke off demand.
The council also recognises that the national picture hides wide variations at the State and regionallevel. In 1981-82 activity is expected to increase markedly in Victoria, Western Australia,

3414 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Planning Council for the Housing Industry

the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory, remain buoyant in Queensland, show some recovery in South Australia, remain stable in Tasmania and decline marginally in New South Wales. The capital investment surge, particularly in resource related projects, is identified as a major influence on housing activity during the 1980s. It will bring significant benefits to the housing industry but also may create problems. The main message contained in the report is that the health of the housing industry will depend upon sound policies and planning by all levels of government, designed to ensure that the industry is a beneficiary not a casualty of the resources boom. The resources boom is already placing large demands on the capital market. The industry is facing competition from semi-government authorities borrowing to finance resource related projects and infrastructure development.
The Commonwealth Government has sought to restrain its own demands on the capital market by reducing overall public sector borrowing and by reining in the deficit. But the Commonwealth Government cannot expect to be able to overcome all the problems on its own. We will lead the way but planning, co-operative effort and far sighted policies are required from all levels of government. State Governments should examine their expenditure plans critically to ensure they do not siphon off too large a share of available finance and labour. They should plan adequately for the housing and social facilities they need before they permit massive development.
If all governments do not discipline their own demands and those of their authorities, housing borrowers could be crowded out and the building industry dealt a damaging blow. I hope this is borne in mind by States when they come to the Loan Council discussions on 19 June. At the same time State Governments should be aware that unrealistic interest rate ceilings imposed on permanent building societies are hindering the flow of funds to these institutions. Neither the permanent building societies nor any other financial institutions are guaranteed a share of available funds. If interest rates are overcontrolled, the report points out that the result is frequently to dry up the flow of funds. That is why the Commonwealth allowed an increase in bank housing loan rates and removed the regulations on deposit rates. Bank lending for housing has picked up considerably. In the March quarter 1981, the number of loans approved for dwellings by savings banks increased by over 9 per cent in seasonally adjusted terms. That means more prospective home buyers are now home owners.

But it does not end just with the finance sector. The resources boom is likely to place pressure on the labour market and housing costs. Already the Commonwealth Government has taken initiatives designed to ensure that the benefits of the resources boom are maximised and that people's housing aspirations are met. Besides announcing higher immigration targets, which increase the supply of labour to all industries and also increase housing demand, the Government has lifted its support for labour training programs. The Commonwealth has supported the work of the Commonwealth-State Ministerial Council on housing costs. It supports the conclusion of the inquiry into the nature and terms of employment in the New South Wales housing industry that there should be no change to the cost effective subcontract system of housing construction.
As the Council has indicated, in a climate of intense competition for finance and pressure on housing costs, further pressures are likely on home ownership rates. I will be watching the situation closely and examining the flexibility of housing programs and appropriateness of policies. The housing industry is well placed to capitalise on the growth forecast by the Council during the 1980s as long as constructive and far sighted policies are maintained. I can assure honourable members that my Government has a strong commitment to maintaining a healthy and stable housing industry and that this report will be carefully considered as we make our major decisions. The 1981 report of the Indicative Planning Council has come at an opportune time and provides a full discussion of the prospects and issues facing the industry. I highly recommend it to members of this Parliament, the industry and governments at all levels.
I present the following paper:
Indicative Planning Council for the Housing IndustryMinisterial Statement, 10 June 1981.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Mr UREN (Reid) (11.30)-The Opposition welcomes the report of the Indicative Planning Council for the Housing Industry. The Council is a remnant of what is remaining of the Federal Labor Government of 1972--75. This Council was established by the Labor Government to advise on the estimated needs and capacity of the housing industry in order to assist government intervention to provide stability in the housing market. The sad situation is that in no way has this market forces government paid any heed to the advice of the Indicative Planning Council in the past. But we are grateful for the crumbs that faJl from the

Planning Councilfor the Housing Industry

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3415

Government's table. At least this body is still intact and can still make reports to this Parliament. Someone in the bureaucracy may draw information from it and that may have some influence on the Government.
The advice from this Council remaiIis the only advice which is provided to the Federal Government in relation to housing policy. I am not trying to be personal about the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) or the Government-I suppose, in a way the Minister will want to take advice from the Council-but we know that the market forces controlled by the Department of the Treasury are the dominant authority in the Government relating to the housing industry. They are the forces that really determine what occurs in relation to the housing policy of this Government. The housing industry has been the real casualty of this Government's policies both in the public sector and in the private sector. This is the only body which can have any influence on the Federal Government's housing policy. The recommendations of the Henderson Commission of Inquiry into Poverty have had no real influence on the housing industry policies of this Government. The Government also has not been influenced by the recommendations of the Eyers Committee of Inquiry into Housing Costs. The Government has failed to assess the housing needs, the number of homeless in Australia, the population mix, size and age, the regional dislocation that is now occurring on a large scale, the quality of housing stock, and the adequacy of aged persons accommodation. The Fraser Government shows no evidence of acting on the advice of the Indicative Planning Council. It shows no intention of intervening to offset the disruptions in the housing market and no preparedness to plan ahead.
The Indicative Planning Council considers the effective demand for housing rather than housing need. I criticise the membership of the Indicative Planning Council even though, as the Minister said, it does represent a very wide section of the community. It has representatives from the building associations such as the Master Builders Association and the Housing Industry Associationthe ownership and production level of the industry. It includes one representative of the trade union movement on its membership, but there is no representative of the consumers on that Council. There is no representative from the housing co-operative groups and other bodies such as the Shelter organisation that should be represented so that there is some understanding of the socia.! needs and problems.

This Council underestimates the real requirements for housing provision. It underestimates the real social problems of 80,000 families which are on housing commission lists. These lists are growing and will grow dramatically in the next few years. It underestimates the problems of the 250,000 people living in caravans and in temporary accommodation and it underestimates the problems of the 150,000 homeless people throughout this country. Australia's population in the next two decades will increase by one-third. There is no indication of that in the report. The Indicative Planning Council works from the assumptions of government policy in relation to impacts of resource development and the availability and price of housing finance. Yet in no way does this Indicative Planning Council report deal with the deregulation of the capital market or interest rate increases. There is no real understanding of that situation. Jn fact, the Council implies that interest rates will hold their present levels.
In spite of all these limitations, the Indicative Planning Council report poses a challenge to the Fraser Government's policy. The 1981 report indicates a range of pressures emerging in the supply of labour, land and material in the context of expanding resource development or tourist resort activity in a number of regions. It is a matter of regret that the earlier years when such advice was available were not used more effectively to absorb labour lost from the building industry and to train a higher number of new apprentices. When labour and materials were under-used, this Government began cutting back on the housing industry in a way which raised prices. The price of building materials in New South Wales, where the housing industry was more buoyant, rose at a faster rate than in States such as Victoria. The Government undermined the capacity of the housing industry to cope with emerging needs. As a result, the pressures are greater now than they should be. According to the Council, the resources development activity is likely to affect the demand for housing in ditIerent regions, the cost of housing, the availability and cost of housing finance, finance for developers and infrastructure finance. On page 7 of its report the Council states:
Whether this demand is reflected in the rental sector or as increased demand for owner occupation, will depend in part on the availability and cost of housing finance, and in the cost of purchasing a dwelling.
The Council implies that the position is so difficult that more housing will be made available for rental. I question that. The monthly repayments for a $30,000 loan, repaid over 25 years at an interest rate of 11.5 per cent, are $305. I ask leave

3416 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Planning Council for the Housing Industry

of the House to incorporate in Hansard a tabk setting out monthly repayments and total repayments of loans of $20,000, $25,000 and $30,000 with various interest rates over a 25-year period.

Leave granted. The table read as follows-

MONTHLY REPAYMENTS AND TOTAL REPAYMENTS ON LOANS OF $20,000, $25,000 AND $30,000 WITH VARIOUS INTEREST RATES Loan to be repaid over a 25-year period ($)

Loan

$20,000

$25,000

$30,000

Interest rate

Monthly repayment

Total Monthly repayment repayment

Total Monthly repayment repayment

Total repayment

per cent 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5 10.0 10.5 11.0 11.5 12.0 12.5 13.5

122.81 128.86 135.04 141.35 147.79 154.36 161.04 167.83 174.73 181.74 188.83 196.02 203.29 210.64 218.07

36,845.24 38,658.08 40,512.42 42,406.75 44,339.47 46,308.97 48,313.62 50,351.78 52,421.79 54,522.04 56,650.90 58,806.78 60,988.13 63,193.44 65,421.24

153.52 161.07 168.80 J 76.69 184.74 192.95 201.30 209.79 218.42 227.17 236.04 245.02 254.11 263.30 272.58

46,056.56 48,322.60 50,640.53 53,008.43 55,424.33 57,886.21 60,392.03 62,939.72 65,527.24 68,152.55 70,813.62 73,508.48 76,235.17 78,991.8 J 81,776.56

184.22 193.29 202.56 212.Q3 221.69 231.54 241.56 251.75 262.10 272.61 283.25 294.03 304.94 315.96 327.10 349.00

55,267.87 57,987.12 60,768.64 63,610.12 66,509.20 69,463.45 72,470.43 75.527.67 78,632.69 81,783.06 84,976.35 88,210.17 91,482.20 94,790.17 98,131.87

Compiled at request by the Statistics Group of the Legislative Research Service.

Mr UREN-l thank the House. It costs $305 a month for a $30,000 loan over a 25-year period. In Sydney the bottom of the market for a house and land is now $50,000. A person would need to earn about $300 a week to qualify for a loan of $30,000. Average weekly earnings are $250 a week. That means that 70 per cent to 73 per cent of all male wage earners are excluded from purchasing a home. So it is becoming an impossible dream for some people in Sydney and the situation is becoming just as difficult in other cities and States. It is becoming a tragic situation under these regressive policies of this Government. On page 6 of the report the Council states:
In areas where the resource developer is not required to make a major contribution to finance for local infrastructure, major financial and administrative pressures on local authorities frequently serve to restrict the supply of serviced residential land and place a heavy debt burden on the local community.
Particularly in the western suburbs of Sydney, because of the Government's resources policy, local government authorities are finding it hard to fulfil their loan allocations.
The report goes on:
Increased pressure on the supply of housing and housing costs can be expected. This may not be a significant problem

for those who have high incomes deriving from the development or whose housing is company supplied. For others, particularly those on low incomes renting in the private market, there can be severe personal hardship. These difficulties have already emerged in some areas.
That is the Government's Indicative Planning Council talking about what is occurring within our community. The inference is, firstly, that resource developers should pay more towards their costs. It is about time that the resource developers paid more towards infrastructure costs. Secondly, it is essential to improve forward planning. There is no forward planning because this Government isolates its position from State and local governments. This Government thinks that all it has to do is supply 2 per cent of the income tax for local government and it has met its responsibilities. It is transferring more and more responsibilities to local government, and there is not that interrelationship which is so necessary between Australian State and local governments if we are to overcome these difficult housing and social infrastructure problems in those areas. Thirdly, it is necessary that action be taken to protect low income tenants. How can we protect low income tenants? If we look at 1974-75, the last full year of Labor Government, we made available $150m in constant terms to the Commonwealth, the States,

Planning Council for the Housing Industry

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3417

the Territories, and Aboriginals. In the coming year all that this Government will make available is a base amount of $200m. That represents a cut in the public sector from $850m in the peak year of the Labor Government to $200m this year. That is another difficult problem. This Government is squeezing the housing industry not only in the public sector but also in the private sector.
On page 61 of the report the Indicative Planning Council considered the problems of Gladstone and its relationship to the large development proposals and the limitations of the expensive provision of accommodation. Similar problems are foreshadowed for the Hunter region and for Portland. Last night I gave figures on the housing situation in the Latrobe Valley. It costs between $85 and $105 a week for a normal worker to rent a house in that area, if a house can be obtained. In Gladstone 25 per cent of the people are now living in caravans. This is a social problem which has not been taken up by the Government. On page 9 of its report the Indicative Planning Council deals with the question of adequacy of housing finance. It states:
Housing finance institutions are already facing considerable competition from semi-government authorities borrowing to finance resource-related and other infrastructure.
That is right. Again, the Government cannot pass the buck to the State governments. It got out into the highways and byways and argued about Australia being the El Dorado of tomorrow, the great resource boom. This Government forced through this policy. It is about time that this national government co-operated with the States to overcome those problems. Even the Minister for Housing is still fiddling figures. The sad thing about this is that the Minister said today:
That is why the Commonwealth allowed an increase in bank housing loan rates and removed the regulations on deposit rates. Bank lending for housing has picked up considerably. In the March quarter 1981, the number of loans approved for dwellings by savings banks increased by over 9 per cent in seasonally adjusted terms.
He went on to say:
That means more prospective home buyers are now home owners.
Honourable members should 'read the report of the Indicative Planning Council. On page 22, section 3.5.5 states:
However, the value of loans approved for new dwellings is forecast to decline slightly in 1980-81 because the proportion of funds lent for new dwellings is expected to continue to fall.
It goes on:
. . . banks and permanent building societies are expected to approve 62,000 loans for new dwellings in 1980-81 compared with around 67,500 in each of the previous two years, a drop ofaround 8 per cent.

Mr Deputy Speaker, for heaven's sake tell your Minister, who is in the same party as yourself, that he should stop fiddling the figures. It is about time that this Government met its responsibilities and did some positive planning.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Debate (on motion by Mr Bourchier) adjourned.
DEFENCE FORCE OMBUDSMAN Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence)-For the information of honourable members. I present a statement relating to the report of the Administrative Review Council on the Defence Force Ombudsman, which was tabled on 4 June 1981.
INSURANCE BROKERS Ministerial Statement
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-by leave-I wish to outline for the information of honourable members the conclusions reached by the Government following an assessment of the recommendations in the report of the Law Reform Commission on insurance agents and brokers. The Law Reform Commission report recommended that legislation should be introduced to regulate theactivities of insurance brokers by imposing registration requirements, compliance with certain financial requirements, compulsory professional indemnity and fidelity guarantee insurance, and prohibitions on certain relationships between brokers and insurers. Views were sought on the Commission's report from insurance industry organisations and other interested parties, the States and the Northern Territory. Whilst those groups that responded generally favoured regulation of brokers, their reaction to the terms and coverage of regulation proposed by the Commission differed significantly.
As should now be well known, the Government's general view on intervention in commercial relationships is that a clear need must be demonstrated before Commonwealth regulatory legislation is considered. The Government does not believe such a need has been established either by the Law Reform Commission or by others making submissions. Indeed, the recent decision on the Review of Commonwealth Functions requires by the Government critical examination of existing supervision of the insurance industry. It is clear that over the past decade the vast majority of broker transactions have been conducted in a

3418 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Insurance Brokers

satisfactory manner. Losses from broker insolvencies over this period, while attracting considerable publicity, have represented only a minute proportion of business turnover. The more than $7.25m known to the Law Reform Commission to have been lost from broker insolvencies in the 10 years preceding its report represented less than 0.1 per cent of premiums handled by brokers in the period. Furthermore, it appears that much the greater part of those losses have affected businesses rather than individual consumers. It should also be recognised that the States have traditionally been the regulators of intermediaries such as solicitors and estate agents and in areas of consumer protection. Several States either have or are foreshadowing legislation in this area.
One aspect of the pattern of operations of insurance brokers does appear to be worthy of special attention. That is the traditional practice in the general insurance industry whereby brokers,'and to some extent other insurance intermediaries, are entrusted with premiums and other moneys which they are able to hold and invest, or otherwise use on their own account and receive income therefrom, over and above whatever commission is received by them. While it is evident that the great majority of brokers handle these moneys in a responsible manner, potential does exist for abuse. In large part, this practice amounts to extended credit to brokers. It enables them to extend credit to clients or to hold permium moneys for periods exceeding normal business practice before the moneys are transmitted to insurers.
In regard to this particular aspect, consideration will be given, in consultation with the insurance industry, to amending the Insurance Act 1973 with a view to circumscribing dependence on extended credit terms and to ameliorating the consequences of broker failure for insureds and insurers, provided this can be done without undue regulation or administrative cost. I will be making a further statement on that matter, in conjunction with the introduction of a number of amendments to other areas of the Insurance Act, at a later date. I should emphasise that the Government remains of the view that the most effective approach to the basic issues relating to insurance brokers is the development of sound and appropriate selfregulatory practices. No system of regulation can provide an ultimate assurance against loss in all circumstances. But with self-regulation consumers are given the freedom of choice to deal with intermediaries who are subject to such arrangements, or, if they prefer, to seek services elsewhere in the market. The ultimate judgment can therefore rest with the consumer.

I might point out that there is now no shortage of readily identifi.able insurance brokers operating within the marls@twho are subject to selfregulatory arrang<;ment~. Specifically, the Confederation of Insurance Brokers of Australia and the Insurance Brokers Association of Australia impose membership requirements similar in a number of respects to the controls recommended by the Law Reform Commission. The Government would hope that any prospective legislation by the States will recognise the benefits of these existing self-regulatory arrangements and have regard to the advantages associated with uniformity in controls. In this latter context the Commonwealth Government stands ready to assist wherever it may be able in achieving uniformity between the States in this area.
lam conscious that there will be, some in the community who will be disappointed that the Government has not embarked upon the course of full-scale regulatory legislation. However, Governments have to justify the cost of regulatory intervention by establishing a clear public interest in so intervening. It is often erroneously claimed that the only answer to default and dishonesty is to pass more legislation. On the contrary, whilst legislation can go some way to reduce bad and inefficient practices, no amount of legislation can provide a guarantee against fraud and business failures. The attempt to provide such a guarantee would inevitably bring with it an unacceptable level of intervention in the affairs of businesses and individuals. I commend the statement to the House. I present the following paper:
Regulation of Insurance Brokers-Ministerial Statement, 10 June 1981.
Motion (by Mr Killen) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (11.52)- The statement by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) destroys five years of detailed and constructive investigation and recommendations on the need to legislate for insurance brokers. It is a slap in the face to the industry, to the community and, above all, to Professor David St Leger Kelly and the staff of the Law Reform Commission. The Treasurer has not even had the courtesy to pay a tribute to the work of the Commission.
The track record of Liberal governments over the years, particularly in the field of insurance, is simple of definition. It is a series of rearguard actions taken after the horse has boited, of closing off certain stable doors in the hope that in doing so policy holders will be protected against further failures in the future. This is no way to act responsibly in a highly complex and important industry

Insurance Brokers

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3419

such as the insurance industry. I have read the debates in England; the Minister obviously has not. Past actions have been repeated time after time. Voluntary controls, however good, have been inadequate. There are some who would argue that the industry itself has failed and has passed the buck to the Government. It has been demonstrated that the whole field of insurance is too big and complex to be operated entirely by voluntary control. The policy holder pays a premium and in return he gets a mere promise-a promise that on the happening of some event the insurer has a contingent liability and will pay. The Government must be concerned as to whether the people who make the promise are suitable persons. It must also be concerned about their capacity to carry out their promise.
The purpose of the legislation was to deal with the severe problems faced by members of the insuring public in relation to misconduct by insurance intermediaries. There are thousands of insurance intermediaries in Australia, the vast majority of whom act honestly in the interests of c1ients. But cases of misconduct occur and, when they do, severe loss can be caused to numerous honest people. The Treasurer has a distinct lack of enthusiasm for the controls suggested by the Commission after an exhaustive inquiry. Yet the Commission's central recommendations have the support of the insurance industry in its entirety. There has been a whole succession of collapses of insurance broking houses. The total estimated loss incurred in the period 1969-1981 is not $7.3m but $14m. Losses of $7m have occurred over the last two years. Someone has to pick up the tab. Obviously this is left to the policy holders. The Government's inaction in relation to the question quite frankly is scandalous. Protective legislation is desperately needed by the community and will be welcomed by all reputable sections of the industry.1t is utterly irresponsible to unload that r.esponsibility back on the States. All the Government is doing is recycling the need as in the case of uniform company law.
The need for regulation has been long recognised overseas, within the State jurisdictions and by all sections of the community involved in the broking industry. As the Minister is aware, the Queensland Insurance Act 1960-1976 provides for the licensing of insurance brokers. The United Kingdom brought in legislation in 1977. The Whitlam Government drafted legislation before we got turfed out in 1975. Since then there have been a number of somersaults by the Government. In April 1976 the then Minister Assisting the Treasurer announced that the Government would introduce legislation for the supervision of

insurance brokers. In March 1977 the Government reversed this decision and announced its intention to pursue a scheme for self-regulation in conjunction with the Insurance Brokers Council. In 1979 the Treasurer announced that he would seek government approval to develop legislation for voluntary regulation arrangements for brokers. Six months later he changed his mind again. The Government refused to grasp the nettle, claiming that there was no consensus among the various bodies representing brokers on the forms of control that ought to be and might be introduced. The Treasurer waited until the Law Reform Commission's report was tabled. One might be forgiven for expecting that the tabling of the Commission's report would finally have stimulated the Treasurer into some action. Great was my disbelief when on the tabling of the Commission's report in September of last year, after four years of extensive consultation, the Treasurer announced that as a first step in the Government's consideration of the present report he proposed to seek the views of the industry, organisations and interested parties.
The report's recommendations, which I will deal with in more detail, show clearly and unequivocally how endemic is this Government's capacity for vacillation on the regulation of business in the public interest. The Government cannot claim in its defence that the insurance broking lobby is against the legislation. It cannot sustain that claim. Bodies representing the insurance brokers and all sections of the insurance industry have persistently supported and demanded the legislation. We have the spectacle of the Western Australian Government being obliged to bring in legislation. The New South Wales Minister has repeatedly indicated that if the Commonwealth fails to act New South Wales will legislate. The Victorian Minister is committed to bringing in legislation. Unquestionably the only two remaining States will be obliged to bring in legislation to protect the consumer section of the industry. What is the Minister going to have? I will tell him what he will have. He will have a plethora of mismatched, ineffective, inefficient State laws. The situation is scandalous.
In September 1976 a reference which I obtained from the then Attorney-General required the Law Reform Commission to report on insurance contract law. I must confess that the Treasurery has overlooked this aspect, which is inextricably mixed up in the whole insurance industry. If one is to bring in recommendations on insurance contract law one has to cover intermediaries. If one does not regulate that one is wasting one's time regulating to update insurance

3420 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Insurance Brokers

contract law. The Commission reported separately on the regulation of brokers and it is about to bring in a report on insurance contract law. If the Minister were honest, he would request the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) to ask the Law Reform Commission to cancel any further procedures.

. It is an appalling situation that anyone may call

hImself a broker, whether he is a true broker or an

agent tied to a single company. The company is

readily misled by this practice, and the major

problem with agents is that some insurers will not

accept responsibility for them. They choose their

agent, but when something goes wrong it is the in-

sured who worries. The insurer simply denies any

liability. In the past this has led to scandalous de-

cisions. The insurers have made the insured sign a

statement to the effect that the insurer's agent is

not the insurer's agent at all. Instead, he is the

agent for the insured, and regrettably the courts

have upheld this charade. Insurers have also been

able to avoid liability by denying that their agents

had authority to do certain things. We all know

that agents and employees often fill in proposal

forms for clients. When those agents make a mis-

take, the insurer should accept the responsibility.

The most frequent complaint is in relation to

motor vehicle insurance. A car salesman is an

agent or a sub-agent for insurance. He offers to ar-

range insurance for the buyer, often at scan-

dalously high ra,tes. He fills in the form on the

strength of the answers given to him by the buyer.

The buyer tells him that he has had two accidents

in the last five years. I have handled many such

cases. The salesman knows that the insurer may

not be willing to insure a so he writes 'no' alongside

tbhueyqeur ewstiitohnthcoantcreercnoirnd~

the buyer's claims history. In that way he makes

sure of the contract and his commission. If the in-

sured makes a claim, the inaccuracy of the answer

as recorded by the agent is discovered. The insurer

denies liability on the basis of the insured's mis-

representation. When the insured says 'It was

your agent who made the mistake', the invariable

answer that he gets is: 'Too bad'. The insured loses

out. That position is intolerable.

Disreputable insurers are encouraged by the law to have concern, but they have no concern whatsoever for the behaviour and ethics of their agents. That is bad business practice. Insurers owe a duty to train and supervise their agents. They will do so uniformly only when they are made legally responsible for their conduct. I suggest to the Minister and to Government members that the real question involved is not so much the ques-
tion of the need to regulate brokers as the need to

get some updated revision of insurance contract law.
Perhaps one other disastrous feature of the collapse of the insurance broker, to which the Minister has made no reference at all, is that a policy holder who has in good faith forwarded his premium to the broker may find that due to the broker's failure to forward the premium to the company he is entirely uninsured. Similarly, an insured may have forwarded funds to the broker in settlement of a claim against it, and this sum may not have been transferred to the insurer. It is true tha~ insurance companies have persistently, for a varIety.of r~asons, assumed liability. According to the legIslatIon, that payment of a premium to a broker discharges the insured's liability to the insurer in respect of that premium. Conversely, that payment to the broker by an insurer of money intended for the insured does not discharge the insurer's responsibility to the insured in respect of those funds; nor should it.
Self-regulation has been proved a failure time after time. What is needed is urgent legislation. If there is no legislation, all that we are doing is what we did in the field of company law. We give an open misere to the spiv, the charlatan and the corporate crook. The Minister is misleading the Parliament when he says that the cost involved in self-regulation would be an impost on the taxpayer. If we look at the proposals put by the two insurance brokerage organisations in Australia, it would not have cost a cent. One of their recommendations was that the whole system could be funded entirely from registration fees if the English practice were to be followed. The'Minister was not prepared even to legislate in that form. I repeat that, quite apart from insurance contract law, in the field of insurance brokerage law there is a critical and urgent need for the legislation to be implemented. There is a need for a statutory system of registration of insurance brokers to be supervised by an insurance commissioner, and a life insurance commissioner. There is an obligation for registered brokers to keep all premium moneys and moneys received from insurers in a separate trust account, the investment of which is to be closely controlled. There ought to be heavy penalties for misleading conduct by brokers and agents. Greater protection is needed for consumers by making insurers statutorily liable for the actions of their agents and responsible for premiums received by brokers.
The Government's actions, after five years of exhaustive examination, are utterly scandalous and irresponsible. Protective legislation is needed by the community, and it is needed by all reputable sections of the insurance industry. I utterly

Standing Committee on Expenditure

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3421

condemn this Government for its failure to give the insurance industry and the public the protection they deserve. I can say only that after the next Federal election the Labor Government will as a matter of urgency bring in uniform legislation to cover insurance brokers and to update, revise and implement a new code of insurance contract law.
Debate (on motion by Mr Bradfield) adjourned.
COMMONWEALTH GRANTS COMMISSION REPORT
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-Pursuant to section 75 of the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973 I present the Commonwealth Grants Commission report on State tax sharing entitlements 1981, volumes J to 3.
BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE
The following Bills were returned from the Senate without amendment or requests:
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill 1981. Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Bill 1981. Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981. Overseas Telecommunications Amendment Bill 1981. Supply Bill (No. I) 1981-82. SuppJyBill (No.2) 1981-82.
JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE NEW PARLIAMENT HOUSE
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian Robinson)-Mr Speaker has received advice from the Leader of the Government in the Senate nominating Senator Teague to be a member of the Joint Committee on the New Parliament House, and from the Leader of the Opposition in the Senate nominating Senators Colston and Sibraa also to be members of that Committee from 1 July 1981.
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXPENDITURE
Mr LUSHER (Hume)-On behalf of the Standing Committee on Expenditure J present the report of the Committee entitled 'Commonwealth Government Purchasing', together with a transcript of evidence and minutes of proceedings.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr LUSHER-I ask for leave to make a short statement in connection with the report.
Leave granted.
Mr LUSHER---This report is the result of the Expenditure Committee's largest inquiry in terms of the amount of information examined and the

length of the inquiry. It arose out of concerns expressed to members of the Committee by companies supplying goods to the Commonwealth. The main complaints were of delays in awarding contracts and paying for goods. After a preliminary hearing in September 1978, a subcommittee was established on 25 October 1978 to examine the efficiency of administrative procedures and the effectiveness of the purchasing program in meeting its objectives. I would like to thank my colleague the honourable member for Dawson (Mr Braithwaite) for his tireless and thoughtful contribution as Chairman of the Subcommittee. He was a member of the Subcommittee from its inception. I must also thank the other member of the Sub-committee, the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay), and former members of the Subcommittee, particularly the former member for Henty, Ken Aldred, and the former member for Grayndler, the late Frank Stewart. I was also a member of the Sub-committee.
Expenditure on purchases of goods and services by'the Commonwealth Government is a mess. In 1980-81 the estimated net expenditure, less the salaries and wages of those conducting purchasing, is $4,461m which is over 12 per cent of estimated Commonwealth outlays. In addition, the Committee has calculated there are about 2,000 purchasing staff with salaries totalling over $25m in the current financial year. Although responsibility for purchasing is dispersed throughout the Commonwealth Government the prime responsibility lies with the Purchasing Division in the Department of Administrative Services. It became apparent to the Committee that the Department of Administrative Services has made significant advances in its operations since the Scott committee completed its inquiry into Commonwealth purchasing in 1974, although some deficiencies remain. By contrast, in other departments and authorities there are many elements of purchasing which have glaring weaknesses. The exceptions to this broad criticism are the trading authorities'--that is, those engaged in commercial competition-where purchasing sections appear to be in generally better shape. The Committee believes in many departments and authorities the attention of senior management is confined to matters directly related to the department's area of interest with the result that ancillary matters, including purchasing, receive less attention.
The Committee has made 54 recommendations affecting all stages of the purchasing process. The main categories of recommendations are aimed at

3422 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Standing Committee on Expenditure

making purchasing more efficient by avoiding unnecessary expenditure, paying less for goods purchased and reducing staffing requirements. Other recommendations are designed to improve public accountability, examine the effectiveness of programs and improve the management and use of resources. Over the course of the inquiry the Committee looked at a wide range of examples of government purchasing and uncovered many areas of bureaucratic absurdity. The purchase of crockery was an example of this. The House may be interested in brief details of what the Committee learned from evidence on that subject, particularly in relation to the problem of overspecification.
Whilst some departments and authorities judged that commercially available crockery if made to hotelware standard was acceptable, others demanded from suppliers the most stringent tests; so much so that until recently the Department of Veterans' Affairs considered Australian produced crockery unacceptable for its requirements. This meant that the Department of Veterans' Affairs paid 40 per cent to ] 00 per cent more for crockery than other departments with similar crockery usage. In relation to the Department of Defence, there were two crockery specifications-a 12-page one for other ranks and sergeants messes and an I8-page specification for the officers mess. Included were detailed engineering drawings for the manufacture of a crockery impact machine to test crockery for breakage.
The Committee has already achieved some results from the inquiry process itself. The Committee has been successful in having one piece of red tape removed. During the inquiry the Committee found that departments had to obtain approval from the Public Service Board when purchasing office machines. This seemed unnecessary and created inordinate delays. The rules were changed so that only in cases of large value purchases of office machines and for some specified categories did departments need to seek approval from the Public Service Board. Also, a series of threshold levels within the tendering process have been raised in line with the Committee's earlier discussion with the Department of Administrative Services.
Before concluding, I wish to pay tribute to the work of Kevin Newbold and Bob Harlow who were the clerks to the Sub-committee. The report owes much to the consciencious work of these two able young men over the course of the inquiry. This has been a long and exhaustive inquiry. The Committee believes its findings and recommendations will assist in more efficient and more effec-
tive purchasing. As 1 indicated earlier, we are

talking about $4.5 billion in total and over 12 per cent of the Commonwealth Budget. We look forward to the response of the Government to this report and hope that there will be a broad measure of agreement with the recommendations we have made. I commend the report to the House.
Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson)-by leaveAs my colleague the honourable member for Hume (Mr Lusher) has said, the report on Commonwealth Government purchasing is the result of an exhaustive and comprehensive inquiry. Fifty-four recommendations are included covering all aspects of purchasing. If the Government implements the recommendations, which I trust it will, there should be a significant improvement in the efficiency and en'ectiveness with which Commonwealth goods are purchased. There were 236 submissions to the Committee and 75 witnesses appeared before the Committee. Members of the Committee, the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay) and the honourable member for Hume, made tremendous contributions to the work of the Committee and in the final stages of preparation of the report.
The Sub-committee Chairman during the last Parliament was the former member for Henty, Mr Ken Aldred. He was the main force behind the inquiry and I believe its success is due in considerable measure to the energy he put into it. The late Frank Stewart, the former member for Grayndler, was also on the original subcommittee when it was formed on 25 September 1978. [t is hoped that the report reflects the feelings of these two former members. I also wish to make special and favourable mention of the work of the clerk to the Expenditure Committee, Mr M. E. Aldons, and the clerks to the Subcommittee, Mr R. S. Harlow and Mr K. Newbold. Their dedication, their efficiency and their attention to detail has made this the effective report I believe it to be.
The expenditure on purchases by the Government is significant, as has been mentioned by the honourable member for Hume. This is referred to in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the report. The Joint Committees of Public Accounts and Foreign Affairs and Defence have recently published reports on the purchase of computer and defence equipment respectively. Consequently the Expenditure Committee did not subject these areas to the same degree of scrutiny as it did other areas. The Committee determined the essential elements for effective and efficient purchasing in the Commonwealth. Together these constitute a model of how purchasing should be conducted. In the report these are examined in the logicai sequence in

Standing Committee on Expenditure

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3423

which goods are purchased, from deciding what and how much is needed, to ensuring the quality of the gQods supplied.
The Committee has been anxi9us not to try improving purchasing by adding more rules, regulations and controls. Rather, it has devised simpler, cheaper and more effective ways of getting goods for the Commonwealth. The Committee does not recommend a central purchasing body for the Commonwealth but suggests that all departments take advantage of the expertise in purchasing built up in other departments, particularly the Department of Administrative Services. The major category of recommendations is designed to reduce costs of goods purchased. The Committee has recommended greater use of government bulk purchasing power. Although the Department of Administrative Services has already made advances in this direction, a lot more needs to be done. The Commonwealth, as previously indicated, is a major purchaser and as such should be able to use its bulk to get better prices, for instance in hospital supplies.
'In Canberra almost $1m is spent on warehousing facilities for centralised purchasing within the Capital Territory Health Commission, but each hospital still has its own purchasing staff, storage, accounts, et cetera. Much of the purchasing is conducted in ignorance of where other hospitals are buying their goods and for how much. This relates also to the States. The Committee found a great deal of support for centralising purchasing within the CTHC, but so far nothing has been done.
The Committee has recommended that a more careful analysis be made of the buying of goods rather than leasing or hiring. There is a temptation to lease because of short term advantages, whilst committing the Commonwealth to high long term payments. For example, the Committee estimated that for the major brand of photocopiers used in the Public Service, the saving by buying rather than leasing would be $1.4m over the life of the machines. There are also recommendations on program effectiveness. The Government has a commendable policy of giving preference to Australian-made goods to aid industry recovery, increase employment and improve productivity. However, the Committee felt there were problems. For instance: Firstly, protection provided is small in aggregate; secondly, it discriminates in favour of industries which are major government suppliers; thirdly, it does not focus on employment; fourthly, the costs of policy are unknown and, fifthly, it has not been subject to indepth review.

The Committee believes there is an urgent need both for improvements in the collection of information on benefits and costs of Australian preference and for a detailed review of the impact of these programs. The Committee has been concerned for suppliers of goods to the Commonwealth, especially small businesses. The Committee has recommended that unsuccessful tenderers be advised more thoroughly as to why they were unsuccessful. The Committee has also recommended two-phase tendering be introduced so that every firm does not have to supply detailed tenders initially.
The Committee also inquired into the payment of accounts for purchasers and felt that, through a previous Government instruction, this process had been shortened. Other recommendations simplify and shorten procedures, thereby reducing staff requirements; for example, revised quality control procedures which would reduce Government inspections and place a greater reliance on the firm's quality control. Again I pay tribute to the co-operation of the Committee members and of those witnesses who appeared before it in the genuine hope, I believe, that answers and suggestions could be given to improve this major part of Government involvement.
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler)~by leave~I commend this report to the Government. The honourable member for Dawson (Mr Braithwaite) has spoken at length on the recommendations in the report, and I believe he should be congratulated on producing'such an excellent report. He is the longest serving member of a rather lengthy inquiry. When one looks at the members who have come and gone from the Standing Committee on Expenditure over the years the inquiry has continued, it is obvious that the honourable member for Dawson would know more about government purchasing than most people presently in this Parliament. As has been said earlier, this report points out most vividly that purchasing on behalf of the Commonwealth Government is in an absolute shambles, and no department shows that more than the Department of Defence. I believe that the Committee's report highlights the same problems in the Department of Defence as those shown by the Katter Sub-committee of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence. I think that the sooner the Government tightens up the procedures of Commonwealth Government purchasing, the sooner the wastage in that area of Commonwealth expenditure will be removed. I conclude my remarks by congratulating Bob Harlow, the Expenditure Committee officer who ~nally put together the report. That work will

3424 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

stand as an example of some of the, good work parliamentary committees can do to assist the Government and the bureaucracy to fulfil their functions.
JOINT COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE
Report
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins)-On behalf of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence Tpresent the Committee's report entitled 'Power in Indo-Chimf since 1975', together with the transcript of evidence.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr SHIPTON-by leave-This report follows the decision by the Committee, in November 1979, to inquire into 'The changing power structure in Indo-China since 1975 and its effects on Australia and the region'. Sub-Committee A undertook the reference and, in the course of the inquiry, submissions were received and evidence heard from a wide variety of individuals and representatives of organisations. These include nationals and diplomatic representatives of the Indo-Chinese countries, Australian academics with expert knowledge of the region, representatives of Commonwealth depaitments, and United Nations representatives. Five members of Sub-Committee A individually visited the region between 1979 and 1981, which has provided the Committee with valuable first-hand information, especially regarding the refugee situation and conditions in Kampuchea.
One of the Committee's recommendations in the report tabled today is that the Government should encourage further and continuous study of this volatile region, which is likely to become more important to Australia's future. In this way, the Australian public can become aware of the many political, military, social and economic factors contributing to the present instability of the region, and public interest in events in the region will be stimulated.
The very large Indo-Chinese refugee problem which has arisen in recent years has had direct consequences for Australia since over 50,000 Indo-Chinese refugees have been accepted for resettlement here since 1975. The humanitarian aspects of the Indo-Chinese refugee situation, and Australia's role in assisting the refugees, is currently being examined by the Senate Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence and has not been studied in depth by this Committee. The existence of a very large body of refugees is also a major cause of instability in the region, particularly in the Thai-Kampuchean border area.

The Committee therefore recommends that, working through United Nations organisations, the Government should press for the establishment of some form of administrative machinery on the Thai-Kampuchean border so that those refugees seeking a new life in another country can quickly and permanently be separated from shortterm refugees who intend returning to Kampuchea.
The Indo-Chinese refugee problem is a tragic by-product of the recent political and military upheavals in the region, which are documented in the report tabled today. The most widely known of these events is the virtual destruction of Kampuechea's social fabric, as a direct result of the policies of the Democratic Kampuchean Government-better known as the Pol Pot regime. Between April 1975 and the end of 1978, it would appear that the DK leaders caused the deaths by massacre or starvation of as many as one to two million Kampucheans. Also, the events taking place in Kampuchea resulted in large numbers of Kampuchean refugees fleeing to Thailand and Vietnam. The report notes that there have been few regimes this century so reviled as the so-called DK Government. The Committee recommends that the general abhorrence felt in Australia towards that regime should be kept in mind when considering Australia's attitude towards the Indo-Chinese region, and that Australia should discourage diplomatic support for the Democratic Kampuchean regime. The Committee does not, however, support the recognition of the People's Republic of KampucheaHeng Samrin-whilst Vietnamese military forces are present in Kampuchea.
Following the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea and the overthrow of the DK Government in January 1979, there was a new outflow of Kampuchean refugees into Thailand. The movement of Kampucheans towards the Thai border greatly increased in the second half of 1979, after the onset of a disastrous famine in their devastated country. By the end of 1979, there were over a quarter of a million Indo-Chinese refugees and displaced persons in Thailand, including 119,000 Kampucheans who arrived in the last months of the year. In addition, approximately another quarter of a million Kampucheans were camped near the Thai-Kampuchean border. In recent months, the international relief agencies and the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations-FAO-have expressed a belief that the worst of the food shortages in Kampuchea may now be over. The country is still far from selfsufficient in food production, but, due largely to the international aid effort in 1979-80, the food

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3425

situation has greatly improved. This improvement is reflected in the fact that, in recent months, people have been returning to their farms and villages from the temporary settlements along the Thai-Kampuchean border. However, the FAO's reports have stressed that the country's economy is still so fragile that famine conditions could easily return if drought or floods occur, or as a result of political or military upheavals, or if there is an abrupt end to international aid.
In the interests of encouraging stability in the region, every effort needs to be made by the international community to prevent the re-occurrence of famine in Kampuchea. The Committee therefore recommends that Australian humanitarian aid to Kampuchea should continue. The refugee problem that has arisen in the last six years'is also related to events in Vietnam and Laos, and to policies adopted by the governments of those countries. These policies and their consequences are described in the report tabled today. Over 100,000 Laotians had fled their country by the end of 1977, and the outflow has continued since then. In 1978, nearly 200,000 Vietnamese of Chinese origin fled over the Vietnamese border into China, while almost 90,000 Vietnamese boat people, among whom Vietnamese of Chinese origin predominated, arrived in South East Asia that year, followed by a further 160,000 in the first half of 1979. The exodus of Vietnamese-Chinese by land and sea in 1978 and 1979 brought accusations from the international community that the Vietnamese Government was deliberately and callously driving out the country's VietnameseChinese minority. As a result of international criticism, the Vietnamese Government undertook to reduce. the outflow of boat people, and the numbers leaving by sea dropped substantially in the second half of 1979. Since mid-1980 the numbers of boat people reaching countries of first asylum in South East Asia began to rise again, and this trend has continued in 1981. According to figures released by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, approximately 11,150 Vietnamese fled in April, compared with 5,154 in March.
One of the most notable developments in Indo China since 1975 is the emergence of Vietnam as a strong military power. This development is one of the main causes of the present instability in the region, and has tremendous potential for causing instability in the future. The Committee recommends that any Australian foreign or domestic policy decisions concerning future developments in the region should take into account the existence and capacity of this power. Vietnam's emergence as a military power has also been responsible

for a near breakdown in its relations with the Association of South East Asian Nations, especially Thailand. Vietnamese forces have clashed with Thai troops a number of times in the ill-defined Thai-Kampuchean border area, and both sides engaged in heavy fighting during the Vietnamese military incursion into Thailand in June 1980. Prolonged confrontation has not yet occurred between the opposing forces along the border. However, as long as Thai and Vietnamese forces continue to face each other across the border there is a constant possibility of renewed armed conflict.
Recently, there has also been a resurgence of serious fighting in the Sino-Vietnamese border, where China is currently reported to have some 250,000 troops deployed, and Vietnam a similar number. As the report tabled today indicates, Vietnam is apparently determined to maintain its present domination of Indo-China, even at the cost of conflict with China. Under the so-called Twenty-five Year Treaties of Friendship and Cooperation signed with Laos in July 1979 and Kampuchea in February 1979, Vietnam has legitimised her military presence in those countries, under the guise of defence co-operation. Currently, there are 40,000 to 50,000 Vietnamese troops in Laos and some 200,000 troops in Kampuchea. Consequently, Laos and Kampuchea must now be regarded as client states of their powerful neighbour. The Committee is concerned at this situation and recommends that Australia should support policies which woulrl; result in the independence of Vietnam, Laos and Kampuchea, based on democratically elected governments. The Committee also recommends that economic aid should not be given by Australia to Vietnam until it withdraws its military forces from Laos and Kampuchea.
Vietnam's domination of Indo-China entails her continuing dependence on the Soviet Union for large-scale military and economic aid. The Soviet Union has been able to utilise its relationship with Vietnam to obtain access to port facilities and thus increase its own presence in the region. The physical presence of Soviet advisers in Vietnam and the Soviet naval presence, particularly in such major ports as Da Nang, appears to have expanded considerably since February 1979. Vietnam has apparently become an important staging-cum.lnaval observation post or depot for Soviet naval operations in the South China Sea. To China, this no doubt appears part of what is seen as a Soviet plot to encircle her on all possible borders. A reduction in the tensions in the IndoChinese region will not be achieved easily. The Committee believes, therefore, that Australia must face the prospect of continued instability in

3426 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Joint Committee on Foreign AjJairs

the region, coupled with the very real prospect of on the continued humanitarian aid to Kam-

renewed armed conflict there.

puchea. We certainly see some contradiction in

The Committee recommends that Australia the views of Committee members on this subject.

should make strenuous efforts to promote reI would like to draw the House's attention to

gional solutions to Indo-Chinese problems and, in the dissenting report on recommendation No. 3

the interest of peace and stability in the region, which starts at page 93 of the report. I point out

attempt to decrease the involvement of the superthat the dissenting report was signed by one of the

powers. The Committee further recommends that Government members of the Committee-

the Government should utilise its relationship Senator Sim. What we were seeking to do in that

with ASEAN to encourage all forms of dialogue dissenting report was to point out that although

between ASEAN countries and Indo-China the decision to terminate the aid program to Viet-

which may help decrease tension in the region and nam was understandable-it was only a very

promote a peaceful settlement of the conflict in small aid program-we believe by the continu-

Kampuchea. Australia should also continue to ance of that policy we will deny Australia an iden-

lend its support to international efforts aimed at tifiable position in the discussions and nego-

decreasing regional tension.

tiations which will have to be undertaken in order

Mr MORRISON (St George)-by leave-I think the report of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence is well worthy of note. As with most committees of this Parliament

to bring a sense of peace and a resolution of the very complex problem in the Indo-China area. I commend to the House the consideration of the dissenting report.

there are a large number of areas of agreement I think some matters of grave concern flow

among the membership of this Committee. There from the report. One that is particularly topical is

is agreement by all members of the Committee on the attempt by the Singaporean Government to

a bipartisan basis of the denunciation of the Pol create a third force. I noticed in the newspaper

Pot regime of Democratic Kampuchea. I think today a report of a threat by the Singaporean

that is recognised in recommendation No.4 of the Minister for Foreign Affairs which is directly rel-

report. There is also bipartisan support for and bievant to the matters discussed in the report of the

partisan statements on condemning the VietForeign Affairs and Defence Committee. It was

namese invasion of Kampuchea. I point out that reported that if Australia did not vote in favour of

as far as the Opposition is concerned the invasion the Pol Pot regime that would be a black mark, to

of any other country, whether it be of Afghanistan use Mr Rajaratnam's phrase, against Australia.

by the Soviet Union or the raids carried out yesThe Committee report indicated that back on 4

terday by Israeli forces on Iraq, is to be conFebruary Singapore is alleged to have asked

demned. I think that point is registered in the reAustralia to provide active support for the third

port as far as the Vietnamese invasion of force. That support was to be in the form of

Kampuchea is concerned.

money and arms. It was an attempt to create a

There is also agreement that the Heng Samrin regime in Kampuchea is dependent on the continued presence of Vietnamese forces. In Committee discussions there was a slight difference in emphasis on how we should handle the question of the Heng Samrin regime. My colleague the

force to counter the Heng Samrin regime by military means. First of all, we can say that no such official approach was received, and the report underlines that fact. If such a request were ever received I hope that the Australian Government would treat it with the contempt it deserves.

honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley) The report categorically states in recommen-

moved a motion in the Committee, which Twas dation No.4, after pointing out the abhorrence

very happy to support, stating that the recogfelt in Australia for the Pol Pot regime of Demo-

nition of the Heng Samrin Government ought not cratic Kampuchea, that we should discourage

to be entertained at this stage, that clear evidence diplomatic support for the Democratic

should be presented that the Heng Samrin regime Kampuchean regime. 1 hope that the Govern-

is independently capable of controlling Kamment will take note of the recommendation that

puchea before such recognition was granted. I bewe should take no actions in the international

lieve that was a very sensible motion. It was in field to give any support or succour to the Pol Pot

slight contradistinction to the recommendation regime. This will be a complete denial of the prop-

that was carried and included in the Committee ositions put forward by Singapore. I do not think

report. All in all the areas of agreement were we are being anti-ASEAN-that is, the Associ-

large. The one area in which there was difference ation of South East Asian Nations-when we take

was on the question of resuming aid to Vietnam. that position because it is well known that Sin-

This is in curious distinction to the position taken gapore and Thailand take a particular position in

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3427

relation to Kampuchea. This position within the ASEAN context is not shared by Malaysia and Indonesia, which countries have very grave reservations about the proposals put forward by the Singaporean Government.
I think one of our other concerns is the ambivalent position of the Australian Government in relation to its policy on Kampuchea. On 14 October 1980 Australia cast a deceptive, certainly misleading, vote in the United Nations where the Australian delegation was instructed to vote for the credentials of the Pol Pot regime. In fact this meant that for the succeeding year until the next meeting of the credentials committee of the United Nations-in September or October this year-Australia will have continued to give international respectability to the Pol Pot regime. The Government has stated in international forums that it will not vote for the Pol Pot regime. I point out that by the Government's vote back in October 1980 it has committed itself to that course. It has taken that position and I hope it will continue to observe it. Its position has not yet been tested. I think the Government, in light of the recommendations of this bipartisan Committee report, should act in conformity with the abhorrence expressed in the report for the Pol Pot regime of Democratic Kampuchea and with its view that we should not provide diplomatic support for the continued recognition of the Pol Pot regime.
Mr McLEAN (Perth)-by leave-I will confine my comments to the interpretative aspects of the report of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence which were the most controversial and on which the Committee was most divided. I have a particular interest in the recognition issue because I think I was the first member of this Parliament to call for Australia to withdraw its recognition of the Pol Pot regime. I did this in the form of a question to the then Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Peacock) in the House of Representatives on 29 April 1976. My call for derecognition was based on the horrendous atrocities being committed by that regime. It seems to me that we have an enormous problem in establishing criteria for recognition, and maintaining consistency in the application of such criteria. At the moment there appears to be a constant dilemma between granting or withdrawing recognition on pragmatic grounds-based on whether or not a certain government or regime is in control of a country-or granting or withdrawing recognition on moral grounds, that is, whether or not a particular government is acting humanely and according basic human rights to its citizens. If it is

not, should we apply our own standards and perceptions to that regime when considering our diplomatic relationship to it?
It seems to me that if we apply one principle to the total exclusion of the other, we are in some difficulty and if we apply a combination of both we can be seen to be inconsistent. For example, if we derecognise Pol Pot-as I have long believed we should-on moral grounds, perhaps one could legitimately ask: 'Where does one draw the line?' Totalitarian governments of the Left and the Right account for most of the governments around the world. They are governments such as that in the Soviet Union which do not grant basic human rights to their citizens. If we apply this moral principle exclusively we would recognise very few countries at all, which might be unwise on both diplomatic and strategic grounds.
On the other hand, do we recognise a government which, whether we approve of it or not, does happen to be in control of a particular country? If so, why is the Government of Taiwan not recognised, or the previous Administration in Rhodesia? After all, the regime in Taipeh is the Government of Taiwan and has perpetrated much less undesirable policies than, say, Pol Pot whom we have long continued to recognise. I am not advocating recognition of any particular nation. All I am saying is that we appear to be inconsistent in our approach to this whole question. This poses a serious dilemma which should be canvassed by this Parliament. Adherence to any one principle at the exclusion of others certainly creates difficulties. If recognition is based solely on moral grounds it can ignore our best foreign policy and political interests. If it is based solely on whether or not a regime effectively controls a particular country, then this can offend our moral sensibilities and harm our own political interests at the same time. If we are to grant recognition firmly in accordance with one criterion or another, very fine judgment will be required.
Perhaps the old adage that there are no permanent friends, no permanent enemies and no permanent alliances but only permanent interests is the best and most practical guiding principle in such matters. The Committee's recommendation No.4, in which it is basically said that Australia should not recognise any regime in Kampuchea at present, has my support and certainly seems sensibly to embrace both of the recognition principles I have mentioned.
The matter of aid to Vietnam was the subject of a dissenting report. I support recommendation 3 of the report. I say this for a number of reasons, most of which are contained in the report. Firstly,

3428 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

as stated in the report, Vietnam has frequently been referred to as the Prussia or Sparta of Indo China. In fact in proportion to its population Vietnam has one of the largest armed forces in the world; secondly, Vietnam has some 200,000 troops still in Kampuchea; thirdly, Vietnam has 40,000 to 50,000 troops in Laos; fourthly, increasing military and economic aid has been given to Vietnam by the Soviet Union which is now reequipping and re-arming the Vietnamese armed forces; and fifthly, Vietnam, following its reunification after some 40 years of warfare which had destroyed the country's economic infrastructure, made a conscious decision of its own to further its military imperialism in the area at the expense of economic development and the furthering of the living standards of its people.
Given these reasons, together with the fact that Vietnam deliberately destroyed an important base of its economy by expelling the Chinese middleclass-the nation's merchants and entrepreneurs-and given that our report states that the economic aid it now receives from the Soviet Union has allowed it to divert its domestic national resources to military expansion, I find it impossible to justify Australia's giving economic aid to Vietnam. More aid would simply allow Vietnam to divert more resources to military expansion in the region, with the endorsement and support of the Soviet Union. To give economic aid under these circumstances to a country over which we have no influence, to a country which has itself decided to give priority to military expansion rather than economic development and to a country which has strategic interests clearly against our own best interests in the region, would be absurd. [ therefore support the Committee's recommendation not to give aid to Vietnam.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect)-by Jeave-I would like to add a few words to the debate on the report of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence. I am one of those whose views on the derecognition of Pol Pot preceded those of the honourable member for Perth (Mr McLean). I opposed the original recognition back in 1975.
It is important to note that the report was unanimous on all recommendations except recommendation No.3. Whilst there was some disagreement, not so much on the original Subcommittee but on the full Committee, the members of the Committee as a whole presented a dissenting report only on the question of aid. Let
me make my position quite clear on that matter. r
would support aid if I thought for one minute that it would lead to a split between Vietnam and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, or even to a withdrawal from Kampuchea and Laos by the

Vietnamese. I believe there is no evidence whatsoever for this hope. I think at present our aid to that area is being given to the thousands of refugees from Indo-China many of whom are still in refugee camps. Large numbers have come to Australia.
The question of the recognition of the Heng Samrin regime has not produced a minority report, I believe the people who support the recognition of Heng Samrin in Vietnam are the same people who gave us Stalin, Pol Pot and the Ayatollah Khomeini. Every time they thought they were improving the set-up in the country. They thought they were improving the situation in the Soviet Union by supporting Stalin, they thought they were improving the situation in Kampuchea by imposing Pol Pot on the country and they thought they were improving the situation in Iran by supporting the Ayatollah. In many cases within a very short time of those people taking over in those countries it became quite clear that they were changes for the worst. Very few people would now argue-I do not think anybody in the Australian Labor Party would argue-that Stalin was an improvement on Kerensky and, after all, the communists overthrew Kerensky and not the czar; very few people would argue that Pol Pot was an improvement on the type of government in position in Kampuchea or that the Ayatollah was an improvement on the Shah, however bad the previous rulers were.
r think that appeasement has not paid off vis-a-
vis aggressors. It did not pay off before the Second World War and it has not paid off since the Second World War. I strongly support the proposition that we give no aid to countries if they behave in an aggressive fashion towards their neighbours.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek leave to make a short statement on the same matter.
Leave not granted.
TASMANIAN WILDERNESS AREAS
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian Robinson)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The failure of the Government to instigate a Federal inquiry into the environmental value to Tasmania and Australia of its south-west wilderness area and the most appropriate way of preserving the area consistent with Tasmanian State development.

Tasmanian Wilderness Areas

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3429

I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmelryDerS required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (l2.49)-South-west Tasmania, including the wild rivers area of the Gordon, Franklin and Olga systems, is arguably Australia's most beautiful area and it is certainly our last great wilderness. The Franklin River, Australia's last wild river, runs from the Cheyne Range across flats, around 5,000 feet mountain peaks, through 3,000 feet gorges and turbulent rapids to the Gordon River and to the sea. I have been to the area four times since last December. Already the upper Gordon has been flooded and so has Lake Pedder. Now a new Tasmanian Hydro-Electric Commission integrated hydro scheme is proposed to flood the Franklin River and the lower Gordon in ignorance of its grandeur in the best Hydro-Electric Commission tradition that no Tasmanian river, regardless of its environmental value, shall flow to the sea without first passing through a power turbine. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has previously recognised the value of this wilderness to the nation and to the world.

crisis which has resulted from the Hydro-Electric Commission's plans to dam the Gordon River below the Franklin River. Despite the apparent agreement between the Federal Government and the Tasmanian Government, the Tasmanian Opposition, using its stooges who are in the majority in the Upper House, has set out clearly to frustrate the wishes of an elected State government to save the Franklin River by imposing an environmentally destructive HEC plan upon Tasmania and Australia. What is the Federal Government's position now? What initiatives has it taken? What initiatives has the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) taken, given the environmental value of the area and given a clear Federal Government involvement resulting from its requirement to authorise the immense Loan Council borrowing programs that will be needed to construct the dams? Tasmania is split four ways. Honourable members opposite who are trying to interject, such as the deposed Minister and the little Aussie battler who does not even know what is going on in his State, should listen to this for a change.
Mr Charles Jones-And the phoney from Denison.

Mr Good luck-Tell that to the men who work down there. The people get cold down there.
Mr Groom-Tell the workers that.
Mr WEST-Mr Deputy Speaker, perhaps you could call these Tasmanian recalcitrants to order so that they might learn something about their own State. They are in complete opposition to their own Prime Minister. In 1978 the Prime Minister contacted the Tasmanian Premier, Mr Lowe, advising that nominations were being called for the World Heritage List. He suggested that south-west Tasmania be considered for listing. After a long time. I admit it was a long time-the Tasmanian Government advised the Prime Minister last year that the request had been acceded to. Now the Tasmanian Government has gone one step further and has proclaimed an extension to the South West National Park along the Franklin River which is to be named the Franklin Wild Rivers National Park. It is expected that this area will also be added to the south-west nomination for the World Heritage List.
Despite the delays, two clear facts emerge. Honourable members should take note of them. The Prime Minister says he wants the south-west of Tasmania to be part of the World Heritage List-correctly so-and the Tasmanian Government agrees with him. But a political crisis has erupted in Tasmania to match the environmental

Mr WEST-And the phoney from Denison. Where is the Minister? Is he here? He has ducked the issue as usual. Why is he not handling the debate. I do not think the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment who is sitting opposite me will have had time to acclimatise himself. Tasmania is split four ways. The conservationists want no more dams. The Hydro-Electric Commission's integrated plan involves three dams, one on the Gordon below the Franklin, one on the upper Franklin and one on the King River. The Government proposes to dam the Gordon above the Olga and the King River at a later stage. The fourth option is the amendment to the Government's proposals by the Upper House which has proposed a variation of the hydro scheme which involves the damming of the Gordon below the Franklin. That is essentially the same as stage one of the hydro scheme.
It is very interesting to examine the huge capital investments involved. These commitments compare with a very low comparative power output. I will give honourable members the figures. The total hydro scheme would cost approximately $81Om in real terms to produce only 340 megawatts of power. It would flood the Gordon River for 37 kilometres above the Franklin and would flood the lower Franklin for 35 kilometres. The

3430 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Tasmanian Wilderness Areas

Government's scheme would cost $611m to produce 180 megawatts of power. The select committee's program, which still involves the damming of the Franklin, would cost approximately $650m and produce only 230 megawatts. The unit cost of energy from the Government's proposal is only 0.22c a unit more than the upper House program. I will give a cost comparison with coalfired power generation. The power stations at Eraring, Bayswater and Mount Piper in New South Wales will cost an all-up total of $2.6 billion and produce 6,600 megawatts of power. Loy Yang A and B power stations in the Latrobe Valley in Victoria will cost $3.2 billion and produce over 4,000 megawatts of power.
There are unanswered questions regarding Tasmania's future power requirements and the capacity of hydro-electric schemes to meet them. Tasmania's average current power output is now 1,033 megawatts. After completion of the Pieman scheme for a cost of over $500m, a further meagre 135 megawatts wi II be added to make a total capacity of 1,168 megawatts. The upper House scheme would add a mere 230 megawatts giving a total capacity of 1,400 megawatts. The Government's scheme would give a total Tasmanian capacity of 1,340 megawatts. The integrated hydro scheme, if completed, would give the State 1,500 megawatts of power in all. The Hydro-Electric Commission forecasts a total Tasmanian requirement of 1,650 megawatts within 20 years. If the Commission's assessments are correct, even if it has its way and Hoods the Franklin, the Gordon, the King and every other dam and creek in Tasmania, there will still be a shortfall on its own estimation by the year 2000 A.D. The Directorate of Energy in Tasmania has produced a report that the Hydro-Electric Commission is greatly underestimating the demand for electricity, particularly future bulk industrial use. If the Directorate of Energy is correct, there could be an even larger shortfall even if the Franklin were dammed. On the other hand, those who favour no more dams and a policy of co-generation, including the use of the 370,000 tonnes per year of wood wastes, energy conservation and perhaps thermal power, argue that the Hydro-Electric Commission's figures are grossly over-stated and involve an exaggerated HEC projection rate of increase of 7 per cent a year.
There are three separate positions. The Directorate of Energy is saying that Tasmania needs more power than the Hydro-Electric Commission estimates, the Commission is taking the middle ground and the conservationists ar; on the base
line taking basically a no-growth position. The conservationists could be right. On the other

hand, the Directorate of Energy could be right. There needs to be an inquiry. The conservationists say that in 1970 the Hydro-Electric Commission predicted a need for almost 1,500 megawatts of power by 1980 and that that was a projection error over the last 10 years of almost 50 per cent. Those are facts and figures. Either the HEC's projections are grossly over-estimated and the proposed expensive low power yield hydro s('hemes are unnecessary, or the HEC and the even more bullish State Directorate of Energy are correct. That would mean that hydro power in Tasmania would have a limited scope in satisfying rising demand and in no way could satisfy Tasmania's requirements. [f this is true, perhaps now is the time to break with hydro power and look at alternatives such as conservation, co-generation, thermal power stations and an undersea cable from Victoria delivering power as part of an interstate energy grid.
There is a very strong case on environmental, economic and employment grounds to develop either a 200 or 400 megawatt coal-fired power station in northern Tasmania using local coal from the Fingal Valley or imported coal from New South Wales. Current economically recoverable reserves in Tasmania are approximately 130 million tonnes. The demand for a 400 megawatt power station is 1.5 million tonnes of coal per year. Such a station could be constructed for $240m.lt could be expected to employ 300 people during the construction period and provide 120 permanent operational jobs compared with only 30 permanent jobs for the HEC's integrated scheme. Although hydro power is cheaper than coal-fired power, over a long period this is greatly offset by the hydro power's greater capital costs and the increased long term employment opportunities with coal-fired power. Last December the State Liberal dominated upper House amended the State legislation put up by the Tasmanian Government by seeking to impose its own scheme to dam the Gordon and Franklin Rivers.
Mr Good luck~I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. The upper House in Tasmania is an independent House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian Robinson)~ There is no point of order.
Sitting suspended from 1.1 to 2.15 p.m.
Mr WEST~Before the suspension of the sitting for luncheon 1 was saying that the upper House in Tasmania is frustrating the wishes of the elected government in Tasmania. 1 said also that the hydro-integrated scheme, which the upper House wishes to implement, must not proceed in Tasmania. We have heard arguments~I have no

Tasmanian Wilderness Areas

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3431

doubt that I will hear them from the MinisterTasmanian Opposition has attempted to flood the

that the Government should noti intervene in TasFranklin on two occasions there should be a Fed-

mania, that this is a State issue: We do not agree eral inquiry to assess once and for all Tasmania's

with that. Whatever scheme is passed in Tasfuture energy needs, the best way of satisfying

mania, that Government wilt be requiring funds them, and whether the people of Australia-

from this Federal Parliament through the Loan besides the people of Tasmania-want to save the

Council, or it will be requiring Federal assistance Gordon-Franklin system for all time. Mr Deputy

to compensate for the saving of the wild rivers Speaker and Tasmanian members of Federal Par-

area. Those are clearly matters that should be deliament, let the Franklin River run wild and free.

termined by Federal inquiry.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-

Another option, which could be the long term Order! The honourable member's time has

answer, is an interstate power grid to link Tasexpired.

mania with three mainland States. This would obviate the necessity for each State electricity commission to construct its own electricity empire based upon providing for maximum peak demands. A proposal from the Institute of Engineers is currently being studied by the Ziedler committee. That proposal suggests that reserve capacity in four States could be reduced by between 20 per cent and 30 per cent of maximum demand and total savings of some 2,500 megawatts could be introduced in four States in the next decade; that is, a power station the size of Eraring in New South Wales, or over seven times the output of the entire Hydro-Electric Commission integrated scheme in Tasmania~the destroyer of the Frank-

Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment) (2.20)-In this matter of public importance the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) has drawn attention to the beauties of south-west Tasmania. There is no argument about the environmental value of south-west Tasmania. Only recently the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), in response to a question from the honourable member for Cunningham, reaffimed the Government's view when he said:
The south-western wilderness area is land of great beauty. It is unique; it is irreplaceable.
He went on to say:

lin River. If we linked up the Latrobe Valley with I hope it can be listed on the World Heritage list.

Bell Bay by undersea cable as part of such a He pointed out that in his view it was a good thing

scheme, this would cost approximately $230m. I that Mr Lowe, the Premier of Tasmania, had

repeat that it would cost $230m to save the made a decision to seek the nomination of this

Franklin and.$81 Om to flood it.

area on the World Heritage list. The area is part

We are dealing now with a subject of immense of a national park.

importance-the energy and economic future of The Commonwealth has taken a number of

Tasmania, the need for rationalisation of our eaststeps in recognition of the value of south-west

ern States' electricity system, and the need to preTasmania. In particular, we have consistently

serve a magnificent area of national and world sigmaintained that the Government is prepared to

nificance. We have a federal Environment assist Tasmania to establish in south-west Tas-

Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act which mania a national park of world significance. We

allows the Federal Minister for Home Affairs and have listed south-west Tasmania in the register of

Environment, who is sitting at the table, to set up the National Estate, and the effect of that regis-

a public inquiry to examine developments of tration is to impose obligations on Common-

national significance or where the Commonwealth Ministers and authorities. The House

wealth has an interest through the issue of export would be aware, of course, that that legislation

licences or Loan Council funds. After all, if any does not impose any legal obligation on State or

new hydro scheme proceeds in\ Tasmania the local authorities. That is a matter for the Govern-

Loan Council will provide the majority of funds. ment of Tasmania to determine. We have

There is a need to save south-west Tasmania, and it has all of these federal connotations. The Opposition knows that the Prime Minister and the Government are on record as wishing to save

suggested-we are pleased to know from the Tasmanian Government that it now agrees with usthat south-west Tasmania should be nominated on the World Heritage List.

south-west Tasmania for the appreciation of The Tasmanian Government is unsure about

many generations of future Australians. The what it wants to do in this area. It has not made up

House of Representatives Standing Committee on its mind as to the values it places upon south-west

the Environment supports a Federal inq uiry; so Tasmania. The honourable member for Cun-

does the Opposition and, from my information, so ningham, in bringing forward this matter of publi<.:

does the Government of Tasmania. Now that the importance for debate today, and in urging this

3432 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Tasmanian Wilderness Areas

Government to set up an inquiry when a whole range of other inquiries are already going on, is trying to camouflage the Tasmanian Government's desire to proceed with a hydro-electric proposal. At the same time, he is seeking support from many whose concerns are far broader than that, who would like to see the whole area brought within a national park and placed on the World Heritage List.
Within the Commonwealth of Australia, land use decisions are largely matters for State governments. This issue is primarily a matter of concern for Tasmania. At the present time Tasmania has not made a final decision as to what it wants to do in terms of land usage in the area of south-west Tasmania. In recognising the great value of that area from an environmental point of view, the Commonwealth has given support to Tasmania in its provision of $350,000 for a resources survey. The object of that resources survey is to provide a basis for future decision making by the Tasmanian Government in the administration and management of the area, including the wilderness values which may require reservation and management as a national park. The Government has assisted also in the commissioning of aerial photography of the area to assist in the definition of key habitats for endangered fauna and flora and by funding some research into the ecology of the lakes in the region.
The final report of the resources survey is expected to be relaxed in the near future. When that survey has been released, all governments, according to their responsibilities, can then make a determination as to the future moves they might wish to make taking into account the information that is brought to our attention in that survey. It will be a matter of great interest to the Commonwealth to learn from the Tasmanian Government its assessment of that report. Further Commonwealth assistance for the management and administration of the park has been requested by the Tasmanian Government. The Commonwealth has undertaken to consider these requests by the Tasmanian Government in respect of specific proposals associated with the protection of the region when the report of the resources survey has been assessed. Concerning the proposed hydro-electric development in south-west Tasmania it should be appreciated, as I have already mentioned, that land management and land use decisions are generally matters for State governments, except where Commonwealth-owned land is involved. The Commonwealth Government,

therefore, believes that the decisions on the development of State~owned land in south-west Tasmania are largely the responsibility of the Tasmanian Government.
It is true that the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation tabled its report in August 1980 on south-west Tasmania and hydro-power development. The Committee, amongst other things, recommended that the Commonwealth seek advice as to whether the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act 1974 applies to proposed hydro-electric developments in south-west Tasmania and, if there were such proposals as defined under the Act, that the Act be invoked. The Government is considering these recommendations and in due course an announcement will be made to the Parliament on the outcome of the Government's considerations. But, as Tasmania indicates to us its views as to what it is proposing to do, those changed views of the Tasmanian Government need to be taken into account.
Honourable gentlemen will be aware of the continuing uncertainty in Tasmania on which a hydro-electric power proposal, if any, is to proceed. Pending resolution of differences between the two Houses of Parliament, it is quite proper, I believe, that the Commonwealth should reserve its decision until it knows what the Tasmanian Government has in mind. On 30 April 1981 the Premier of Tasmania advised that the FranklinLower Gordon-Wild Rivers National Park had been proclaimed. This park encompasses areas of the Franklin and Olga Rivers as well as the lower part of the Gordon River. In addition, the proclamation provides for the extension of the south-west national park to include the catchment area of the Davey River. It would appear that this proclamation has excluded one of the hydroelectric options under consideration~the one favoured by the Tasmanian upper House.
The area affected by the Gordon above Olga proposal has not yet been included by the Tasmanian Government in the area either within the south-west Tasmanian national park or the wild rivers national park. The honourable member for Cunningham did not indicate whether he believes that that area should be included in one of those parks. So he brings before this Parliament a matter of public importance on the pretence that he is concerned about the whole of the south-west Tasmania region and then spends a large part of his time in support of a hydro-electric deVelopment proposal in the Olga above Gordon section of the river.

Tasmania Wilderness Areas

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3433

Mr West-That is not what I said. I said we course, Tasmania, like the Commonwealth, is

need a federal inquiry to determine the energy awaiting the outcome of the report of the com-

future of Tasmania.

mittee looking into energy resources in south-east

Mr WILSON-At the present time it is a matter for the Tasmanian Government to determine what its own policies are with regard to its energy future. That is true of other States. When they have development projects in mind they determine their own priorities. When they have made their decisions, and there is an involvement by the Commonwealth Government as a result of those decisions, it is then proper for the Commonwealth to give concern under its own legislation and to take into account the national interest. So what the honourable member for Cunningham is

Australia. Whilst this report is directly concerned with the possibility of further integrating existing and planned electricity systems between the States, the further development of electricity supply systems within a particular State are also being considered. The committee's report may have a significant bearing on the future power development proposals in Tasmania and the economic, social and environmental impacts of possible alternatives including the linking the Tasmanian power grid with the mainland grid and matters of energy conservation.

endeavouring to do is to move from Tasmania a I conclude my remarks by once again drawing

decision which is a decision for the Tasmanian the attention of the House to the terms in which

Parliament, the Tasmanian Government and the this matter is being debated this afternoon. The

Tasmanian people. When they have made up terms of the matter of public importance are:

their minds what course of action they wish to take in this regard it will be proper for that decision to be assessed in the manner that takes into account the Commonwealth's legislation.

The failure of the Government to instigate a Federal inquiry into the environmental value to Tasmania and Australia of its South-West Wilderness area and the most appropriate way of preserving the area consistent with Tasmanian State

development.
Mr West-They have already decided and are

being frustrated by the upper House.

Mr West-It is under threat, Ian. You are the

Mr WILSON-They are not being frustrated Federal Minister for the environment.

in any way at all.

Mr WILSON-If it is under threat it is under

Mr West-They are being frustrated.

threat because of the decisions of the Tasmanian Government and the Tasmanian political

Mr WILSON-If they are being frustrated processes.

they are being frustrated in accordance with the appropriate political processes applying within Tasmania. In view of the continuing uncertainty as to the intentions and the capacity of the Tas-

Mr West-The people in the upper House won't pass the Bill. They want to dam the Franklin.

manian Government about the future in south-west Tasmania; it has not been appropriate to respond to the recommendations following the inquiry conducted by the House of Representa-

Mr WILSON-Well, it is a matter for the Tasmanians. But the Tasmanian Government wants to dam another part of the area.

tives committee. To date there is no proposal. If Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Minister will

the Tasmanians were to find that their energy address the Chair.

needs were not dependent on hydro-development in the region there would be no circumstance which would give rise to the question of the applicability of the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act. It would be interesting to learn what environmental value Tasmania places on the south~west wilderness area and its views as to the appropriate way of preserving the area. I was interested to hear that it had extended the south-west park and had declared the wild rivers park.

Mr WILSON-They want to dam the Franklin. It is not a matter for debate today as to which would be the preferred areas in which to dam rivers in the south-west of Tasmania. What the Government is concerned to do is to recognise in the way that we have in the past the important environmental value of the whole of the south-west Tasmania region. We have set in motion inquiries such as the inquiry into energy in south-east Australia. We have provided funds for Tasmania

It is up to Tasmania to determine whether it has to carry out resource investigations. We have

in mind proceeding with the hydro-electric prourged the Tasmanian Government to list the

posal in the Gordon above Olga area, and when whole area on the World Heritage list. So the ball

that decision is taken it will be proper for the is very much in the court of the Tasmanian people

Commonwealth to consider its position. Of and the Tasmanian Parliament and, through the

3434 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Merchant Seamen: Service Pensions

Tasmanian Parliament, the Tasmanian Government. So until the Tasmanian Government comes forward with a proposal, it is not appropriate for the Commonwealth to indicate what its views are. When a proposal comes forward that involves any development in south-west Tasmania that is the time for an assessment to be made as to the effect of that development on that wonderful rivers area in south-west Tasmania.
Mr Milton-You are evading your responsibilities.
Mr WILSON-We are not evading responsibilities in any way at all. The responsibilities, if being evaded, are being evaded by Mr Lowe, the Premier of Tasmania, and his parliamentary colleagues. It is time that his Government made a determination as to whether or not it wishes to proceed with any development in south-west Tasmania.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Minister's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.
ALLIED MERCHANT SEAMEN: SERVICE PENSIONS
Suspension of Standing Orders Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (2.35)- move:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member for Shortland moving General Business Notice of Motion No.3 standing in his name forthwith.
This is an urgent matter which needs to be debated and resolved before the House rises for the winter recess, otherwise there will be no opportunity to discuss it until some time into the Budget session, that is, after the Budget has been finalised and presented to the Parliament. The entitlement to service pensions is an issue of great importance. The merchant seamen are concerned.
Motion (by Mr Moore) agreed to:
That the honourable member for Shortland be not further heard.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (2.37)-1 second the motion. These merchant navy men received military, not civilian, decorations from King George VI.
Motion (by Mr Moore) agreed to:
That the honourable member for Henty be not further heard.
Original question put:
That the motion (Mr Morris's) be agreed to.
The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

40

Noes

57

Majority

17

AYES

Armitage, J. L.

Beazley, K. C.

Blewett,N.

Brown,John

Brown, Robert

Child,J.

Cross,M.D.

Cunningham, B. T.

Duffy,M.J.

Everingham, D. N.

Free,R. V.

Fry, K. L.

Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L.

J'

Humphreys, B. C. (Teller)

Hurford,C.J. Innes, V.E.

Jacobi,R.

Jenkins, H. A.

Johnson, Les (Teller)

Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay,Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Baume,M.E. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller)
HOfard,J. W.

Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M.
Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C.
Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B. Lynch, Sir Phillip
MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J.
McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White,P.N.D. Wilson, J. B. C.

PAIRS

Bowen, Lionel Campbell,G. Darling, E. E. Hawke, R. J. L. Scott, J. L.

Macphee, J. M. Street, A. A. Viner,R. 1. McMahon, Sir William Anthony, J. D.

In division-

Mr Good luck-I raise a point of order. Is it permissible for an honourable member to duplicate another member's Notice of Motion and then bring on that Notice of Motion?

Question so resolved in the negative.

Redevelopment ofAntarctic Bases

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3435

PROVISION OF ARMY HOUSING, TOWNSVILLE, QUEENSLAND
Approval of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs--Minister for Housing and Construction) (2.45)-1 move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to theParliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the Committee has duly reported to Parliament: Provision of army housing at Townsville, Qld.
The proposal is to provide 120 married quarters for soldiers of the Third Task Force. The need for this housing results from the Government's decision to expand the Task Force to carry out its new function as an operational deployment force. In reporting favourably on the proposal the Committee has indicated its acceptance of the need for additional housing in Townsville and has recommended the construction of these 120 houses subject to the reservations expressed in its report. The Committee has made a number of comments and specific recommendations in its conclusions and throughout the body of its report has made several other observations. These recommendations and observations not only concern the Townsville project but provide constructive comment for administrators in the provision of defence housing generally throughout the Commonwealth. They relate amongst other things to the provision of some villa type medium density housing; the need for liaison with representatives of Service families about defence scales and standards and the need for putting more emphasis on safety, comfort and variety of design for Service housing.
I can assure the Committee and this House that careful consideration will be given to the views expressed throughout the report both for the Townsville project and housing projects generally. The estimated cost of the proposal examined by the Committee was $5.35m at February 1981 prices. The Committee has recommended construction of the work in the reference and if the House agrees to support this motion, detailed planning can proceed in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
REDEVELOPMENT OF AUSTRALIAN ANTARCTIC BASES
Approval of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs--Minister for Housing and Construction)-by leave-I move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which

the Committee has duly reported to Parliament: Redevelopment of Australian Antarctic bases.
The proposal is for the progressive replacement of buildings and the provision of facilities needed to support current research programs in Australia's Antarctic Territory. The redevelopment will be carried out over a lO-year period and will involve replacement of accommodation which is substandard and whose structure has deteriorated to a state where continued maintenance is no longer economical or practicable. The replacement of buildings will occur at Casey, Mawson and Davis stations. The proposal comprises construction or replacement of facilities including: Living and sleeping quarters; store, workshop and administration buildings; laboratories and scientific support facilities; powerhouses; engineering services including electricity reticulation; water supply and sewage disposal; and general'siteworks.
In reporting favourably on the proposal the Committee has made one recommendation that the timing of the construction of the recreation buildings for Mawson and Davis be put back from the 1984-85 program year to 1986-87. The purpose of this change is to give higher priority to scientific buildings and the Committee's recommendation is acceptable to the Government. It is noted that in the body of its report the Committee has made a number of useful observations. They include reference to such topics as the use of hydroponics in the stations, questions of air travel and wharfage facilities and conditions of service in Antarctica. These matters have been noted and will be further considered in the development of the construction program. The estimated cost of the civil works component of the proposal examined by the Committee was $35m. Additional costs of $23.14m will be incurred for plant and equipment, logistic support and shipping. The Committee has recommended construction of the work in the reference. If the House agrees to support this motion detailed planning can proceed in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (2.49)- I want to register the fact that to the best of my knowledge no notice was given to the Opposition of the intention of the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) to move that motion, nor of the content of' the motion. Under the circumstances we are not disagreeing with the motion because of the type of program which exists this afternoon. However, it would facilitate the proceedings of the House and the strength of parliamenary debate if notice had been given so that we could have had an opportunity to respond and to express a view.

3436 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Statute Law Revision Bill

Mr McVeigh-Mr Deputy Speaker, by way of explanation may I say that many discussions were held with the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford), who I understand is in charge of Opposition business concerning this matter. The honourable member agreed to the matter being dealt with. I personally contacted the Opposition shadow minister, the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren). This procedure was agreed to wholeheartedly and was supported. It is a little disappointing when someone gets up and passes such a ridiculous comment.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-
Order! r feel that the Minister has made his point.
Mr Morris-I did not make any ridiculous comments. I do not take kindly to that kind of throw-away line. The fact is that this matter does not appear on today's daily program.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Shortland has made his point. 1 ask him to resume his seat.
Question resolved in the-affirmative.

and this should contribute to the maintenance of an accurate and up to date body of statute law.
1 turn to the second innovation of this Bill which concerns the intelligibility and interpretation of legislation. I refer to the proposed amendment to the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 which is tucked away in Schedule 1 to this Bill. That amendment intends to insert in the Act a new section 15AA under the heading 'Regard to be had to purpose or object of Act'.
Proposed sub-section (1) provides a direction to the courts to have regard to the purpose or object of legislation in performing their vital task of statutory interpretation. Proposed sub-section (2) preserves the existing limits on the aids to construction which are available to judges. I shall return to this point later to argue that the effect of the new direction to the courts will be much weakened unless the courts are empowered to look at a wider range of materials, such as parliamentary debates, in seeking to elicit the purpose or objects of Acts.

STATUTE LAW REVISION BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 2 June, on motion by Mr Fife:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (2.52)-1 have been given the responsibility for the carriage of the Statute Law Revision Bill on behalf of the Opposition. The Opposition supports the legislation. I am privileged to be followed in this debate by the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy). The honourable member for Holt is one of the most eminent barristers in Australia, particularly on constitutional and statute law. The Statute Law Revision Bill is a welcome measure in this era of proliferation in statute law. As the legislative output of Acts and regulations expands, the ordinary citizen is becoming increasingly concerned with the effects of statutes on his life, his business and his employment. The legislative process assumes compliance with laws once enacted, and for compliance to be a reasonable expectation the minimum requirementsfor legislation are that it should be, firstly, accurate and up to date and, secondly, intelligible and certain of interpretation. 1 say that these are the minimum requirements. Honourable members are aware ofhow often one or other of those requirements is not met. This Bill goes some way towards meeting those requirements. The Attorney-General (Senator Durack) has indicated that statute law revision Bills will be introduced on a regular basis, at least once a year,

The obvious attraction of this new role of construction is that it must increase the probability that the intention of Parliament will be implemented rather than frustrated by the courts when they interpret Acts of Parliament. ] want to stress that the principles of statutory interpretation have direct relevance to the impact of legislation on ordinary people. As the commissioners of the English and Scottish law commissions said in their 1969 report on the interpretation of statutes, we must aim at ensuring that any statute can be understood, as readily as its subject matter allows, by all affected by it. In pursuing this aim I recognise, of course, that to understand the complex legislation of the modern state the ordinary citizen may require expert legal or other professional advice. Indeed, problems will arise from time to time which will require reference to courts. Satisfactory rules for the interpretation of statutes can help to keep such recourse to professional advisers or to the courts within at least acceptable limits.
The intelligibility of statutes from the point of view of ordinary citizens or their advisers cannot be dissociated from the rules of interpretation followed by the courts. The ability to understand a statute depends in the ultimate analysis on intelligent anticipation of the way in which it will be interpreted by the courts. In this context, the rules of statutory interpretation constitute the rules of communication between the legislators, the legislative audience and the citizens affected by it.

Statute Law Revision Bill

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3437

What could appear more obvious, more selfFinally, the English and Scottish Law Com-

evidently sensible to ordinary people than a direcmissions recommended, in their 1969 report to

tion to the courts to implement the legislative purwhich I have referred, a draft clause for inclusion

pose? Ordinary citizens-for instance, the man on in appropriate legislation. In part that clause

the Bondi tram-might well be amazed that any reads:

such direction should be necessary. He might The following shall be included among the principles to be assume, and with fairly good reason, that the priapplied in the interpretation of Acts, name1y-

mary task of the courts in interpreting statutes is and always has been to ascertain what Parliament

(a) that a construction which would promote the general legislative purpose underlying the provision in ques-

intended and to reach the result which best con-

tion is to be preferred to a construction which would

forms with that intention. The record of the

not;

courts in the common law world has been far from It ought to be clear to the Government that it is consistent, and all who followed the nullifying of certainly taking no risks in this proposed new sec-

clause 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act by tion. Indeed, by comparison with some of those to

the Barwick High Court, will know just how misguided that was. Judicial frustration of the legislative interest through adherence to strict canons of construction is regrettably common. It is to be hoped that this amendment to the Acts Interpret-

which I have referred, this is a modestly phrased direction to the courts. It is a most important step, and it is to be hoped that the intent of Parliament in enacting this provision is absolutely crystal clear to the courts. Ultimately, its effectiveness

ation Act will minimise such judicial behaviour in will depend on them. I have not the time nor the future. Lest it be thought that the Governreally the inclination to discuss the various canons ment has shown initiative in taking this step, I of interpretation which in the past have vied with

stress that both the purpose test and this legislative direction to the courts to use it have been around for a very long time. As in so many areas of law reform, Australia brings up the rear.

and often displaced the purpose test in the judicial armoury. I refer here in particular to the infamous literal rule, classically stated by Higgins J. in the Engineers Case in 1920. I do not think anybody in

The purpose of the test, or the mischief rule, as it is called, was first enunciated by the Barons of the Court of Exchequer in 1584. More recently, but still almost 100 years ago, the Canadian and New Zealand Parliaments both gave express directions to the courts of their respective countries to have regard to the object of legislation when interpreting it. That direction appeared in the Canada Revised Acts 1886 and in the New Zealand Interpretation Act 1888, and now appears as section 5 U) of the New Zealand Acts Interpretation Act 1924. That section states:

this chamber would disagree with that. It has been used to such striking effect by the eminent Sir Garfield Barwick over recent years, particularly in the field of tax avoidance.
The New Zealand experience tends to suggest that the enactment of a legislative direction to have regard to purpose or object does not necessarily spell the end of these restrictive approaches to interpretation. I am, nevertheless, more optimistic about the future in the light of the judgment handed down by the High Court last week in the case of Cooper Brookes (Wollongong) Pty Ltd v. the Commissioner of Taxation. It is a wel-

Every Act, and every provision or enactment thereof, shall come turnaround. I understand that argument in

be deemed remedial, whether its immediate purport is to direct the doing of anything Parliament deems to be for the public good, or to prevent or punish the doing of anything it deems contrary to the public good, and shall accordingly receive such fair, large and liberal construction and interpret-

this case was heard over a year ago, but it is a good omen that, simultaneously with the introduction of this legislation and the anti-tax avoidance legislation, we should see a majority of four to one in

ation as will best ensure the attainment of the object of the Act and of such provision or enactment according to its true intent, meaning and spirit.

the High Court having such explicit regard to the purpose of the legislation, and a taxing statute at that. No longer will we subscribe to these facades

It is salutary to note that this provision has had a put up by tax avoidance schemes.

chequered career in influencing statutory inBefore finishing I wish to raise the issue to

terpretation. According to the New Zealand Law which sub-section (2) of section 15AA is directed,

Journal of 4 June 1963, section 5 (j) frequently that of the aids to interpretation available to the

has been neglected or ignored by some courts courts. It is one thing to direct the courts to have

while other courts have held themselves as being regard to the purpose or object of legislation. It is

bound to comply with the section. We must therequite another to provide adequate means of ascer-

fore temper our enthusiasm at the proposed taining that purpose or object. Traditionally, the

amendment to our Acts Interpretation Act with right of courts to consider extensive material out-

the realisation that it is not the magic cure-all. side the particular statute under examination has

3438 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Statute Law Revision Bill

been severely limited, much more so in the English common law world than in the United States of America or in Continental countries. Most controversial of all has been the prohibition of the examination of parliamentary debates. In England, Australia and New Zealand the weight of judicial opinion is heavily against the admission of parliamentary debates for interpretation purposes. This principle was unequivocally reaffirmed in the recent House of Lords decision in Davis v. Johnson in 1978. Lord Scarman said, with the unanimous concurrence of the other law lords:
. . . it has always been a well-established and salutary rule that Hansard can never be referred to by counsel in court and therefore can never be relied on by the Court in construing a statute or for any other purpose.
It is interesting to note that in the same case Lord Denning, sitting in the Court of Appeal, said:
Some may say-and indeed have said-that judges should not pay any attention to what is said in Parliament. They should grope about in the dark for the meaning of an Act without switching on the light. I do not accede to this view.
Mr N. A. Brown-Turn on the lights.
Mr JACOBI-Well, that may be a conservative view. I could understand that, the honourable member being a barrister. Lord Denning continued:
In some cases Parliament is assured in the most explicit terms what the effect of a statute will be.
Does the honourable member disagree with that? Lord Denning continued:
It is on that footing that members assent to the clause being agreed to. It is on that understanding that an amendment is not pressed. In such cases I think the court should be able to look at the proceedings.
. . . And it is obvious that there is nothing to prevent a judge from looking at these debates himself privately and getting some guidance from them. Although it may shock the purists, I may as well confess that I have sometimes done it. I have done it in this very case. It has thrown a flood oflight on the position.
The issues for and against the admissibility of parliamentary debates were fully canvassed in the 1969 report of the English Law Commission, to which I have already made reference. I do not propose to rehearse them again, except to say that the whole question of extrinsic materials must be examined as a matter of urgency. The Interpretation of Legislation Bill 1981, currently before the British Parliament, has tackled this problem squarely, and it is time that we did the same. I note that the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) has foreshadowed the idea of an explanatory memorandum approved by the Parliament. This would, I hope, set out as fully as possible the purpose, object and intent of the legislation and would be specifically included in materials to which a court must have reference. It

is nevertheless only one of the ways in which existing aids to construction can be expanded. Again, it is no use telling the courts to look to the purpose of the legislation unless they are given the tools with which to go beyond mere words in the legislation to ascertain the purpose.
In conclusion I will refer to one other good omen in a most auspicious week. I read with considerable pleasure in the Australian Financial Review of 9 June that the High Court last Friday-this occurred not only in the Cooper Brookes case-rejected an application by Peter Clyne for special leave to appeal against his conviction for failing to lodge a tax return in 1977. Perhaps he ought to go back and put his act together. If this Bill and the renewed vigour of the High Court displayed in last week's judgment can combine to make legislation more effective and to ensure that social miscreants like Clyne are subject to proper regulation the autumn session of the Parliament will have partially rescued itself from disaster. We support the Bill.
Mr DUFFY (Holt) (3.7)-Firstly, for the record I would like to correct the opening remarks of the previous speaker in the debate, the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi). I appreciate the compliment he paid me but that is, of course, part of his somewhat quaint sense of humour. 1 must say that unfortunately the compliment paid is not deserved. However, before moving to the matters before us J would like to pay a compliment to the honourable member for Hawker for his role in this area. Throughout his years in the Parliament he has directed hisattention in a very direct way to the issues which we are discussing today. From a reading of the speeches he has made on these matters I believe he has made a very great contribution.
The Statute Law Revision Bill corrects drafting and printing errors and repeals Acts no longer required. This process of cleaning up legislation is a very worthwhile reform. However, the most significant aspect of the Bill is the amendment to the Acts Interpretation Act. The Bill provides in Schedule I for the insertion in the Acts Interpretation Act of a new section 15AA which is preceded by a heading 'Regard to be had to purpose or object of Act'. Sub-section (1) of proposed new section 15AA states:
In the interpretation of a provision of an Act, a construction that would promote the purpose or object underlying the Act (whether that purpose or object is expressly stated in the Act or not) shall be preferred to a construction that would not promote that purpose or object.
The Attorney-General (Senator Durack) explained the new section in his second reading speech when he said:

Statute Law Revision Bill

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3439

The effect of the provision to be inserted in the Acts In-

terpretation Act will be to confirm. that'in interpreting pro-

visions regard is to be had to the objept pr purpose underlying

the Act in question.

'

Crimes Act which should be interpreted in a literal sense. For many years the High Court adopted a literal interpretation in taxation law.

Does the proposed new section achieve the purpose outlined by the Attorney-General? If a court took a literal interpretation of the proposed new section the provision would not achieve the stated objective. An examination of sub-section (l) of proposed new section l5AA reveals that the effect of it is that where there are two interpretations, one of which promotes the object of the Act and one of which does not promote such an object, the former is to be preferred. But the proposed new section does not state that the construction which would best promote the purpose or object underlying the Act is the construction to be preferred. As a result, unless a courtregards one of the alternative interpretations as not promoting the purpose or object of the Act, the section in fact has no application.
Although the proposed new section as drafted purports to require an interpretation which will carry out the purpose or object of the Act as an alternative to a literal interpretation, it does not achieve this purpose if the court adopts a literal interpretation of the sub-section, coupled with a literal interpretation of the statute it is interpreting. The court is not required by sub-section ( 1) of proposed new section 15AA to prefer the interpretation which better promotes the object of the Act in question. To achieve the object stated by the Attorney-General the proposed new section should require the interpretation to be that which gives effect to the purpose or object underlying the Act. As it presently stands the proposed new section will not achieve this if a court decides to adopt a literal interpretation. It is similar to a dog chasing its tail: The proposed new section attempts to discourage literal interpretation but if
a court adopts a literal interpretation of the sub-
section it is ineffective and does not achieve the purpose stated by the Attorney-General in the second reading speech.

Mr Jacobi-A disaster.
Mr DUFFY-That is correct. That interpretation emasculated the intention of the Parliament. We have subsequently seen an outrageous explosion of tax avoidance. Unfortunately, in the past the High Court has tended to follow the view expressed by Sir Owen Dixon on his being sworn in as Chief Justice in 1952 when he said:
Close adherence to legal reasoning is the only way to maintain the confidence of all parties in Federal conflicts. It may be that the court is thought to be excessively legalistic. I should be sorry to think that it is anything else. There is no other safe guide to judicial decisions in great contlicts than a strict and complete legalism.
This view expressed by Sir Owen Dixon has proved a disaster in the area of taxation law. Fortunately, the High Court now appears to be adopting an approach which will reverse the farcical course of ignoring the intent and object of legislation in the tax area. Of course, this change was clearly demonstrated in the decision of the High Court handed down on 5 June-it was referred to by the honourable member for Hawker-in the case of Cooper, Brookes (Wollongong) Pty Ltd v. the Commissioner of Taxation when the court moved away from the literalist interpretation. Such an interpretation had led to absurd and artificial decisions in taxation laws giving support to contrived taxation avoidance. However, today's victory in the High Court could be tomorrow's defeat. Therefore, while we support the general thrust of the amendments to the Acts Interpretation Act it is a matter of regret that the legislation is still inadequate as it will depend almost entirely on the goodwill of the courts to continue their new-found desire to move away from literal interpretations in the taxation area. It is the responsibility of the Parliament to ensure that such laws passed by the Parliament are enforced and interpreted according to the object and intent of the legislation. It is our view that this amendment fails to achieve this result, particularly in the area of taxation law.

The amendment to the Acts Interpretation Act is therefore disappointing in that it does not go far enough particularly in the interpretation of taxation law. It is difficult to understand why there was not inserted in the Income Tax Assessment Act a clause requiring an interpretation which gives effect to the purpose or object of that Act. In the area of taxation it is crucial to ensure that the object of the legislation is given eiTect. The liberal
interpretation, while essential in taxation law, should not of course apply, for example, to the

Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Employment and Youth Affairs) (3.15)--1 wish to thank honourable members for their contributions to this debate. The situation is
very encouraging, to the extent that there is now a bipartisan approach to the desire for courts to have regard to the purpose of legislation. I wish to say only that I noted with interest the remarks of the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy). One of the first tasks of the courts I suppose will be to interpret the true meaning of what will be

3440 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Lands Acquisition (NT Pastoral Leases) Bill

section 15AA of the Act. The only matter of regret, or otherwise, is that under the present rules the courts will not be able to have the benefit of reading the honourable member's remarks to aid in that interpretation.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr N. A. Brown) read a third time.
LANDS ACQUISITION (NORTHERN TERRITORY PASTORAL LEASES) BILL
1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 4 June, on motion by Mr Newman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (3.17)-The purpose of the Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Bill is to validate the compulsory acquisition in June 1978 by the Commonwealth of the Mudginberri and Munmarlary pastoral leases in the Northern Territory, of 111,000 hectares and 101,000 hectares respectively. Ostensibly that was to include them in Stage II of the Kakadu National Park but in reality it was to allow the Jabiluka uranium mining project to proceed. As the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) pointed out in his second reading speech, these two areas are subject to a current Aboriginal land rights claim under the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act which is now being considered by Justice Toohey. The Opposition is not opposed to the validation of the Federal resumption of the Mudginberri and Munmarlary leases to allow a successful conclusion to the land rights case and then for their inclusion in the Kakadu National Park, but it is totally opposed to the mining of uranium ore from within these leases or in any other areas. The Opposition will move a second reading amendment to that effect. The area in question includes the Mudginberri and Munmarlary pastoral leases and vacant Crown land to the west of the South Alligator River, almost to the East Alligator River or the edge of Arnhem Land. It is a piece of environmentally sensitive wetlands which clearly must go into the Kakadu National Park forthwith without any recourse to uranium mining.
As I have said, the pastoral leases which are the subject of this Bill are the Munmarlary lease, held by the Second Pastoral Co. and the Mudginberri

lease, held by the Mudginberri Station Pty Ltd. Both companies belong to Northern Pastoral Services, which in turn is a subsidiary of the Pioneer Concrete organisation. In turn, that is owned by CSR Ltd. The Commonwealth and the companies could not agree on compensation to be paid to the companies so the properties were compulsorily acquited in June 1978. The properties were valued at $l.4m and the Commonwealth offered $3m to allow for any future profits, in spite of the fact that the leases lost money in the preceding seven years. The companies demanded $10.5m. They lodged challenges with the Northern Territory Supreme Court in November 1980 to the acquisition or the properties. These challenges may take many months or even years to be heard and will hold up the settling of Aboriginal claims to the land. The companies-that is, the former owners of these two leases-appear more interested in collecting as much money from the Commonwealth as possible than in retaining their leases. The Government is clearly worried that if these court challenges take too long, Jabiluka, the big uranium mining proposition requiring Aboriginal approval, will not proceed before it is shut out of the world uranium market.
Mr Newman-Nonsense.
Mr WEST-It is true, as I will prove. r under-
stand that these areas will not be included in Stage II of the Kakadu National Park until the Aboriginal land claims are settled. Then, one assumes, when the land is duly held in trust for the traditional owners by the Kakadu Land Trust, under the legislative arrangements in the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act and the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act, the area will be leased to the Director of the National Parks and Wildlife Services. We can then expect the Jabiluka area, with its 206,000 tonnes of yellowcake-it is the biggest uranium ore body in Australia-to be excluded from the park when the Governor-General proclaims Stage U. Of course the Ranger area will also be excluded, as it already has been from Stage 1. No doubt the Government will make sure that, unlike Koongarra, the boundaries of the Jabiluka area set aside for uranium mining are those designated by the owners of the uranium mining leasePancontincntal Mining Ltd. No doubt the mistakes which led to the shameful retrospective alterations to the Koongarra boundaries will not be repeated this time. The end result will be that
Jabiluka will become, like Koongarra, a uranium mining enclave within the famous Kakadu National Park.
Koongarra is a valley on the edge of the Arnhem Land plateau. Ranger is in the lowlands

Lands Acquisition (NT Pastoral Leases) Bill

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3441

below the escarpment. Iabiluka is on the very edge of the flood plains of the A:lligator Rivers region. I have been there and have observed the absolute stupidity and futility of mining in this environmentally delicate and sensitive area. All three areas are within, or on the edge of, the proposed boundaries of the Kakadu National Park. All three should be part of the park. What nation, what government except this one, would nominate a park for the World Heritage List and then proceed to allow uranium mining, the most environmentally devastating form of mining, to proceed in that park's most beautiful and sensitive areas? The demands of the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) and the Northern Territory Minister, Mr Tuxworth, may well ensure that Kakadu is rejected for the World Heritage List. Again I make it clear to the Aboriginals that, after winning this claim to the Mudginberri and Munmarlary pastoral leases, under the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act, they will have a veto over uranium mining on any section of their land in the park excised for that purpose. Section 40 of the Act gives such a veto except over the Ranger uranium area, on eastern Groote Eylandt and on areas where petroleum leases were issued prior to the land becoming Aboriginal land. I point out that Iabiluka is not in these categories so the Aboriginals will have the right to veto, to stop, the Iabiluka project, the largest, most unacceptable and most environmentally damaging uranium mine of all.
Iabiluka is Australia's largest, and is believed to be the world's richest, uranium deposit. It is owned 65 per cent by Pancontinental Mining Ltd and 35 per cent by the Getty Oil Development Co. Ltd. The mine is expected to yield 206,000 tonnes of uranium yellowcake with an annual production rate expected to start at 3,000 tonnes per annum. It should increase annually to 9,000 tonnes by the fifth year. Altogether, a total of 880 permanent jobs are expected to be created. This vast uranium deposit is situated in what is currently the Mudginberri pastoral lease area and will be squarely in stage two of Kakadu National Park. Therefore, as with Koongarra, for uranium mining to proceed it will require what is fast becoming the Government's favourite form of legislation-its popular Swiss cheese method of hacking out mineral deposit sites from what should be environmentally protected areas well within the park.
The major danger with Iabiluka is its situation in the most flood prone region of the proposed park. It is 200 metres from a major water system which is subject to annual flooding, that is the Magela Creek and East Alligator River systems. I

went up there a couple of years ago in the dry season. As we drove along the road into Jabiluka, the manager of Pancontinental said to me: 'This road over the crossing we are going over, this low lying area next to the mining area, is 8 feet under water during the wet season'. That indicates the climate and rainfall in that area. The mining companies say that they will contain the radioactive water within a closed system. In the dry season this wetlands area is a maze of creeks and billabongs. In the wet season it becomes an area of fast flowing waterways feeding the south and east Alligator Rivers system. The threat of radioactive leakage into the park region will always be present although things have improved since the 1979 environmental impact statement was submitted proposing open cut mining. The mining companies actually proposed a 1,200 feet deep open-cut mine in this area and tried to sell that idea. Now they say that that is impractical and they will mine by underground methods. Even this Federal Government has recognised the criminal folly of an open-cut method and rejected the earlier submission.
The final environmental impact statement suggested using underground mining techniques. We have yet to hear the Government's ideas on it but we can rest assured that it will be accepted in principle. The problem with underground mining, whilst it is an improvement environmentally, is that it increases the health risks to workers due to their increased exposure to radiation from radon gas. In case the Minister for Administrative Services does not know, radon gas is carcinogenic. It is a product of uranium 238, thorium 230 and radium 226. These substances always end up in the tailings from uranium mining and give off radon gas for 100,000 years. The radon gas itself does not last that long but it emanates from the tailings which last for 100,000 years. At Jabiluka 50 per cent or 52 million tonnes of the tailings is proposed to be returned to the mine but the other 50 per cent will be radioactive. It is proposed that they be permanently left in the tailings disposal area and covered with a few metres of earth, in the most flood prone of those areas.
The Iabiluka, Ranger and Koongarra projects will last 27, 15 and 12 years respectively but the potential hazards from the tailings pits will pose a threat to future life on earth for 100,000 years. There is no way, given the rainfall in this area, that these radon producing tailings will remain covered for any length of time. In one, five, 10 or 20,000 years time, what will be the geographical condition of this area? Who or what will be living there? It matters not to this Government or to Pancontinental for they and their ill-considered

3442 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Lands Acquisition (NT Pastoral Leases) Bill

profits will be long forgotten. The Federal Government and particularly the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources seem incapable of understanding that the international nuclear power industry is in rapid decline. That is a reason for not going ahead with uranium mining, other than the environmental hazards. Last week the Minister for Trade and Resources issued a media release which stated:
The fact is that the generation of electricity by nuclear power stations is seen worldwide as a necessary and irreplaceable source of energy. There are now 237 such power stations in 22 countries and a further 229 stations arc under construction. The generation of electricity by nuclear power is clearly here to stay, and equally clearly, Australian uranium has a vital role to play in satisfying that demand. Around 55,000 short tons of Australian uranium, with an overall value of close to four thousand million dollars have now been firmly committed.
He then went on to announce that a full feasibility study into uranium enrichment would be conducted by the Uranium Enrichment Group of Australia. The problem for the Deputy Prime Minister and the uranium miners is that if Ranger--
Mr Newman-What has this to do with the amendment?
Mr WEST-I am saying that there should be no uranium mining and proving why there should be no uranium mining.
Mr Newman-It has nothing to do with the amendment.
Mr WEST-The Minister should look at the amendment. I will move it at the conclusion of my speech. I have tried to show the Minister why the Government should not go ahead with the project. He was not even honest enough to say in his second reading speech that this matter affects the Jabiluka ore body. He has tried to palm the Bill off as one which validates the resumption by the Commonwealth of these two leases. The reason is that the Government wants to go ahead with Jabiluka.
Mr Newman-It has nothing to do with the amendment.
Mr WEST-Of course it does. The problem for the Deputy Prime Minister and the uranium miners--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-If the honourable member wishes to speak to the amendment, he should move it.
Mr WEST-I intend to move my amendment, ifthis is all right with you, Mr Deputy Speaker, at the conclusion of my remarks.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member cannot speak to the amendment until he has moved it.
will Mr WEST-I move the amendment. You
are holding me up, Mr Deputy Speaker. I did not expect to speak for a full half hour. I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'the Bill be withdrawn and re-drafted to provide for the Munmarlary and Mudginberri Pastoral Leases to be included in their entirety in Stage II of Kakadu National Park without the excision of any portion of the leases for the purposes of uranium mining'.
As I was saying, the problem for the Deputy Prime Minister and the uranium miners is that if Ranger, Jabiluka, Koongarra, Nabarlek, Yeelirrie, Beverley, Honeymoon and Ben Lomond proceed we will produce a total of approximately 435,000 Lonnes of yellowcake. The Deputy Prime Minister has already said that we have a market for 55,000 tonnes. Where will we sell the other 380,000 tonnes? The Minister for Mines and Energy in the Northern Territory, Mr Tuxworth, knows that the chances of selling that amount are slim. Hence he made a statement only the other day which is in direct contradiction to the bullish predictions of the Deputy Prime Minister. Mr Tuxworth said:
Our view is that if we haven't sold our uranium by contract by 1985, we won't be selling any more 'til the year 2000, or of that order,
Our assessment is that if these two (Pancontinental and Denison), haven't sold their cake and are off and running by 1985 they aren't going to go.
Now we know why the Government wishes to push ahead with Koongarra and Jabiluka. Now we know why it wants to acquire and validate the acquisition of these two leases. Hence the Koongarra Project Area Bill last week and now this legislation this week are pushed through in the dying days of the session. The uranium industry is in decline. Australia's share of the world market may be about 8,000 tonnes by 1985-86 and, if the Government has its way, we will be producing 14,000 to 15,000 tonnes. Where will we sell the surplus? Increasingly, most nations and energy utilities are accepting that only oil is more expensive than nuclear fission to generate electricity. The construction costs for nuclear power plants have risen twice as fast as the cost of constructing coal-fired power stations of the same capacity. One must be concerned that there are problems with coal-fired electricity including air pollution and the accumulation of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. But these problems are not as devastating as the risks from nuclear energy such as the proliferation of nuclear weapons amongst countries in highly militarised areas such as the Middle

Lands Acquisition (NT Pastoral Leases) Bill

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3443

East, the inability of science to provide permanent waste disposal, the environmental dangers of mining, the increasing list and danger of nuclear accidents at the power stations and, finally, the great problems associated with the dismantling and disposal of obsolete and worn out power stations.
No nuclear power station in the world has ever been successfully dismantled and disposed of. The problem is that for 100 years one cannot get near enough to them to dismantle them. This is a fact. The Minister is shaking his head. If he knows of one that has been successfully dismantled would he please stand up to tell me. I would then retract what I have said.
Mr Newman-I was nodding my head that it would take 100 years to dismantle.
Mr WEST-I said it takes 100 years before the radioactivity declines enough for the demolition workers to get near them. The Minister obviously does not even understand this industry or what he is talking about. He gave us a very trite, small, sneaky second reading speech which did not even indicate the purpose of the Bill, which is to get on with the job of producing ore from Jabiluka while there is still some chance of grabbing a few markets from overseas. A quote from an international article, which appeared in the National Times of 7 June, illustrates what I am saying, that even major power utilities are now turning away from nuclear energy. The article states:
Thus a vicious spiral seems under way. The utilities insist their customers will need more electricity than their customers turn out to want. The outsized projections make nuclear power appear unavoidable. But to build all those costly new plants, the companies exhaust their borrowing power and seek large rate increases. The big increases further slow the growth in the demand for electricity, so the companies once again start hacking away at their construction programs. And the first proposed plants they cut are the most troublesome and most expensive to build-the nuclear-powered ones.
The irony is that, in the end, even the utilities will be better off without them.
Mr Newman-Who wrote that?
Mr WEST-It is an international article which was originally produced in America. I advise the Minister to read the whole text which appeared in last week's National Times.
Mr Newman-Who wrote it?
Mr WEST-The article appeared in the National Times. It was written by an Anthony J. Parisi. It was first produced in America. It appears in the business section. If the Minister wants I will have the whole article included in Hansard. Despite all these indisputable facts, this Government is pressing ahead with uranium mining. To compound its folly it is now suggesting

that its razor gang foolishness of handing over nuclear regulation to the States will actually be implemented. There is no uniform environmental legislation throughout the States to deal even with conventional resource development projects let alone uranium mining with its unique environmental problems. I did not think the Government was serious when I first saw the razor gang report that it was actually contemplating handing over uranium legislation and nuclear power legislation to the States. This will be the only nation in the world producing uranium which does not have federal control over the industry. Does the Minister realise that? This will be done in the name of the new federalism or new feudalism and in the name of smaller government. But actually, the Government is creating more government than we have ever had by duplicating federal Acts in the States.
No doubt the legislative base lines drawn up by this Government will be the very lowest common denominator that Paul Everingham, BjelkePetersen and Charlie Court will accept. We are dealing with worker safety, exposure to radon gas, contamination of wetlands and water tables and long term disposal of tailings, not to mention approval for the actual go-ahead of the project. I repeat that we are now seeing the same sort of competition among the States as they attempt to attract investment in uranium mining as we have witnessed in other resource orientated projects such as coal mining, alumina refining, aluminium smelting and coal to oil feasibility studies.
I conclude by saying that we put this Government and the uranium industry on notice. Under a Labor government there will be a moratorium on the industry until its problems are solved. We will not be bound by these contracts to sell uranium, nor will we approve construction of enrichment plants or nuclear power stations. Australia is rich in resources. Our export earnings are strong and will strengthen year by year without the added income from this dirty and antihuman industry.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Is the amendment seconded?
Mr UREN (Reid) (3.42)-1 second the amendment. I will speak briefly now because on other occasions when I have reserved my right to speak the Government Whip has not given me the chance to say a few words. In seconding the amendment I stress very firmly the seriousness of having to deal with such an important piece of legislation at such a late hour of the session. We

3444 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Lands Acquisition (N. T. Pastoral Leases) Bill

have had ample time in which to have a wide discussion on this legislation. This Government discusses matters related to the uranium mining and nuclear industry questions in stealth, either in the early hours of the morning or in the dying hours of the Parliament. The situation is that--

Mr Newman-What about the debate on the Fox report? Don't be dishonest. That is a dishonest statement.

MI' UREN-~ Whatever anybody says, it is not a dishonest statement. It is a statement of fact because this Government has done so many things by stealth in relation to uranium and associated questions. The honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) has presented to the House the importance of the interrelationship of Jabiluka with this legislation. It is a serious situation. We know that in these days this Government seems to be pushing blindly on with its uranium policy and this matter concerns part of the second committee's reporL--

Motion (by Mr Bourchier) agreed to:

That the question be now put.

Question put:

That the words proposed to be omitted (Mr West's amendment) stand part of the question.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Hon. Charles Jones)

Ayes

61

Noes

39

Majority

22

AYES
Adermann, A, E. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M, Braithwaite, R, A, Brown,N.A, Bungey, M, H, Burr,M.A, Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman. H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D.B. Deun,A.O. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards~ H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Goodluek, ll. J. Oroom, R.J. Hall, Steele

Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C. Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean,R.M. McVeigh, D. T. Millar,P.C. Moore,J,e. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe,F.L. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Jan Rocher, A, C, Ruddock, 1', M, Sainsbury, M, E. Shack,P, D, Shipton, R, F. Sinclair,!. McC. Spender, J. M. Tambling, O. E. J. Thomson, D. S.

AYES
Harris, O. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Howard,J. W.

Tuckey, C. W. White. p, N. D, Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J, L. Beazley, K. C, Blewett, N, Brown, John Brown, Robert Child,J. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Duffy,M,J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Holding, A. C. Howe,B,L. Humphreys B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Inne..'>, U. E. Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry

Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J.
Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, les Mildren, J, B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J, G. Scholes, G. G. 0, Theophanous, A, C. Uten, T. Wallis,L.O. West,S,J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS
Macphee, I. M. Street, A. A.
Viner, R. r.
McMahon, Sir William Anthony, J. D.

Bowen, Lionel Campbell,G. Darling, E, E, Hawke, R, J, L. Scott, J. L.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Amendment negatived.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

In Committee The Bill.
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services) (3.40)- Mr Deputy Chairman, I wish to move the amendment standing in my name.
Mr West-Mr Deputy Chairman, I raise a point of order. Is it normal practice for a Minister to move amendments at the Committee stage without forewarning the Opposition?
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)-All I can tell the honourable member for Cunningham is that the amendments were circulated at 2.15 p.m.
Mr West-The Minister did not draw the amendments to the attention of the Opposition.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN-All that the Chair can do is call on the Minister to move his amendment.

Lands Acquisition (N. T. Pastoral Leases) Bill

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATlVES 3445

Mr NEWMAN-Mr Deputy Chairman, move:
Page 4, after clause 13, insert the following new clause:
Application to Aboriginal Land Commissioner
'13A. For the purposes of any application in respect of the whole or any part of the land described in the Schedule that was made before the commencement of this Act to the Aboriginal Land Commissioner under sub-section 50 (1) of the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976, that land shall be deemed to have at all times been unalienated Crown land to the intent that the Commissioner may complete his consideration of the application, and make and report his findings and make any recommendations, under that sub-section as if the land had been unalienated Crown land when the application was made and had not ceased to be unalienated Crown land. '.
Following further consideration of the Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Bill, which was introduced on 4 June 1981, the Government has decided that there is a need to introduce an amending clause 13, which ensures that the whole or any part of the land described in the Schedule attached to the Bill which is the subject of a claim under section 50 of the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976 shall be deemed at all times to have been unalienated Crown land. This will enable the Aboriginal Land Commissioner to complete his consideration of the current claim over the Alligator Rivers Stage II area. I commend the Bill to the Committee.
Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory) (3.53)- The Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Bill is intended to clarify the position of the Commonwealth in relation to the 1978 land acquisition of Mudginberri and Munmarlary stations in the Northern Territory. Honourable members should note that this land is already subject to an Aboriginal land claim. Further, it is anticipated--
Mr Uren-Mr Deputy Chairman, I raise a point of order. The honourable member is making a speech to the second reading of the Bill. We are now in Committee and we expect the honourable member for the Northern Territory to speak to the amendment moved by the Minister. The Government has been ruthless in gagging this debate. [t is late in the session and we do not intend to be tolerant with the speaker.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member has made his point of order. I have to sustain it. The honourable member for the Northern Territory should try to relate his remarks to the amendment before the Committee.

Further, it is anticipated that the bulk of this land will be included in the Kakadu National Park. With the conclusion of mining at Jabiluka, the rest of the land will become part of the park. From the outset--
Mr Uren-Mr Deputy Chairman, I take a further point of order. The amendment states:
Page 4, after clause 13, insert the following new clause: Application to Aboriginal Land Commissioner.
Clause 13A is then set out. Unless the honourable member for the Northern Territory speaks to that amendment I will continue to take points of order.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMANLeave has been granted for the Bill to be considered as a whole during the Committee stage. I ask the honourable member for Reid to be tolerant of the honourable member whose views' on the amendment may quite legitimately vary from those held by the honourable member. The question before the Committee is that the amendment be agreed to. As I understood the situation, other aspects of the Bill may be discussed.
Mr TAMBLING-From the outset it should be pointed that this legislation is consistent with the terms of the Lands Acquisition Act and is also in accord with the wishes of Aboriginals of the area. It also preserves the rights of the former lessees to compensation for the land. Furthermore, the former lessees will still be able to contest the validity of the original acquisition. It is pleasing to see two important yet very sensible matters relating to Kakadu National Park and uranium mining come before this House within the space of one week. Last week we moved a step closer to getting the KQongarra development under way with the introduction of the Koongarra Project Area Bill. That legislation, in changing the boundaries of the project area, did two things. It gave back to the park--
Mr Uren-l raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Chairman. I have looked through the Bill clause by clause. J have not heard the honourable member for the Northern Territory either directly or indirectly relate his remarks to any clause in the Bill. Mr Deputy Chairman, you said that I have to be tolerant. I have found from time to time that you are a stickler for the rules. All [ am asking you to do is to rule in conformity with the Standing Orders. I do not want much tolerance given to National Country Party members.

Mr TAMBLING-Mr Deputy Chairman, you will recall that the comments I just made were in relation to the Aboriginal land claim and the im-
pact that this legislation will have. That is the most important aspect for this Committee.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN-In view of the difficulty which has arisen in respect of what I think is a legitimate enough complaint, the Chair intends now to put the amendment. What hap-
pens after that is up to the Chair.

3446 REPRESENTATIVES LO June 1981

Lands Acquisition (N. T. Pastoral Leases) Bill

Mr Tambling-l wish to speak to the point of order. I will defer to your ruLing and save my remarks for the third reading stage.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. The honourable member may not have to defer his remarks for as long as that. The question is:
That the amendment be agreed to.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (3.57)-The first thing 1would like to say--
Motion (by Mr Bourchier) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Mr West -I rise to order. You will notice, Mr Deputy Chairman, that we did not call for a division because we support the amendment. The normal convention of this place is that a Minister makes available copies of amendments to the relevant shadow Minister. That was not done in this case. But I am happy to report that in one and a half minutes flat we have been able to digest and ascertain the purpose of the amendment. We do not oppose the amendment because we can see that it will expedite the hearing of the Aboriginal land rights claim. We do not want to hold that up. However, we say that this area should go into the park and should not be used for uranium mining.
Amendment agreed to.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. The question
IS:
That the Bill, as amended, be agreed to.
Mr UREN (Reid) (4.0)-Clause 4, which is concerned wit.h the object of the Act, states:
The object of this Act is to ensure, as soon as it is practicable to do so, that, notwithstanding the uncertainty that has arisen in relation to the effectiveness of the acquisition of the relevant land by the Commonwealth under the Lands Acquitions Act in 1978, that land is vested in the Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth has a right to immediate possession of that land, for the purpose of including that land in a park Of parks established or to he established pursuant to the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1975 and of using or enabling the use of part of that land for the development of uranium mining.
As the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) has pointed out, this legislation has been brought in at this late hour to enable uranium mining to be carried out at labiluka. In fact, the labiluka mine will be one of the biggest mines, if not the biggest mine, in the southern hemisphere. We know that this legislation is related to the second report of the Fox Ranger Uranium Environmental Inquiry which set out certain conditions under which this land acquisition should be made. One of the major recommendations of the second Fox report was that if uranium mining should proceed then it should be sequential development. We know that work at Ranger is in progress. However, the acquisition of this land will allow a

second uranium mine to proceed in the Northern Territory. The Fox inquiry was greatly concerned about many of the delicate environmental considerations because we do not have enough information or detail about the environmental aspects of uranium mining in this national park. If this Government allows mining at labiluka to proceed before we have sufficient information and knowledge we could create great difficulties.
When the honourable member for Cunningham recently visited the mining area he was shown a road which in the wet season is eight feet under water. I have been in this area during the dry season. The second Fox report contains photographs which show the seriousness of flooding that occurs in this area. These floodings have very serious consequences. The Koongarra mine, which was the subject of debate last week and which has been given the go ahead, is in the eastern Alligator Rivers catchment area. Most of the land we are discussing at the moment is in the southern Alligator Rivers catchment area. Therefore, the Kakadu National Park will contain two major catchment areas and as a result there could be serious consequences from mining. For instance, during the dry season J have seen lagoons which have been formed from flood waters. We should remember that the Aboriginals in the area, whose staple diet is fish, catch barramunda in lagoons. Of course, one of the unknown problems associated with mining is the elTect that the uranium tailing dams at Ranger, labiluka and Koongarra will have on such areas of water. We do not know what the consequences will be or what effect this uranium mining will have on the Aboriginal life style. We in the Labor Party are very concerned about it. J said earlier that I do not think there has been sufficient debate about these matters. I have expressed my concern that they have been brought into the chamber at this late hour and we on this side of the chamber are greatly concerned. The last few words of clause 4, which relates to the objects of the Act, refer to land for development of uranium mining. 1 think we should keep in mind that when we are dealing with uranium mining we are dealing with the interrelationship of uranium mining with the nuclear power industry, nuclear weapons and nuclear war. I refer to the nuclear threat recently in the Middle East, when Israel bombed Iraq because of Israel's concern. We on this side of the House are deeply concerned about that act of aggression and the consequences of what could develop out of such an action.
I come back to the Fox reports, the second and the first reports. We know that the third major finding in the first report said: The nuclear power

Lands Acquisition (N. T. Pastoral Leases) Bill

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3447

industry is unintentionally contributing to an increased risk of nuclear war. This is the most serious hazard associated with the industry.' That is our great fear. That is why we have continually said that we believe mining should not proceed until all the unresolved problems have been solved, including those environmental problems in the area of Kakadu National Park-that delicate area where land is being acquired-and also in relationship to the life style of aboriginal people. This is a very delicate area. As anyone who has been there knows, it is a very beautiful area, and the more that man and mining go in there, the more they will rape the area. We have said clearly that we will repudiate any commitment entered into by a non-Labor government in regard to uranium mining. We make it clear that we do not agree with the procedure. The Opposition opposes very strongly this proposal because it does not adhere in any way to the sequential development proposals as set out in the second Fox report.
Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory) (4.6)-It is obvious that the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) merely wants to frustrate this debate on the Lands Acquisitions (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Bill. He has not introduced one new comment in this debate. He repeated the same comments as he has probably been making for the last five years. He should merely have tabled his former statement. As I said last week, we moved a step closer to getting the Koongarra development project under way, with the Koongarra Project Area Bill. That legislation, in changing the boundaries of the project area, did two things. It gave back to the Kakadu National Park an environmentally important area; and, secondly, it isolated the effects of uranium mining from the surrounding environment. This legislation secures the Commonwealth's right to provide land for the park and outside the parle The latter will be from the Jabiluka project area.
The Jabiluka mining project is probably the most important uranium venture in Australia. It is located about 20 kilometres north of the regional community centre of Jabiru in the Northern Territory uranium province. The importance of this region is self-evident, when I point out that the region contains about 79 per cent of Australia's known uranium reserves. The Jabiluka deposits, which were discovered in 1971, are almost double the amount of the Ranger, Nabarlek and Koongarra deposits combined. Jabiluka consists of over 50 per cent of the identified uranium resources in Australia, and is the largest deposit of high grade uranium in the world. Resource estimates by Pancontinental Min;ng Ltd indicate that it will be

able to extract 207,400 tonnes of uranium oxide. Over a 27-year period, it is proposed to mine and process a total of 53.3 million tonnes of uranium bearing ore at an average grade of 0.39 per cent uranium oxide. Following a construction phase of 36 months, it is planned to commence ore production at just over 1 million tonnes per year. This will enable the extraction of 3,000 tonnes of U30 gIt is anticipated that this will increase to a level of 2.1 million tonnes a year in five years, which should produce 9,000 tonnes ofU30 g-
Unlike other deposits, at labiluka Two significant gold mineralisation has also been discovered. The most recent reserves estimate is a total of 1.1 million tonnes of ore averaging 10.7 grammes of gold to the tonne. The estimated capital investment required to reach production at labiluka is $800m. Obviously the work force requirements for such a project will be considerable. For the operation of the 3,000 tonnes a year ore treatment plant, in its first year of operation, 785 persons are to be employed. When the production capacity of the ore treatment plant is increased to 9,000 tonnes a year, personnel employed will increase to about 880. During the construction phase, a camp will be provided capable of housing 1,600 people. There is, however, real concern in the Northern Territory that much of this benefit will be transitory and will be considerably reduced when the project reaches its expected operating capacity of 9,000 tonnes per annum.
To illustrate this point, let me say that the projected benefits from payments to the Northern Territory in lieu of royalties will be $2Am per annum. Certainly the effect of this $2Am will be much more at the multiplier impacts throughout the whole economy. When the figure is put in the perspective of the entire development, it is not so glamorous. It compares unfavourably with the net value of the Territory asset being mined and sold, namely, an estimated $l92m per annum. According to a recent study undertaken by the Department of Economics at the Queensland University, the multiplier impacts of the labiluka project on the Northern Territory economy during the construction phase would be 48c for each dollar spent. As the development enters normal production and construction ceases, this would drop to only 12.Sc for each dollar spent. These beneftts would be comparatively small because the leakages from the Northern Territory economy of most of the income generated by the project would be substantial. Profits, interest payments and money spent on equipment and other inputs would go largely interstate and overseas. Given this anomaly, it is not unreasonable to suggest that alternative means be considered to compensate

3448 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Lands Acquisition (N. T. Pastoral Leases) Bill

for this leakage from the Northern Territory economy. Perhaps it is time to consider an adjustment in the level of royalties payable to the Northern Territory in order to see a more equitable distribution of the economic advantages of such deposits.
I turn now to the second major aspect of this legislation which is related to the Alligator Rivers Stage II Aboriginal land claim. As I mentioned briefly before, this legislation sets aside any legal doubts about the 1978 acquisition of pastoral leases. The Government is keen that the Alligator Rivers Stage II land claims should not be delayed. At the same time this legislation is careful and, indeed, specific, in not interfering in any way with the rights of the former lessees of the land to continue their proceedings against the Commonwealth on the question of acquisition or their entitlement to compensation. Any opposition to this Bill would result in the land claim being brought to a sudden halt by protracted legal action which might take years to resolve. Legal action would place the land claim in abeyance and thus prevent the Aboriginal Land Commissioner from determining its status and recommending consequent action to the Government. Before opposing this Bill, the Opposition should check and find out the wishes of the Aboriginal people in the area. Relations between the Northern Land Council and Pancontinental Mining Ltd have been cordial and fruitful. Both organisations have developed a positive approach to the whole matter, and any attempt to try to portray this legislation as a sellout to a mining company at the expense of local Aborigines would be blatantly misleading.
I would point out that many of the tribal elders who have provided evidence during the land claim process are of advanced years. Their expectations as to the land concerned have been raised, and any delay of some years would mean that there would be some elders who would not see the realisation of the claim that they were instrumental in helping to verify. Honourable members opposite should think again before launching blindly into their hackneyed anti-uranium speeches. By opposing this measure they will be directly opposing the expressed wishes of the Aboriginal people in this area in favour of the acquisition of this land in question. The issue involved here is whether or not one of the major Aboriginal land claims, now nearing its final stage, should be put in the 'too hard' file for almost indefinitely because of the protracted and complex legal dispute between the other parties. The Opposition should understand that in voting against this measure it will be voting quite callously to frustrate the wishes of the local

Aboriginal people. Whenever members of the Australian Labor Party hear the words 'uranium mining' they automatically presume--
Mr West-Mr Deputy Chairman, I raise a point of order. The honourable member for the Northern Territory just has not read the Opposition's amendment.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- What is the honourable member's point of order?
Mr West-The point of order is that he is blatantly misrepresenting our position. I said that we were not opposed to the intent of this legislation.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN-That is not a point of order.
Mr West-Mr Deputy Chairman, I think that--
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. The honourable member cannot state that he thinks something when he raises a point of order. A point of order is a point of order.
Mr West-Well, the second part of my point of order is that for the last eight minutes we have not heard a proper speech from the honourable member for the Northern Territory. We have heard his speech on the second reading. He has not been relevant to the matters before the Chair. We have exercised a great deal of tolerance.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN-That is not a point of order either.
Mr TAMBLING-Mr Deputy Chairman, obviously the Opposition is feeling very sensitive--
Mr Uren-l raise a further point of order.
Mr West-If the honourable member intends to blatantly misrepresent us we will not extend to him that tolerance.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! I wish to hear the point of order.
Mr Uren-The honourable member made a blatant misrepresentation. He said that the Aboriginals of the area are in favour of uranium mining. We well know that the second Fox report at page 9 set out that the Aboriginal people are opposed to uranium mining in that area.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member is giving a personal explanation and is not stating a point of order.
Mr TAMBLING-Getting back to my original topic, I am very suspicious that the ALP is deliberately using Aboriginal issues to further its own short sighted policies on the banner of uranium mining. To suggest that uranium mining

Christmas Island Agreement Bill

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3449

and environmental protection are irreconcilable is naive to say the least. The requirements of environmental protection legislation will be fully met by both a responsible development company and a responsible government, which this Government is. I do not share the paranoid hangups of the honourable member for Reid, the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) and their anti-nuclear mates; neither do a large majority of Territorians, either Aboriginal or non-Aboriginal.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (4.18)-1 do not wish to take up too much time but there are several points that should be--
Motion (by Mr Bourchier) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Bill, as amended, agreed to.
Bill reported with an amendment; report-by leave-adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr Newman)-by leaveread a third time.
CHRISTMAS ISLAND AGREEMENT AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 9 June, on motion by Mr Newman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (4.19)-The Opposition does not oppose the Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill. At the outset I would like to thank the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) for giving me a copy of the Bill in order that I could peruse it over the weekend. The Minister explained to me last Friday that there had been a delay and that normally he would have presented the Bill last week. The reason for the delay was the need to get concurrence with the New Zealand Government. As is explained in the Minister's second reading speech, this Bill is really only an interim measure because a completely new Christmas Island agreement is still to be negotiated with New Zealand. The Bill follows on from the statement that the Minister made on 5 March of this year. Of course, that statement itself followed on from the report of the Sweetland Commission of Inquiry into the Viability of the Christmas Island Phosphate Industry.
The Bill sets out that the British Phosphate Commissioners will be replaced on the island as managing agents for the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission by an Australian Government

owned and controlled company. So after 1 July of this year there will be a Christmas Island Phosphate Company. I note that the appointment of the chairman has been announced. The Chairman will be Mr George Warwick Smith, a former public servant who has had a long and distinguished career in the Australian Public Service. The Christmas Island Phosphate Company will actually mine the phosphate on Christmas Island. The mining will be carried out basically on a nonprofit basis but the company will act in a commercial way. Therefore, we can say that the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission is no longer required to have British Phosphate Commissioners as managing agents. Eventually the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission itself will be wound up. As I said, this is still pending final agreement with New Zealand. Unlike the Government's action with the Australian Wool Testing Authority, where there seems to be a series of organisations being set up, in this instance there is evidence that the Government actually knows what it is doing.
The second thing that the Bill does is enable the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission to transfer its stockpiles at manufacturers' plants in Australia and New Zealand to the respective governments. Finally, the Bill reflects impending changes in purchasing and distribution arrangements for phosphate by removing the requirement on the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission to dispose of Christmas Island phosphate in conjunction with phosphate supplied from other sources by the British Phosphate Commissioners. This responsibility will pass on 1 July from BPC to the Australian Phosphate Commission. So four organisations have been named. It would appear that eventually we will have a Christmas Island Phosphate Company which will mine the phosphate and also look after municipal type functions on the island, and an Australian Phosphate Commission which will assume responsibility for the purchasing and distribution of Australia's phosphate requirements. We are not quite at that step yet. The manufacturers will take over the shipping of the phosphate presently being undertaken by three ships of the Australian National Line under long term charter to the BPC. In a way I guess we can say that the Government is trying to unscramble an egg and is creating an omelet, but I think we all understand the reasons for that.
There are two questions of contention in the minds of consumers of phosphate-the farmers and graziers-which relate to the fate of the stockpiles and their cost, and the future cost of phosphate as a result of the new arrangements and other general factors. The Opposition agrees

3450 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Christmas Island Agreement Bill

with the Government's approach to the stockpile. It is worth $79m. It amounts to 1.2 million tonnes. The proposal represents a sensible approach to securing supply for Australia. The stockpile exists. It will be monitored and measured. As it is used the manufacturers will pay into Consolidated Revenue. If the stockpiles do not drop rapidly the status quo will prevail-in other words, the stockpiles will be there-but it all depends on the rate of mining until the resource is exhausted. If I understand the position correctly, it is most likely that there would be large flow of money into Consolidated Revenue only if the Australian Phosphate Commission decided to run the stockpile of Christmas Island phosphate down once mining ceased.
Prominent farmer leaders have said that the way the stockpile has been financed over the years has conflicted with the requirement that phosphate be supplied as cheaply as possible. The Minister's statement regarding the mechanism used to build up the stockpile gives backing to this view; but the question depends on the semantics of whether the stockpile, being an essential part of the supply of phosphate, was also supplied as cheaply as possible. Perhaps the Minister could comment. I am sure he is aware of some of the comments which have been made in the newspapers, particularly by Mr Michael Davidson, the then New South Wales President of the Livestock and Grain Producers Association. He is now the President of the National Farmers Federation. I think he still remains as President of the LGPA. There has been quite a substantial amount of Press comment, including one that the Government is stealing $80m worth of stockpile phosphate. I think that is stretching a rather long bow. This is a very important issue. Some commentators have said that the Australian and New Zealand governments are stealing the stockpile from the farmers. Perhaps I should read the reasons that the comment was made. The commentator was Mr Brian Hale, as reported in the Australian of 17 March 1981. The article stated:
Phosphate with a current value of $80 million has been stockpiled around Australia by BPCjCIPC and it is quite clear that primary producers have paId for it, although they have not known they were doing so.
Their purchases have enabled the repayment with interests, of all capital subscribed by the three national governments at the formation of BPC and have provided the funds to buy the stockpiles.
I have already explained my version of the reason why the Government is not stealing the stockpile. Essentially, it has built it up. It is also certain that BPC and CIPC with a staff of 2,000, have freed the manufacturers from the burden of purchasing and shipping phosphate on a world-wide basis.

The package service that has prevailed in the past has given to them some compensation for any costs involved in storing stocks greater than normal commercial levels. In other words, there has been a bit of a good fairy relationship, and J think that this has been in the interests of the farmers.
The next point of contention is whether the new arrangements will, by themselves, increase the cost of phosphate to the manufacturers and thus the price of superphosphate to farmers and graziers. Mr Timbs, the Australian Commissioner on the British Phosphate Commission, said as recently as March this year that the price must rise under the new arrangements if the manufacturers take over the distribution of Christmas Island rock. The new agreements, as spelt out by the Minister, are not absolutely clear as to the extent to which manufacturers will take over the distribution, and 'distribution' seems to be the key word. If it is not beyond the present physical distribution, then there will be little scope for costs, as per the profit criteria with the manufacturing companies, to increase. Again, perhaps the Minister could respond and clarify the issue.
The third point of contention is the absolute cost of superphosphate and fertilisers in genera1. Fertiliser costs the farming sector nearly $400m per annum, and amounts to more than 5 per cent of all farm expenditure. The price of superphosphate rose by 24 per cent in 1980 and has risen by up to 45 per cent since 1979. The price has risen from $14 to over $80 a tonne in the past 10 years. I think that the most recent price I saw was $85.30. At the same time, the value of the bounty has declined from 46 per cent to less than 15 per cent of the cost per tonne of superphosphate. Fertiliser usage as a whole is still below what it was for the 1970s. We do not know whether this is due to the withdrawal of the bounty for two years, whether there was over-usage, whether the farmers have used more lime, or what the reason may be. I think there needs to be some study of that. In a recent article in the quarterly review of the Bureau of Agricultural Economics Mr B. Moir went into some of those aspects. As an Industries Assistance Commission hearing is pending, I think some of these questions on the usage of superphosphate should be gone into. It is these sorts of factors that have caused the National Farmers Federation to set up a task force to investigate all possible ways of containing fertiliser costs.
The figures I have quoted clearly show that the value of fertiliser subsidies is eroding faster than the rate of inflation is increasing. The price rose from $16.49 in January 1973 to $85.30 in January 1981, an increase of $68.81. If the rate of inflation is taken into account, then the price should be

Christmas Island Agreement Bill

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3451

about $47 and not $85. The Government is not fair dinkum on this matter of fertiliser subsidies. It has no honest commitment to the concept of subsidisation of fertiliser costs per se. It has no intellectual underpinning for the reason for its subsidies. It has only an opportunistic expedient political commitment to fertiliser subsidies. The Government has been cutting down dramatically on the nitrogenous fertiliser bounty when the price of nitrogenous fertiliser has been going through the roof. Of course, as we all know, after the razor gang report there is now no Prices Justification Tribunal to supervise fertiliser prices. The last Industries Assistance Commission report on superphosphate recommended continuation of the bounty until 30 June 1982. The Government has gone along with the recommendation to pay a bounty but it has not kept up its value. It could easily keep up the value if it wanted to, if it was fair dinkum, by paying a percentage or by indexing the bounty to take inflation into account. There is another inquiry under way, as I have said. A discussion paper is, or will be, publicly available. A hearing will be held in Sydney on 6 July, and it will be very interesting to hear the case that is put to that hearing by the various interested parties. I think the Government should state its position on the question of the subsidisation of fertilisers. It is not for this Minister to make any policy statement on the matter or to say that the Government likes subsidies only for political reasons but has no real commitment. If that is the Government's view, then it should say so.
The Australian Labor Party has been concerned about the Christmas Island work force. The 1979-80 report on Christmas Island by the Department of Home Affairs and Environment indicates on page 23 and other pages exactly what is happening to the work force on the island. There is a lot of information for honourable members in that report, which sets out the situation very well in historical form. The Minister referred to my breadth of knowledge on the Abbott's Booby bird. Again, I am happy to see that on pages 9 and 10 the report takes into account the environment and conservation measures that are taking place on that island. Perhaps the Minister would be kind enough to let me incorporate in Hansard pages 9 and 10, and I seek leave to do so.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
4. Environment and Conservation
Isolated islands have long had an attraction for natural historians because plants and animals on such islands have evolved in comparative isolation, leading to the presence of unique natural phenomena. Christmas Island is no exception.

There is considerable natural and international interest in the biology of the island due to the number of endemic and endangered species present, the existence of some structurally unique vegetation communities and the dominant role played by land-crahs in the island ecosystem.
In 1978 the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service agreed to provide an officer to act as Government Conservator on Christmas Island and on 22 November 1979 Mr J. Hicks became the first permanent ANPWS appointment to the position. The Government Conservator advises and assists the Administrator in conservation and related matters and cooperates with the British Phosphate Commissioner's Conservation Officer, Mr D. Powell.
Attention on environmental matters has focused on conservation of the Abbott', Booby (Sula abbotti). A portion of its nesting habitat coincides with phosphate fields and fears have been expressed that clearing of these areas for mining may lead to the extinction of the bird. In 1979 the British Phosphate Commissioners initiated a two year study to determine accurately the numbers of nesting pairs and their habitat preferences. The study is being carried out by Mr Powell, assisted by a biologist, Mr J. Tranter, who has been seconded to the BPC by the Administration.
The study should be completed by the end of 1980 and should enable the preparation of expert advice to Government on a conservation strategy for Abbott's Booby in relation to clearing plans for phosphate mining. In the interim, an existing two year moratorium on clearing mining fields 22A, 24 and 31 has been extended in time to 31 March 1981 and in extent to cover the uncleared portions of the western fields 25, 26 and 27 which also contain nesting Abbott's Booby.
In June 1980, it was announced that the Government had "agreed, in principle, that the program of reafforestation be expanded making greater use of backfilling in mining areas and that the bird populations on the island be monitored as accurately as possible so that any signs of significant decline can be determined and appropriate action taken". This decision was in line with the recommendation of the 1980 Report of the Commission of Inquiry into the viability of the Christmas Island phosphate industry on this matter.
On 21 February 1980. by proclamation in the Commonwealth Gazette, the Governor-General declared the southwestern segment of Christmas Island a national park. In accordance with the provisions of the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1975, public notice was given of the intention to declare the park in the Commonwealth Gazette of 4 October. 1979 and in major newspapers circulating throughout Australia. [n addition explanatory notices in Malay, Chinese and English were displayed on notice boards on Christmas Island. The notices invited representations on the Park proposal and nine submissions were received. All respondents supported the estahlishment of the Park and most suggested that additional areas could have been included.
The Park covers 1600 hectares or about 12 per cent of the island. Features of special interest include four endemic species and six endemic subspecies of birds, an outstanding example of primary rain-forest, a spectacular population of land crabs including the robber crab IBirgus latro} the largest known land crab, five endemic reptiles and two endemic bats.
The Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service has management responsibility for the park and this is effected on the island by the Government Conservator, a service employee.
Guided nature walks through the Park on weekends commenced soon after Park declaration and proved popular. In total twelve walks with 183 people were undertaken in the period March-June.

3452 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Christmas Island Agreement Bill

B grade rock is beneficiated to a standard acceptable for manufacturing by a wash/screen process which reduces impurities. However, the volume of B grade rock processed annually is limited by the availability of fresh water on the island. Studies have concluded that the beneficiation of C grade rock by high temperature calcination is not commercially viable at this stage.

The remainder of A grade reserves on the Island is estimated to last about eight years at current extraction rates. Research into methods of utilising the lower grade rock is continuing.

All rock extracted is transported by truck and rail to the Isla?d's processing plants and than to large storage bins at Flymg FIsh Cove. Conveyor belts operating along cantilever arms bulk load the rock directly into the holds of waiting ships.

Bagged phosphate dust on loading pallets is lowered by shore crane into barges for transport to shipside.

Primary Industry. There are no cash crops on Christmas Island but a number of residents raise poultry and produce green leaf vegetables, maize, bananas and pawpaws on a subsistence basis.

Fishing for local consumption is also undertaken on a small scale.

Commercial Trading. The largest retail outlet on the Island is the British Phosphate Commissioner's grocery and general store at the Settlement. Its main trade is in food items which provide for a range of diets within the community.

There are grocery sub-stores in the Poon Saan, Drumsite

and Malay. KaJ?pong areas and a number of small private

traders, mamly m the Settlement, who sell duty free goods in-

cluding electrical items.

'

Small restaurants at Poon Saan, the Settlement and Flying Fish Cove serve Chinese and Malay foods.

Mr KERIN-The only reason I became so interested in the Abbott's Booby bird was that I was on the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation which visited Christmas Island. I am pleased to see in this report that the south-west of Christmas Island is now a national park of some 1,600 hectares. On that island there are four endemic species, six endemic subspecies, the largest known land crab, five endemic reptiles and two endemic bats. When we were on the island the Committee looked not only at the Abbott's Booby bird but also at a range of other fauna. We looked at the home of several rare and endangered species, and at the Christmas Island frigatebird, the Christmas Island 0,:,,1, the Christmas Island imperial pigeon, the Chnstmas Island goshawk, the Christmas Island silvereye, the Christmas Island thrush the Christmas Island green-winged pigeon, and the golden bosunbird. So we looked at more than just the Abbott's Booby bird. There is also the brown Booby and the red-footed Booby, the robber crabs and the green turtles. All I can say on this is that the Opposition will be keeping up its interest on the island from an environment and conservation point of view. We are pleased to see what is happening. The final thing I wish to say about the Abbot's Booby bird is that as it lays only one egg

every two years I think it needs all the help it can get.
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services) (4.32)-in reply-l will respond very quickly to some of the points that were raised by the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin). I appreciate the co-operation he has shown in certain circumstances that occurred in the passage of this Bill, the Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill. I thank him for that. I point out that although there have been increases in the price of superphosphate, generally it can be said that the price has been below world parity pricing. I think the honourable member will be aware of some of the pressures on price which have occurred in recent years, not the least of which were pressures by the Christmas Island Workers Union-about which I have no complaint-to increase wages that were paid to members of that union. That has had a fairly substantial effect on the price.
The charter of the new company will be to mine the deposits on Christmas Island as efficiently as possible. I hope that will lead to prices that will remain in the vicinity of world parity or under world parity for the future. That cannot be guaranteed and it will depend on how everybody co-operates in the workings of the new company. Again, the Christmas Island Workers Union will playa very important part in the success or otherwise of an efficient mining operation. The Government expects to take over the stockpiles in Australia on 1 July. There have been discussions with the British Phosphate Commissioners and with the manufacturers as to the arrangements that will exist for those stockpiles. The details have yet to be settled, but the main features are expected to be that the manufacturers will pay interest only on the value of the rock they draw from the stockpiles until they replace them, and the calculation of that value will be on the phosphate content of the rock. There will be no obligation on the manufacturers to buy the rock outright, although if that is something they wish to do, they will be able to do so. This is important as to price because the use of the interest method is expected to keep down the cost of the rock. I think that all honourable members can quickly see that. To illustrate the point, that contrasts with other methods of paying for the value of the rock borrowed and then getting a refund on replacement or of buying the rock outright. As indicated in my statement on 5 March, the question of the stockpile ownership will be looked at again, no later than one year before mining on Christmas Island ceases.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Bill

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3453

Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Newman) read a third time.
BOUNTY (PRINTED FABRICS) BILL 1981
Second Reading Debate resumed from 3 June, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill and the Bounty (Textile Yarns) Bill as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering both measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (4.37)-The Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Bill and the Bounty (Textile Yarns) Bill provide for substantial payments of subsidies for the textile yarns and printed fabrics industries. Because they are so important and because so much of the revenue of this nation is appropriated in this way I believe, in spite of the late hour, I am obliged to give the matter full attention and to make a speech that would be made even if the Parliament were not in its dying hours. As we do not intend to divide the House on the Bills I hope that any honourable member who has to catch a plane will do so in the heavy knowledge that I will not be bringing down the Government on this measure. The total full year cost of the assistance will be about $73.5m. The Opposition supports these Bills because they are consistent with our approach to industry policy which recognises, in contrast we believe to the Government approach, the mutual roles of government and the pri va te sector-the necessary partnership.
The Bills will result in lower prices for textile products in Australia. The level of assistance granted is very high-indeed, these bounty payments are the highest of any industry enjoying such payments-but the effective rate of assistance provided appears to represent some overall reduction from the previous levels of protection afforded by tariffs and import quotas. As such, we

of the Labor Opposition see these provisions as representing an appropriate commitment to change in the textile industry and in Australia's economic structure generally at the same time as recognising the necessity for government action to avoid unnecessarily disruptive increases in import competition. But while these Bills are consistent with the Labor philosophy they frankly and ironically point to the sheer inconsistency of the Liberal-National Country Party Government's attitude to matters such as this. The present Government parties went into the election last year making various promises for increased government programs, extolling the virtues of economic policies-the ones they had been applying-and saying nothing about the irrational cutbacks, the decisions to increase taxes or the rhetoric about small government that we have heard since.
Government party members approached the people in, I believe, a cowardly way because they were not, as I said, consistent. They misrepresented their own position as well as that of my party. Now we'hear nothing but talk of cutbacks in the Government sector, small government and leaving it to the private sector. But here the cowardice of the election year is replaced by the different policies of the post-election year. This is not a government committed to cutting the public sector. What it really is doing is effecting a redistribution within the community. A revolution of the rich is going on around us while the Government is pleased to delay programs of assistance for disabled people, while it is happy to reduce the quality and raise the cost of health care, while it seeks to cut government commitment to welfare housing and education. It nevertheless actively pursues measures to increase assistance to business and industry. There is the inconsistency.
As I said, Labor supports these Bills, and it supports the provision of reasonable assistance to industry. We are consistent in this attitude because we believe those other areas which I mentioned ought also to receive assistance. I repeat that we are consistent in this attitude because we believe in a co-operative approach between business and government. Just as we accept government responsibility for the welfare of' Australians we accept the vital government role in industry. At the same time we are committed to planning and, where necessary, regulation in the private sector to achieve those objectives which are the basis of those plans. That is the quid pro quo. The current Government provides all of the assistance but none of the vitally needed planning or the regulation to achieve objectives.

3454 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Bill

I am reminded again of the famous phrase of the former honourable member for Fremantle who said that members among the conservative parties are very keen on socialising the losses but capitalising the gains. Of course, there are some exceptions. Parliament heard this morning from the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) about the Indicative Planning Council for the Housing Industry. That Council provides an example of what is needed. How inconsistent it is, however, that the Minister in his statement should say:
Planning, ao-operative effort and far-sighted policies are required from all levels of government.
Yet, at the same time, he is one who supports the nonsense of the small government rhetoric. We should not let the fact that this is the jester from among the Government Ministers disguise the inconsistency of remarks like that and the malice of the Government's neglect to welfare housing needs. So it is with this Government's approach to industry. The fact is that the Government's policies have been a complete failure. Production in manufacturing industry today is no higher than it was six years ago, in spite of such a large increase in population which should have been responsible for an enormous increase in production by now. The risk of inflation is just as great as ever and for that reason the Government's only response is to cut back as soon as there is any evidence of recovery. That is what is happening in the Australian economy right now.
The confidence being instilled by expanding Government spending is being stalled in its tracks right now with high interest rates and squeezes on the monetary system. Hesitancy and recession are again evident in the manufacturing sector. The Government's approach is fundamentally wrong. Australia and Australians will not benefit from setting the public and private sectors apart. It must be recognised that each has a joint role to play, one which involves co-operation and coordination. Only on this basis can non-inflationary growth and an increased commitment to the
underprivileged be achieved. r assert that only if
the Labor Party's approach is adopted to government, to industry and to social development can Australia fully utilise its vast natural advantages.
Our attitude to these Bills reflects our consistent approach. We are concerned that the 6,000 to 7,000 workers involved in these industries can maintain their jobs. We want to ensure that Australia retains employment in manufacturing because we know that at the very most the resource based development will generate directly and indirectly only about one-third of the jobs needed to employ our growing work force. At the

same time this Bill is a rare one from this Government in that it results in lower prices and provides a prospect for further decreases in prices as a result of increased efficiency. It achieves this by reducing an indirect tax in the tariff previously struck for these goods.
The Government rarely looks at its own full scope and responsibility for reducing inflation. Indeed, at least one-quarter of Australia's inflation is directly attributable to the actions of the Government. Most of the rest results from a failure to pursue a responsible prices and incomes policy in the context of economic growth. Instead the Government uses a restrictive monetary policy and public sector penny pinching. The result is that there is no attitude of conciliation in our community and there is no increase in the productive capacity of our industries.
Whenever there are signs of growth the inevitable result under this Government's conservative approach is increased inflation. It takes an international energy crisis to achieve any sign of recovery. Most sectors of the economy face continued recession. It was the textile industry'S good fortune that the decisions on its future were made in the months leading up to an election. This Government committed itself to uncharacteristic measures at the time. The Bills that we are debating now are part ofthose measures and part of the seven-year program for the textile and clothing industries. Indeed, although these Bills do not cover footwear, problems in the footwear industry were looked at at the same time.
The Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Bill provides for the payment of bounties to the producers of lightweight woven printed fabrics used in making up garments. Existing quotas and tariffs protecting the industry will be removed from 1 January 1982, the date of commencement of the bounty period. The existing assistance arrangements provide an effective rate of protection of 150 per cent to the industry. The bounty is to be paid at a rate of 70 per cent of value added based on factory cost. This is an apparently narrower basis for bounty calculation that than used by the lAC but it is one we support. It is not known how many employees are affected by the Bill, but the total is probably less than 200 persons. The numbers employed have sharply fallen in recent years and will probably fall further as a result of the Bill.
Imports currently supply about half of the market. Nine companies manufacture printed fabrics, all of whom are located in capital cities. They include the Beech, Colortex, Australian Textile Printing, Vida Turner and Frenchprint companies in Melbourne; UTA in Hobart, Actil in Adelaide

Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Bill

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3455

and the Tennyson and Hescham companies in Sydney. The cost of the scheme is about $2.5m per annum-the provisions of the next Bill will cost much more-which is probably a greater subsidy per worker than the wages paid to those workers. As I have indicated, the Opposition supports this Bill.
The Bounty (Textile Yarns) Bill also implements part of the Government's seven year scheme for the textiles, clothing and footwear industries, which scheme was announced last year. The Bill provides for the payment of bounties for the production of most yarns which are used in the production of fabrics. The rate of bounty payable will range from 33 per cent to 59 per cent on the basis of value added based on factory cost. Again, this is a narrower base than that used by the lAC, and hence it is difficult to assess the likely implications of these measures. The rate of assistance appears to be lower than initially suggested but higher than ultimately recommended levels. It is lower than that which applies at this time.

context of an incomes policy so that we do not go ricocheting back into inflation. I hope this occurs, in particular in the context of this speech so that alternative job opportunities are created at a greater rate. That is badly needed when we see that, even in industries such as the textile, clothing and footwear industries, in spite of the large amount of funds made available in legislation such as this that employment is actually dropping. The full year cost of the scheme iIi the second Bill to which I have referred is estimated at $71m, which implies a subsidy of over $10,000 per worker. In spite of that there will be a drop in employment in these industries. We badly need new job opportunities created in new industries and that will be done only if we have an expansionary economic policy. Once again, I state that the Opposition supports these two Bills.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time. Message from the Administrator recommending appropriation announced.

Bounty on cotton yarns is to be increased from the current 33 per cent to 43 per cent, following industry claims that the rate initially determined would result in disruption. It is impossible t6 tell whether the rate of bounty will be adequate, and we urge the Government to adopt a wait and see attitude; in other words, to monitor very closely the effect of this Bill. The Government should be willing to review rates at a later stage if they are inadequate to maintain employment at reasonable levels.
The level of employment in the yarns industry is not known with precision, but is in the order of 6,000 persons. The Fibremakers and Bradmill companies are major producers. Some of their operations are in regional areas which have no alternative employment opportunities offering. At least 35 companies make yarns in Australia and not all of them are in regional areas. But, all of them give employment in particular to migrant workers and others who would not have other job opportunities.
The impact of the provisions of the Bill, since they relate to the removal of tariffs and quotas for the industry, are likely to be negative, although no estimate of the loss of employment is available. It should be noted that rapid productivity improvement is occurring in the industry and on this basis 22 per cent of the work force will be lost over the next five years. I only hope that we will shortly have a change of attitude on the part of the present conservatives who rule us and that we will have a more expansionary economic policy in the

Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.

BOUNTY (TEXTILE YARNS) BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 3 June, on motion byMrMoore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time. Message from the Administrator recommending appropriation announced.

The Bill.

In Committee

Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.53)-1 move:

Clause 2, page 2, line 28, after "tex" insert-

", but does not include monofil-

(c) at least one cross-sectional dimension of which exceeds 1 millimetre; or

(d) that is 6.6 tex or coarser".

The purpose of this amendment is to make clear that the bounty proposed by this Bill will not be payable on certain single filament yarns such as catgut and those used for fishing line. Yarns of

3456 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Bill

this type were not under reference during the Industries Assistance Commission inquiry into textiles and the Government has no intention of paying bounty on these yarns. This amendment will clarify the Government's intention.
Amendment agreed to. Bill, as amended, agreed to. Bill reported with an amendment; report-by leave-adopted.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr Moore)-by leaveread a third time.
DISCHARGE OF TARIFF PROPOSALS Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-1 ask for leave of the House to move a motion to discharge certain Excise Tariff Proposals which were moved earlier in the session and which constitute part of Order of the Day No. 29. These Proposals were incorporated in the Excise Tariff Amendment Bill 1981 which has now been assented to. Leave granted. Mr MOORE-I move:
That Excise Tariff Proposals Nos. I and 2 (1981) , constituting part of order of the day No. 29, Government Business, be discharged.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE Mr BAUME (Macarthur)-T present the fifth report from the Publications Committee sitting in conference with the Publications Committee of the Senate. Copies of the report have been circulated to honourable members in the chamber. Report-by leave-adopted.
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill returned from the Senate with amendments.
Ordered that the amendments be considered in Committee forthwith.
In Committee Consideration of Senate's amendments. Senate's amendments---
No. I-Page 22, clause 23, lines 13 to 15, leave out the clause.
No.2-Page 36, clause 33, lines 36 to 38, leave out the clause.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications) (4.57)-1 move:
That the amendments be agreed to.

The amendments are to delete clauses 23 and 33. These two clauses were in fact related to an earlier draft of the Bill and were inadvertently included in the draft which was passed by this House and forwarded to the other place.
Mr Les McMahon-You are hopeless.
Mr SINCLAIR-It is not altogether easy in a Bill such as this one to keep track of each of the cross references. In this instance, we omitted some. I apologise to the House for that omission.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (4.58)-The Labor Opposition believes that the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill is a silly and objectionable one. We have made our views on it quite plain during its passage in this place and also in the Senate. Of course, we do not oppose these amendments. They do not make the Bill any more objectionable than it was. They merely signify in what haste the Bill was introduced to this place and how poor has been the administration of it. I repeat that the Opposition does not oppose these amendments.
Amendments agreed to.
Resolution reported; report adopted.
DISCHARGE OF ORDERS OF THE DAY
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (4.59)-1 move:
That the orders of the day, government business, for the resumption of the debate on the motions to take note of the following papers, be discharged:
Commonweal th FunctionsReview-Ministerial statement.
Health care services~Ministerial statement. Health insurance rebate and tax indexation-Ministerial
statement. Great Barrier Reef Marine Park (Capricornia Section)
Regulations-Paper and Ministerial statement. Defence-Joint Australian/United States facilities-
Ministerial statement and papers. North West Cape Naval Communication Station
agreement-Ministerial statement. Trans-Tasman travel arrangement-Ministerial statement. Foreign policy-Ministerial statement. Defence force-Operational capacity-Ministerial
statement. Science and Technology statement 1980-81-Paper and
Ministerial statement. Taxation-Ministerial statement and papers. Public Works Committee 43rd General Report-
Government response -Ministerial statement. Defence matlcrs-~ Ministerial statement. Qantas Airways Limited-Annual Report 1979-80. Trans-Australia Airlines Annual Report 1979-80. Ansett Transport Industries-Financial statement. Trans-Tasman Shipping-Report. Australian Water Resources Council-Minutes of
meeting-Paper.
The items listed are matters which have been raised in the House and which at this stage it is felt can adequately be covered in the next sittings of

Discharge ofOrders

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3457

Parliament. They are not matters which need to be carried on by the Parliament throughout the winter adjournment.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (5.0)-This motion gives me' an opportunity to say a few words about the Notice Paper and the mismanagement of the House in recent months. Organisationally, I think the session has been the worst in recent years. In fact we would have to go back to 197 J to find a year when the mismanagement was such. The reforms of Mr Fred Daly have been dissipated. It is no wonder that there is agitation for changed working hours which is, of course, manifested in the various ballot papers doing the rounds of the Parliament at present. Some of the sins of the mismanagement relate to facilities, the hours we work, the want of a proper committee system to scrutinise legislation properly, the absurdity of so many of the Standing Orders and the fact that the Standing Orders Committee has not met in spite of all the mouthing and rhetoric that there has been about the need to improve the workings of this Parliament and to achieve more respect in the community for it than has applied in recent years.
Furthermore, there are so many cases in which the Opposition has been given inadequate notice of what is coming before this House. The last example occurred just half an hour ago when an amendment was proposed to the Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Bill. It was not until the amendment was moved in this chamber that the Opposition heard about it. The pacing of the legislation has also been appalling. I refer to the lack of opportunity to debate some of the important issues in the nation. For instance, I place on record that neither of the two business Ministers in whose work 1 have a particular interest as shadow Minister for Industry and Commerce-I refer to the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) and the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore)-has made a ministerial statement during this session about the state of industry and business. From November to April two pieces of major legislation were debated. In May, three pieces of major legislation were debated. In the 10 days of June, by any definition, at least 10 pieces of major legislation have been debated. That means that the average has increased from one piece of major legislation every six weeks of the parliamentary session to one piece each day.
On at least three occasions the Government has introduced measures late at night. I refer to a ministerial statement on interest rates made by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) at 10.55 p.m. on 2 December 1980 and the Airlines Agreement Bill

and related Bills introduced at 10.53 p.m. on 28 May 1981 by the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon). Also, the Petroleum Products Pricing Bill, bound up with the abolition of the Prices Justification Tribunal, was debated in the dead of night and was given a mere 52 minutes of the program. I could say a lot more but I will not do so because I believe that I have said enough to show just how inadequate the management of this House has been.
To conclude, it is worth remembering that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in his 13 page election speech with its 47 pages of attachments, made scores of promises. None of those gave a hint of the sort of major legislation to be dealt with in the dying days of this session. Instead of implementing his mandate, we have government by exhaustion. The Prime Minister has put enormous effort into looking after his own friends around the place, his mates-risking internal party problems to deliver on his deals with his backers. That has been characteristic of so much of the legislation that has come before the House, such as the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill which was brought back into this chamber in the last few moments. The Government, instead of implementing its mandate, has brought in legislation to help its friends. There have been delays in the legislative program because of the dissent and turmoil within the Government. That should not have been responsible for inadequate time and inadequate scrutiny being given to these major measures. I draw to the attention of the House, as we are discharging a number of items from the Notice Paper, one that stands in the name of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). It is Notice No. 13. It has stayed on the Notice Paper since 25 November 1980. It reads:
To move-That a Joint Committee of the Parliament be established to inquire into and report on-
(1) the power, jurisdiction and effectiveness of the Australian Parliament;
(2) the privileges of the Australian Parliament;
(3) the proceedings and usage of the Australian Parliament;
(4) the machinery of the Australian Parliament, and
(5) the relationship of the media of mass communications to the Australian Parliament.
It is high time that we debated that matter in the hope of setting up such a committee so that we can improve conditions in this place and improve the scrutiny of legislation. This place might then be managed differently; there might be a reversion to the better management that applied after Mr Fred Daly brought in his reforms from 1972 to 1975.

3458 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Discharge ofOrders

Mr BOURCHIER (Bendigo) (5.7)-I wish to make a few remarks following the remarks made by the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford). First of all, one should point out that the amendments to the Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Bill were circulated at 2.15 p.m. today. It is not the Government's responsibility to make sure that the shadow Minister is in the House when amendments are made available; it is his responsibility to be here when he knows that the legislation is on the Daily Program. I have some figures before me which relate to the criticisms made about the lack of work carried out by this Parliament. I will have them incorporated at the end of my speech. The figures compare the allocation of time for parliamentary debates in the Fifteenth Parliament, from 1937 to 1940, and the current Parliament, the Thirty-First Parliament. In that table three items come to notice. The amount of time allowed for debate on Bills in the Fifteenth Parliament was 66 per cent and the amount of time allowed for debate in the Thirty-First Parliament was 46 per cent. I do not think that is altogether a bad thing. Ten per cent of time was allowed for other major policy debates in the Fifteenth Parliament and 13 per cent of the time was allowed for other major policy debates in the Thirty-First Parliament.
The Opposition ought to be delighted about the fact that these figures show that this Government is prepared to give the Opposition ample time to talk. The amount of time allowed for debate of other parliamentary business in the Fifteenth Parliament was 26 per cent and the amount of time allowed for the debate of other parliamentary business in the Thirty-First Parliament was 41 per cent. 'Other business' includes debates on matters of public importance, the adjournment, Grievance Day, general business and debates on parliamentary committee business and questions. So I think that the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) and the Government are to be congratulated rather than criticised. They are trying to make the Parliament accessible for debate, not only on Bills, but also more particularly on some of the matters that are raised by the Opposition. About 90 per cent of matters of public importance raised in this place are formulated and initiated by the Opposition. I do not criticise that; it is proper. So the Opposition has had ample time to introduce matters of concern to it.
The honourable member for Adelaide mentioned a former honourable member, Fred Daly. I point out that at this time of the year the Labor Party, when in office, was able to get Bills through

Parliament not because of the magnificent organisation of Mr Fred Daly but simply because he had absolutely no respect for Parliament. He introduced the guillotine at every opportunity. His record of guillotining Bills through this Parliament is one that I hope that this Parliament and this Government would certainly not want to emulate. We have not introduced the guillotine; we did not need to. For all the complaining by the honourable member for Adelaide, all legislation went through this House with the co-operation of the Opposition. J remember sitting here when Fred Daly was Leader of the House. We sat here very late at night. When an Opposition, whichever party it is, decides to consider a Bill clause by clause in the Committee stages the government of the day has no choice but to sit until that legislation is passed or introduce the guillotine. If Fred Daly was caught at a late hour putting a Bill through the House clause by clause we would inevitably sit late. Otherwise he would have no hesitation in ruthlessly introducing the guillotine which stifled proper debate in this Parliament.
Over the term of this Parliament and of the previous Parliament we have introduced the opportunity for honourable members to meet in committees so that more opportunity is given to them to investigate Bills, to report to the Parliament and to debate them. I think that the honourable member for Adelaide is being just a little bit happy that the end of the session is here and he is going away throwing one over his shoulder in having a dig at the Government when, in truth, he knows that this has been a well run and well organised Parliament, as it will be in the next session. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard'the table which shows the allocation of parliamentary time for certain debates.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

ALLOCATION OF PARLIAMENTARY TIME (%)

Debate on Bills*

Other major policy
debatest

Other parliamentary
businesst

15th Parliament

66

10

26

(1937-40)

31st Parliament

46

13

41

(1978-80)

* Includes: Appropriation supply.
t Includes: Ministerial statements and Opposition re-
sponses; Government motions; Opposition censure motions. t Includes: M.P.I.; Adjournment; Grievance; General Busi-
ness; Parliamentary Committee business; Questions.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

Special Adjournment

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3459

SPECIAL ADJOURNMENT
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (5.1] )-1 move:
That the House, at its rising, adjourn until Tuesday, 18 August 1981, at 2.15 p.m., unless otherwise called together by Mr Speaker, or, in the event ofMr Speaker being unavailable, by the Chairman of Committees.
This motion gives me an opportunity to mention a number of those who have made a significant contribution to the Parliament, some of whom will not be with us when the House resumes. There are, of course, in the other place, a number of retiring senators from all parties, some of whom have been here for many years. Indeed, Senator O'Byrne, the father of the Parliament, has been here, I understand, from a time ~ot long after the end of World War II. There IS no doubt that within his memory are a great number of changes that have taken place within the Parliament and recollections of personalities that have been associated in it. On behalf of the Government parties I extend our best wishes to him and to all of those from all parties who will at the end of June be finishing their Senate term.
There are a number of people within this House who also will not be with us when we resume for the Budget session. In particular I mention John Fox who has been the Parliamentary Liaison Officer for the last two years. Mr Fox came to the position from the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. He served his term here with due attendance to his responsibilities to both sides of the House. I commend him to his new appointment back within the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and wish him well in his future career. To Jeff Townsend, who is succeeding him, I extend a welcome on behalf of all honourable members and trust that his association with the Parliament will be as happy and as fruitful as the associations of his predecessors.
There are many who serve us silently within the Parliament. There are many whom we recognise yet, perhaps, rarely commend for the contribution that they make. I think it is worthwhile specifically referring to the Hansard reporters, the attendants and the police and all of those who, in their several ways, within the Joint House Department, make the functioning of this place possible. Among those who are predominant in serving the Parliament are the Clerks, who serve us within this chamber and who provide the assistance that enables us to avoid all the human frailties that occur from loss of memory of the Standing Orders or other procedural motions which otherwise might make it more difficult for the procedures of the Parliament to be effectively processed. Finally to you, Mr Speaker-and to all

honourable memberson behalf of the Government parties I wish a safe journeying wherever you might be during the recess. I hope that there is an interesting confrontation between the two sides of the House when we resume in the Budget session.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (5.13)-On behalf of the Opposition I extend my tribute to John Fox, the Parliamentary Liaison Officer. During my period as Manager of Opposition Business in this House I got to know John Fox's work well. I admired the way he carried out his duties. J also express the good wishes of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the present Manager of Opposition Business, Mr Lionel Bowen. I hope that we will see John Fox back in the Parliament from time to time. I hope he will get satisfaction from the new work to which he is turning. We extend a welcome to Jeff Townsend. Both the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and I have had a chance to work with Jeff for a couple of weeks now and we know that we will have a fruitful liaison with him in the future.
A great number of senators are retiring. There have been other occasions when we have paid tribute to them, but honourable members on this side of the House would like to put on record our feelings of warmth towards them and express the hope that they will all have a very long and happy retirement. I also pay tribute to everyone who works in this place. 1 am inclined to say that if it were not for Government members this would be an enormously attractive place to which we could come from time to time. Of course, I have my tongue in my cheek. If only the Government members behaved as well in the chamber as they do outside the chamber the whole atmosphere of the place would be enhanced. Nevertheless, having said that, I wish them a happy recess. I note that many of them are travelling overseas. Of course, there will not be nearly the same number from this side of the Parliament travelling overseas. I hope that those who do will have a fruitful time. Mr Speaker, we extend to you our best wishes for the recess and our thanks for the way in which you have conducted the business of the House.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
PROPOSED SITTING HOURS
Mr SPEAKER-I indicate to the House that a ballot was conducted in respect to proposed sitting hours. The votes have been counted by the returning officer, the Clerk of the House, and the results were as follows: Option one, 51 votes; option two, 12 votes; and option three, 18 votes.

3460 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Adjournment

There were three informal votes. The total costs of the shopping centre. These costs are, of

number of members who voted was 84.

course, fully incorporated into rents, not added on

afterwards.

LEAVE OF ABSENCE Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:

At various times, traders have attempted to get Lend Lease to account for the amounts given for

That leave of absence be given to every member of the House of Representatives from the determination of this sitting of the House to the date of its next sitting.

operating expenses and to tell them why income is not shown in relation to general recoverable expenses, but the traders have never received any

satisfactory explanation. For example, in relation

ADJOURNMENT

to the Woden Plaza, Lend Lease has refused to explain the purpose of its so-called 'sinking fund',

Australian Capital Territory Retail Industry

the total monies accumulated in this fund, whether the sinking fund is used to offset repairs, the reasons for heavy repairs necessary to a new

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:

air conditioning system, and the cost of those re-

That the House do now adjourn.

pairs, the reason for significant amounts of painting-some of which has been done for the

Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (S.17)-The enthusifirst time--and the heading under which these

astic new member for Canberra wishes to speak in charges are included. The list goes on and on. The

this adjournment debate. [t is easy to see that I traders must pay whatever Lend Lease demands

have not very far to go home. In the closing without any satisfactory accounting of these
minutes of this session r would like to make a few charges being provided. Of course, Ultimately, it is

points in relation to private enterprise in Canthe consumer again who pays for this in higher

berra. I want to take this opportunity to outline prices.

how private enterprise operates in one particular

industry in Canberra-the retail industry. It is not A further objectionable provision which Lend

a pretty picture. The Canberra retail industry is Lease enforces is to prevent shopkeepers holding

characterised by one dominant firm, the Lend meetings. Lend Lease has written to traders in the

Lease Corporation Ltd, and its associated past asserting its right to enforce this provision. I

companies. This company has a stranglehold on hope that no honourable member in this Parlia-

the small traders as it controls every major shopment would wish to defend such a blatantly un-

ping centre in Canberra except the Belconnen democratic arrangement whereby small business

Mall. These shopping centres include the Woden people are prevented from holding a meeting to

Plaza, Cooleman Court, Manuka Village, Monaro discuss their business affairs. This year, rents and

Mall, The Boulevard, as well as other offices and contracts are being renegotiated for a further

buildings in the Australian Capital Territory. It three-year period. In most cases, this is an ideal

would also be an interesting exercise to trace the opportunity for the management failures of the

shareholdings of Lend Lease in the major retail past to be reviewed and for reforms to be

chains that are established in Canberra.

implemented before a further three years of mis-

ery is foisted on Canberra's retail traders. Lend

The major problem with Lend Lease in CanLease has been able to get away with these

berra is the severe contractual provisions it is able unsavoury practices in the past because of its

to force on small business people as a result of its dominant position in this industry in Canberra.

monopoly position in the local market. Firstly, in The small trader has nowhere else to go.

relation to rents, because of its dominance and

influence in the industry in Canberra, Lend Lease I think it is about time that people in this

is able to set extremely high levels of rents. In adParliament took an interest in the monopoly situ-

dition, high turnover rates are also applied. This ation that has been established in the Australian

means that Lend Lease has the right to go through Capital Territory. For years I have fought against

the books of each trader every month to collect its this in an attempt to get a business leases review

percentage of the turnover-up to 10 per cent in board established in Canberra. I hope that, before

some cases. The effect of this is that the trader's this Parliament again resumes for the Budget

profit margins are constantly under great pressure session, the Minister for the Capital Territory

and, of course, this is ultimately passed on to the (Mr Hodgman) will get together with the small

co~sumer in higher prices. A further cost inflicted business people and the builders, owners and

on these small businesses by Lend Lease is a permanagement associations to get a fairer deal for

centage for promotional costs and the operating small traders in the Australian Capital Territory.

Adjournment

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3461

Question resolved in the affirmative.
House adjourned at 5.21 p.m. until Tuesday, 18 August 1981, at 2.15 p.m., unless Mr Speaker shall fix an alternative day or hour of meeting 01' in the incapacity or absence from Australia of Mr Speaker, the Chairman of Committees may fix an alternative day or hour, such alternative day or hour of meeting to be notified by telegram or letter addressed to each member of the House.
REPLIES TO REQUESTS FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Joint House Department
On 28 April 1981, Mr Les Johnson asked Mr Speaker:
(1) Further to his answer to my request for information relating to the disposal of waste paper from Parliament House (Hansard, 26 March 1981, page 1046) why were tenders not called for this service.
(2) When was the present private treaty arrangement entered into.
(3) Was consideration given to allowing charities to clear the waste paper by private treaty under the same terms and conditions as presently apply; if so, what were the reasons for not proceeding.
(4) Has an estimate been made of the value of the private treaty; if so, what is that estimate.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) There is no file record of why tenders were not called.
(2) The date the private treaty was entered into is not known, a memorandum on file dated 2 August 1971 states that the arrangement had operated for many years.

(3) There is no record of any charities having applied for or having been considered for this concession.
(4) No.
The private treaty with Mr A. T. Cooper was terminated at his request on 10 April 1981. Arrangements have since been made for the removal of waste paper from Parliament House to be effected by the general contractor to the Department of Administrative Services--a Canberra paper and cardboard recycling company, to make a regular clearance free of charge, for a period of 1 year. At the expiration of that period new arrangements will be considered.
Joint House Department On 3 June 1981, Mr Holding asked Mr Speaker:
(1) When was Mr James Murray Jorgensen appointed to the Position of Permanent Head of the Joint House Department.
(2) Was the appointment announced in either House; if so, when; if not, why not.
(3) Prior to the appointment ofMr Jorgensen to his current position, was he Federal Executive Director of the Master Builders' Federation of Australia; if so, for what period.
(4) Has he been a Director of Palmdale Insurance; if so, for what period.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) 17 July 1980.
(2) No. The Appointment was made during the Parliamentary recess and was notified in the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette No. 31 of31 July 1980.
(3) Yes. From March 1968 to July 1980.
(4) Yes. From May 1976 to January 1980.

3462 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Employment Figures: Civilian Employees Series
(Question No. 457)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
Does the Australian Bureau of Statistics intend to republish employment figures in the Civilian Employees series which was suspended in April 1980; ifso, when.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to my answer to Part (2) of Question 1938 (Hansard, 26 May 1981, page 2623).
Functions of Government Returned to the States
(Question No. 594)
Mr McLean asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister in Federal Affairs, upon notice, on 26 February 1981:
What functions of government have been returned to the States since 11 November 1975.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
See the answer of 21 August 1979 given by Senator Carrick in reply to a similar question by Senator Wriedt (Senate Hansard, pages 49-52). The following additional information is provided:
Minister for Aboriginal AffairsLocal government/municipal type services provided by the
Department of Aboriginal Affairs to Aboriginal communities in the Northern Territory, with the exception of those on pastoral properties, were transferred to the Northern Territory Government from 1 Feburary 1980.
Funding provided under the Department of Aboriginal Affairs culture, recreation and sport program to the YMCA in the Northern Territory was transferred to the Northern Territory Government as from 1 February 1980.

Commonwealth legislation to extend State powers to the territorial sea, including the seabed, has been enacted and is to come into force on a day to be proclaimed.
Minister for EducationApprovals of certain categories ofnew courses at colleges of
advanced education, which previously had been given by the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission, are now the responsibility of State authorities.
The provision of education services and responsibility for education matters in the Northern Territory, with the exception of those of a national nature for which the Commonwealth has a continuing responsibility. were transferred to the Northern Territory Government on 1 July 1979.
Under the Transition from School to Work Program, responsibility for approval of program proposals for 1981 has been substantially devolved to the State level.
Minister for Housing and ConstructionResponsibility for Northern Territory education buildings,
design. construction and maintenance was transferred to the Northern Territory Government on I July 1979.
Minister for National Development and EnergyThe Bureau of Mineral Resources is in the process of trans-
ferring responsibility to the States and the Northern Territory Government for the revision of the 1:250,000 scale geological map series.
Powers and functions under the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act 1967 in respect of the areas adjacent to the Northern Territory and to the Ashmore and Cartier Islands were transferred to the Northern Territory Government on 12 June 1979.
With respect to offshore mining to the outer limit of the 3 mile territorial sea and subterranean mining extending from the land mass, Commonwealth legislation to transfer responsibility has been passed but it has not yet been proclaimed. The legislation is part of the overall offshore constitutional package which awaits completion by the enactment of complementary State legislation.

Attorney-GeneralTaxation, industrial and intellectual property jurisdiction
was conferred on State and Territory Supreme Courts with effect from 15 May 1979, when the relevant provisions of the Jurisdiction of Courts (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1979 came into force. That Act also invested State and Territory Supreme Courts with jurisdiction in certain matters arising under the Financial Agreements (Commonwealth Liability) Act 1932 and the Overseas Telecommunications Act 1946, in which jurisdiction had previously been exercisable only by the High Court.
Responsibility for the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory was transferred to the Northern Territory Government on I October 1979 upon the proclamation of the Northern Territory Supreme Court (Repeal) Act 1979, which enabled the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory to be established under an Act of the Northern Territory.
The Supreme Courts of the States have been invested with federal jurisdiction to deal with chambers applications in matters pending in the Federal Court of Australia.
The functions of the Australian Legal Aid Office have been absorbed by the State Legal Aid Commission in Queensland.

TransportAll Commonwealth funding for the MITERS (Minor Im-
provements to Traffic Engineering and Road Safety) program under the Roads Grants Act 1980 ceased by 30 June 1980.
Transfer of 'State-type' aviation powers to the Northern Territory Government was effected on 1 June 1980.
The Navigation Amendment Act 1980 gives effect to the Commonwealth/State Agreement on Shipping and Navigation responsibilities that formed part of the Constitutional Offshore Settlement. The Act ensures that the Sates have responsibility for trading vessels on intra-State voyages, fishing vessels other than those on overseas voyages, pleasure craft, inland waterways vessels and offshore industry vessels whose operations are confined to the one State. The relevant provisions of the Act have been proclaimed and came into eff~t on 1 February 1981. Previously, the Commonw.ealth regulatedsome aspects of the navigation of these vessels.' <
Minister for Veterans' AffairsNegotiations are nearing completion with the Northern
Territory Department of Health concerning the transfer ofresponsibility for the cost of orthoses to non-repatriation

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3463

beneficiaries resident in the Northern Territory to the Northern Territory Government.
In addition, the Prime Minister announced the early transfer of a number of functions to the States in his MiniSterial Statement on the Review of Commonwealth Functions on 30 April 1981.
Wanniassa High School Buildings, Australian Capital Territory ."
(Question No. (38)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 26 February 1981:
(1) Does his Department propose to extend the arrangements for-the provision of accommodation for Trinity College and Cowman College, in the Wanniassa High School buildings, Australian Capital Territory, beyond 1981; if so, for how long.
(2) Does the arrangement represent a change in attitude by the Government on the utilisation of Govermnent school buildings; if so, what change has been made.
(3) What costs are borne by the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority under this arrangement in terms of (a) heating, (b) lighting, (c) maintenance, (d) staff and (e) equipment.
(4) Was action taken to evaluate the effect of these arrangements on the curricula and educational opportunities offered to Wanniassa High School students; if so, what action and will he make available any studies or reports on this matter.
(5) What provision has been made for accommodation for community groups which would normally utilise school buildings. whilst non-govermnent schools occupy parts of WanniassaHigh School.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Government school buildings are provided primarily for education purposes. Use of portion of the Wanniassa High School building by Trinity College and Cowman College meets that criterion without effect on normal community access. In agreeing to this arrangement, which expires at the end of the 1981 school year, the ACT Schools Authority took into account the effect on curricula and education opportunities offered to Wanniassa High students. The two nongovermnent schools meet all costs associated with their tenancy with the exception of structural maintenance which is a normal landlord cost;
It is unlikely that Trinity Christian School and Cowman College will be accommodated in Wanniassa High School in
1982 as development of that school will require additional ac-
commodation. In the context of the Review of Government Functions, the Government has announced that it will actively promote the more economical and efficient use of government and non-government school.}mildings. In the light of this decision, I have asked the ACT Schools Authority to examine the question of locating Trinity Christian School, Cowman College and O'Connor Christian School in surplus accommodation in government schools that will be available in 1982 for alternative uses.
Agricultural Land: Purchases by Foreign Interests
(Question No. (46)
Mr Wallis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 February 1981:

(1) Has his attention been drawn to the concern expressed by rural organisations at the extent of the purchase of agriculturalland by foreign interests.
(2) Are records kept which indicate the extent of these purchases.
(3) Are there any restrictions in force to control the pur-
chase of agricultural land by foreign interests; if so, how do
these restrictions compare with the restrictions that apply in countries such as New Zealand, Canada and the United States of America.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes, I am aware that some rural organisations have expressed concern about foreign ownership of rural land. The Government respects such views and through its policy on foreign investment looks very closely at proposed acquisitions of rural land by foreign interests. Before any approval is given, other than in c.ases where the purchasers are Australian citizens resident abroad or genuinely intending immigrants, the parties must demonstrate that Australians have been given adequate prior opportunity to purchase the land if they wished to do so and that there will be benefits through development of the property or otherwise to Australia from the investment.
(2) The Foreign Investment Review Board keeps records of the proposals submitted for approval under the Govermnent's foreign investment policy. These records do not, however, indicate whether the purchases take place. Similarly the Board's statistics do not record sales by foreign interests to Australians as these proposals do not require notification. I am forwarding to the honourable member a paper on foreign investment in rural land which outlines in some detail the Government's policy and provides detailed statistics.
(3) Acqnisitions of rural properties by foreign interests generally involve acquisitions of assets of Australian businesses and, as such, these transactions fall within the scope of the Foreign Takeovers Act. Proposals notified in accordance with the Act are examined by the Foreign Investment Review Board to determine whether they would lead to benefits through, for example, development, marketing and employ-- ment opportunities, and to ensure that Australians have been given an opportunity to purchase the land.
The Government considers each proposal carefuliy on the advice of the Board and grants approval only where it is satisfied that the acquisition of land by the foreign person would not be contrary to the national interest.
I am informed that the approaches adopted by the other countries mentioned by the honourable member are:
New Zealand
Under the Land Settlement Promotion and Land Acquisition Act 1952, as amended, foreign interests are restricted from acquiring rural land, offshore islands and any land required for public use. The legislation aims to restrict absentee foreign ownership of certain types of land in New Zealand.
Restriction of foreign ownership applies to any land of two hectares (five acres) or over in area which is zoned for rural purposes, or is so zoned that farming of any kind is a predominant or conditional use in that zone.
However, acquisition of land by a foreign interest may be permitted if:
the acquisition is for experimental and research purposes which would benefit New Zealand; or
intended uses of the land, other than for agriculture, clearly show significant benefits to New Zealand and thus are in the national interest; or

3464 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

an individual alien permanently resident in New Zealand farms the land exclusively for his own use and benefit and has the ability and means to achieve these purposes.
If land is part of the assets of a business, and where the consideration involved exceeds $NZ100,000, a non-resident has to notify full details to the Overseas Investment Commission of any proposal that would lead to the non-resident interests controlling 25 per cent or more of the voting rights of the business. Each proposal is considered by the Commission on its merits.
Canada
The Provinces have primary jurisdiction with respect to real estate and regulations vary according to the host Province. Some of them have fairly restrictive statutes. The regulation of foreign ownership of real estate may also fall within Federal Government responsibilities which are administered by the Foreign Investment Review Agency. Foreign acquisitions of real estate are subject to review to the extent that they represent the acquisition or control of a Canadian business.
The United States
Under the Agricultural Foreign Investment Disclosure Act 1978, all foreign interests who own or acquire United States agricultural land are required to report their holdings with the United States Department of Agriculture. This legislation is not intended to restrict or regulate land purchases or sales by foreign interests. It is aimed primarily at strengthening the efforts to monitor foreign investment in United States agriculturalland.
The American States generally have no restrictions on ownership of land by resident aliens. However, nine States have laws that generally prohibit or restrict in a major way, nonresident aliens from owning real estate. Some of these States also have restrictions on ownership of land by resident aliens. An additional four States have laws that limit the total acreage that aliens can acquire or hold and the limits range from 5 acres to 500,000 acres. Six States, five of which are included in the nine States mentioned above, have laws that permit aliens to hold land for a limited duration or require aliens to dispose of all or part of their holdings within specified time periods if they do not become United States citizens or residents of the State.
The policies of these countries are related to their particular circumstances just as the Australian policy is aimed at meeting Australia's needs. This Government's policy and the way in which it is administered provide a reasonable basis for exercising supervision and, where necessary, restraint of excessive foreign investment in Australian land.
Transportation of Deaf School Children
(Question No. 770)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(1) Were changes made in the method of transportation of deaf children attending the Page and Mawson Primary Schools in the Australian Capital Territory; if so, what were the reasons for the changes.
(2) Were consultations held with the parents and teachers involved in this matter.
(3) Is it a fact that under the new transport arrangements the children are unable to use seat belts and are not adequately supervised because the driver cannot communicate with them; if so, can the safety of the children be guaranteed.
(4) Will he take action to overcome the excessive length of time spent in travel for the children and the necessity for them to change buses.

Mr FifeThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(J) Yes. These deaf children form part of a group of handicapped children in the Australian Capital Territory who on an individual needs basis require school transport but who are not eligible for bus transport provided by the Capital Territory Health Commission. Because of difficulties associated with the then existing transport service which was provided by a local taxi co-operative, the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority invited public tenders for the provision of school transport for this group of handicapped children. A mini bus service was introduced at the beginning of the 1981 school year.
(2) Extended discussion and consultations took place prior to the decision to invite public tenders, between officers of the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority, and parents and teachers on questions of reliability, punctuality and safety. Various alternative modes of transport were examined. A questionnaire was sent to parents during the latter part of 1980 asking if they would be interested in transporting, with payment from the Authority, their own child and possibly other children. The responses clearly showed that generally parents were not in a position to transport their children on a regular basis, preferring the Authority to provide transport.
(3) Officers of the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority have recently completed a survey of the bus service and have reported to me that although the buses being used are not fitted with seat belts, their investigations revealed that satisfactory safety standards were being maintained. It was found that the behaviour of the children was generally good and that they were well controlled by the drivers, who despite some initial problems of communication, were able to exercise reasonable care and supervision.
(4) Yes. Additional vehicles have been provided to overcome the excessive length of time spent in travel and to eliminate the need to change buses. With the exception of students travelling from Tuggeranong Valley to Lyneham, no student should now spelld more than 30 minutes on a journey to or from school.
Social Security Appeals Tribunal
(Question No. 779)
Mr Scott asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(I) Did the Minister's predecessor state in September 1980 that where Social Security Appeals Tribunals were to hear appeals against a medical decision, a doctor would be included on the Tribunal.
(2) Did the Minister state on 5 March 1981, almost 6 months later. that the delays in setting up the Tribunals with the inclusion of a doctor were regretted.
(3) How many invalid pensioners have gone before Tribunals, without a doctor included, since September 1980.
(4) Will these invalid pensioners have another opportunity to go before a Tribunal which includes a doctor; if not, why not.
(5) How many appellants have been refused an invalid pension having gone before a Tribunal which did not include a doctor.
(6) How many invalid pensioners have had their appeals delayed because of the failure to appoint doctors to the Tribunals.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3465

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3), (4) and (5) No appealinvolving a medical assessment has been heard by a Social Security Appeals Tribunal without a suitably qualified medical practitioner being a member of that Tribunal.
(6) While there have been delays in appointing medical practitioners as members of the Social Security Appeals Tribunals, it is not possible to say how many appeals have been affected by those delays.
Social Security: Payment of United Kingdom Pensions in Australia
(Question No. 842)
Mr Jull asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
(I) What arrangements are made for the payment of United Kingdom pensions in Australia.
(2) Does the Australian Government supplement the UK rate to bring it to the level of Australian pensions.
(3) If so, what exchange rate is used in determining the rate of payment.
(4) If the UK pensions are adjusted, is any consideration given to exchange rate fluctuations; if so, is any adjustment made by the Australian Government so that UK pensioners receive an equivalent rate.
(5) Are bank charges made for the exchange and conversion of UK pensions; if so, is the UK pensioner disadvantaged by any charge.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The United Kingdom Department of Health and Social Security pays pensions direct to eligible persons in Australia.
(2) Yes, for people subject to the reciprocal agreement on social security between Australia and the United Kingdom.
(3) It is impracticable to ensure that Australian pensions, when affected by United Kingdom pensions, are assessed on exchange rates applied by banks in day-to-day operations. For the purpose of calculating Australian pensions a notional exchange rate is set, based on the Commonwealth Trading Bank on-demand air mail buying rate, and monitored daily. The notional exchange rate is altered when the exchange rate between the Australian and United Kingdom currencies varies by 5 cents or more Australian per one pound sterling, and appears to be relatively stable. This method of assessment is currently being reviewed.
(4) For people in Australia, United Kingdom pensions are not adjusted, but paid at the rates in force when the recipient left the United Kingdom or at the time of grant, if later. As outlined in (2) and (3) above, the Australian Government supplements the constant rate (in pounds sterling) of the UK pension to bring it up to the current level of Australian pension by using the notional exchange rate.
(5) It is understood that some banks impose a charge for the conversion of English currency drafts. To the extent that anyone may be disadvantaged, this results from the method of payment of the United Kingdom pensions.

Sheltered Workshops
(Question No. 846)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
(I) Is he able to say whether Australia is the only English speaking country which has not legislated for conditions in sheltered workshops.
(2) In this International Year of Disabled Persons, does he propose to recommend amendments to the Conciliation and Arbitration Act to ensure that persons employed in sheltered workshops gain the benefit of national wage case increases.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The Commonwealth Government has no legislation governing conditions in sheltered workshops. I am, however, aware that some States have legislation which could be used to license, and thereby regulate, sheltered workshops. To the best of my knowledge the situation varies among other English-speaking countries.
(2) The Handicapped Persons Assistance Act, the legislation under which the Government subsidies sheltered employment services, does not prescribe working conditions for these facilities. Some control is exercised through requirements that sheltered workshops sign a written agreement when they are approved under the Act. The agreement specifies that approval is conditional upon, inter alia, payment of disabled workers according to the work they perform, and organisations' compliance with relevant State and Local Government requirements on building standards, health and sanitation, safety measures and conditions of employment.
In addition to a wage, the majority of disabled people in sheltered workshops receive Sheltered Employment Allowance. This allowance is paid at similar rates to the invalid pension and includes an income test free Incentive Allowance of $5 per week. Sheltered Employment Allowance is subject to the same terms and conditions as the Invalid Pension and undergoes regular adjustment in accordance with CPI movements. This is provided for by section 28A of the Social Services Act, the legislation under which pensions are paid. It is noteworthy that Australia's provisions in relation to Sheltered Employment Allowance were commented upon favourably at last year's World Rehabilitation Congress in Winnipeg, as a possible model for other countries.
Sheltered workshops also employ a number of able bodied people. The Government, under the provisions of the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act, subsidises the salary of any person employed in a workshop who is directly concerned with supervising or training handicapped people.
The indexing of wages for both handicapped and able bodied employees is a matter for decision by the management of each sheltered workshop.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment: Television Advertising
(Question No. 957)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) What sum was spent on television advertising by his Department and Instrumentalities under his control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of

3466 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(a) December 1979 and
(b) January 1980.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that:
(I) $264,528 for national television advertising was spent on behalf of the 'Life. Be In It' program.
(2) (a) and (b) nil.
Attachments for Television Sets for the Profoundly Deaf
(Question No. 960)
Mr Adermann asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) Does he recall my representations to him concerning Seven Tel attachments for television sets which enable the profoundly deaf to call up printed information such as news, weather, cyclone warnings, police messages and other public information bulletins.
(2) Can he say whether profoundly deaf people can get little or no benefit from public information screenings when they can see the image but hear no sound and whether the benefits of television can be considerably increased for these persons where printouts are available.
(3) Is it a fact that these attachments are expensive and attract a sales tax component.
(4) If so, wiII he consider the exemption of these attachments or television sets from sales tax where the purchaser produces a medical certification of profound deafness.
(5) Would this be an important and humane action in 1981, the International Year of Disabled Persons.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) I would imagine that deaf persons would obtain greater benefit from television where printouts are available.
(3) The recommended retail price of $475 for an attachment includes a sales tax component of 27t per cent of the wholesale price of the attachment.
(4) and (5) In 1979 the Government widened the then existing sales tax exemption item 123 covering certain goods for use by blind persons so as to make exempt from tax goods designed and manufactured expressly for use by handicapped persons generally, unless those goods are of a kind ordinarily used by persons who are not handicapped. More recently, in the 1980-81 Budget, the Government announced its intention to support financially the observance of the International Year of Disabled Persons and its decision to implement a number of initiatives to assist disabled persons. Further initiatives in relation to the disabled wiII be considered during the preparation of the 1981-82 Budget. The matter of exempting these television attachments when for use by deaf persons will be considered in that context.
Department of Trade and Resources: Underspending ofEstimates
(Question No. 1092)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:

(1) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for Division (a) 620-Administrative, (b) 640Administrative and (c) 644-Export Development Grants Board.
(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos 1 and 2); if so, what are the reasons.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given to Question No. 1101 by the Treasurer on behalf of the Minister for Finance.
Underspending of Estimates: Department of Education
(Question No. 1107)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(1) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 270-Administrative, (b) 271Education services-Australian Capital Territory, (c) 273Commonwealth Teaching Service and (d) 284-Tertiary Education Commission.
(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos. I and 2) 1980-81;ifso, what are the reasons.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1101 (Hansard, 13 May 1981, page 2374), provided by the Minister representing the Minister for Finance.
Departmental Air Travel: Department of P~imary Industry
(Question No. 1132)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(1) How many travel warrants have been issued for his Departmental Officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Records maintained in my Department are not in a form which provides the particular detail sought and I am not prepared to authorise use of the resources which would be required to identify that detail. Departmental records show:
Travel warrants issued by the Central Office of my Department for all domestic travel, i.e. not just for travel to and from Canberra, numbered:
1,076 in 1976-77; 961 in 1977-78; 1,110 in 1978-79; 1,197 in 1979-80; 1,001 in 1980-81 (to 31 March 1981).
Expenditure on fares relating to the above travel warrants which was incurred by my Department from I June 1976 to 31 March 1981 amounted to $1,458,472.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3467

The above figures represent the bulk of travel undertaken by officers of my Department and include travel by nondepartmental staff, e.g. consultants and members of committees. A small proportion of travel undertaken was by means other than air travel.
Annual Reports and Other Publications: Minister for Primary Industry
(Question No. 1238)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Department of Primary Industry (I) Annual Report.
(2) $2,215.
(3) (i) Rural Industry Information Papers; (a) $4,620, (b) $170.
(ii) Wheat Industry Research Council Annual Report; (a) $700, (b) not separately recorded.
(iii) Annual Report on the Tobacco Industry Trust Account; (a) $550, (b) not separately recorded.
(iv) Oilseeds Research Committee Annual Report; (a) $350, (b) not separately recorded.
(v)- Annual Report of Fruit Industry Sugar Concession Committee; (a) $650, (b) not separately recorded.
(vi) Annual Report of Dried Fruit Research Committee; (a) $650, (b) not separately recorded.
(vii) Fish Market Situation and Outlook Reports (7 issues); (a) $4,200, (b) not separately recorded.
(viii) Annual Report Fishing Industry Research Committee; (a) $700, (b) not separately recorded.
(ix) Annual Report Fisheries Development Trust Account; (a) $700, (b) not separately recorded.
(x) Timber Supply Review (quarterly); (a) $2,000, (b) $350.
(xi) Australian Forest Resources; (a) $825, (b) $285.
(xii) Poultry Industry Assistance Act Annual Report; (a) $350, (b) not separately recorded.
(xiii) Annual Report of the Dairying Research Committee; (a) $1,500, (b) not separately recorded.
(xiv) Annual Report of the Poultry Research Advisory Committee; (a) $2,230, (b) not separately recorded.
(xv) Australian Fisheries (monthly); (a) $139,000, (b) $48,000 ($131,000 (advertising revenue)), ($56,000 (net cost)).
Australian Bureau of Animal Health (I) Annual Report 1978-79.
(2) $5,505.
(3) (i) Bovine Tuberculosis and Brucellosis Eradication in Australia (Annual progress reports); (a) $1,500, (b) $1,800.
(ii) Manual of Instruction for Meat Inspection and Meat Handling Procedures (monthly amendments); (a) $1,000, (b) $300.

Bureau of Agricultural Economics (1) Annual Report.
(2) $2,300.
(3) (i) Quarterly Review of the Rural Economy; (a) $52,000, (b) $14,000.
(ii) Situation and Outlook Booklets (11 Titles); (a) $19,000, (b) $7,000.
(iii) Occasional Papers; (a) $2,100, (b) $220.
(iv) Trends (4 Issues); (a) $800, (b) $300.
Statutory AuthoritiesAustralian Apple and Pear Corporation
(1) Annual Report.
(2) $2,850.
(3) (i) Apple and Pear Buyers Guide (printed in 1978); (a) $10,000, (b) nil.
(ii) Granny Smiths Project Book (Printed in 1979); (a) $4,973, (b) nil.
Australian Canned Fruits Corporation (1) Annual Report.
(2) $1,896.
(3) nil.
Australian Dairy Corporation (1) Annual Report.
(2) $29,536.
(3) (i) Catalogue of Educational Teaching Aids (annual); (a) $6,125, (b) $7.534.
(ii) Dairy Statistics (monthly); (a) $1,110, (b) $660.
(iii) Compendium of Dairy Statistics (bi-annual); (a) $3,000, (b) $2,000.
Australian Dried Fruits Corporation (I) Annual Report.
(2) $3,320.
(3) nil.
Australian Egg Board (1) Annual Report.
(2) $2,000.
(3) Nil.
Australian Honey Board (1) Annual Report.
(2) $1,870.
(3) Nil.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation (1) (a) Annual Report, (b) Statistical Review.
(2) (a) $31,685, (b) $13,338.
(3) (i) Meat Producer and Exporter; (a) $21,268, (b) $14,914.
(ii) Market Notes; (a) $28,560, (b) $44,000.
(iii) In Brief; (a) $22,932, (b) $28,800.
Australian Tobacco Board (I) Annual Report.
(2) $1,300.
(3) Nil.
Australian Wheat Board (1) Annual Report.
(2) $21,276.
(3) (i) Wheat Australia (6 issues); (a) $3,696, (b) $11,115.
(ii) Wheat Research (1 issue); (a) $518, (b) $1,180.

3468 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Australian Wine Board (I) Annual Report. (2) $2,185.
(3) (i) Winebrief (monthly); (a) $180, (b) $264. (ii) Winestyle (monthly); (a) $60, (b) $66. (iii) Wine Report (quarterly); (a) $90, (b) $110. (iv) International Winebrief (quarterly); (a) $105, (b) $358. Australian Wool Corporation (I) (a) Interim Annual Report, (b) Final Annual Report. (2) (a) $6,880, (b) $4,000. (3) (i) Woolgrower (annual); (a) $43,200. (b) $40,000.
(ii) Weekly Market Summary; (a) $3,600, (b) $26,000. (iii) Monthly Perspective; (a) $3,000, (b) $5,640. (iv) Quarterly Exports; (a) $620, (b) $250. (v) Wool Economic Research (bi-annual); (a) $150, (b) $50. (vi) Statistical Data on Wool (annual); (a) $112, (b) $24. (vii) Compendium; (a) $2,200, (b) $2,000.
Australian Wool Testing Authority (1) No annual report is produced. The Authority is in-
cluded as part of the Australian Wool Corporation Report. (2) Nil. (3) Newsletters, Pamphlets and Diaries; (a) $4,000, (b)
$2,700.
Recruitment through Private Employment Agencies: Department of Prime Minister and
Cabinet
(Question No. 1284)
Mr Bungey asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; ifso, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
My Department and statutory authorities within my portfolio did not recruit any staff through private employment agencies in 1979-80.
Industrial Action: Department of Industrial Relations
(Question No. 1370)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers or employees in his Department have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations and other restrictive work action, in each of the last two years.
(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions. (3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike, if so, on what occasions. (4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) (a) 1979-80 115 officers, 1980-81 208 officers. (b) Nil for both financial years.
(2) (a) 1979-80290 manhours, 1980-81 2,932 man hours.
(3) and (4) Nil for both financial years.
Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 1519)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partly paid by his Department.
(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) fully I (b) partially 70.
(2) $16,953.79.
Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Education
(Question No. 1534)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(I) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges
(a) fully or (b) partially paid by his Department. (2) What was the cost to his Department of this expenditure in 1979-80?
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Thirty-two (partially paid)
(2) $3,739.02.
Tea Services: Department of Education
(Question No. 1612)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many:
(a) full-time and (b) part-time staff are employed on tea making and dis-
tribution in
(i) the Head Office and
(ii) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of:
(a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his De-
partment in 1979-80.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) There are five full time employees employed on tea making and distribution in Head Office, and two full time and four part time employees so engaged in other offices.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3469

(2) The cost of salaries in 1979-80, for employees involved in tea making and distribution, was $79,227.55. The cost of other charges in the same period was $730.56.
Income Equalisation Deposits and Withdrawals
(Question No. 1650)
Mr Bungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What were the total income equalisation (a) deposits and (b) withdrawals in each State for each month in the last 2 years.
(2) What sum has been lent to the Primary Industry Bank of Australia in each of these months.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) Amounts of income equalisation deposits recorded for each month from April 1979 to April 1981 in the Department of Finance Central Ledger are set out in Table 1 below.

(b) The corresponding withdrawals figures from the Department of Finance Central Ledger do not provide a dissection by State. Information on amounts of withdrawals of income equalisation deposits available from the accounts of the Reserve Bank of Australia relating to the months April 1979 to March 1981 are provided in Table 2. The amounts for each month in Table 2 are generally reflected as payments recorded in the Department of Finance Central Ledger for the followingmonth.
(2) The amounts deposited with the Primary Industry Bank of Australia and the balances to the credit of the Income Equalisation Deposit Trust Account at 25 May 1981 in respect of these deposits, together with the dates on which the deposits were made, are as follows:

Date
7 February 1979 21 September 1979 31 October 1980

Credit Amount balance at
deposited 25 May 1981

$ 30,000,000 45,000,000 26,000,000

$ 24,000,000
40,500,000 26,000,000

Table 1 ($)

SA&

NSW

Vic.

Qld

NT*

WA

Tas.

ACT

Total

1979 April
May June
July August
September October
November December
1980 January
February March
April May
June July August September
October November December
1981 January
February March April

1,118,300 466,000 435,700 389,600 128,500

992,500 332,700 594,400 421,200 64,500

4,119,000 1,641,700 3,732,300 1,128,100 1,082,700

1,603,800 273,400 948,904 561,700 159,800

9,556,450 3,298,200 11 ,843,596 3,991,300 2,515,700

7,522,050 2,082,500 7,527,500 1,729,200 649,900

91,300 20,000

5,700

Nil

Nil

170,000

3,000

2,000

Nil 15,000

18,200

Nil 24,000 161,000 30,000

114,600 25,300 23,600 39,000

Nil

334,400 283,000 45,000 145,400 50,000

432,000 271,000 124,900 490,600 105,000

740,000 366,000 183,500 143,000 70,000

824,500 263,000 413,000 603,200 77,500

3,670,800 2,260,100 1,757,300 1,492,000 948,600

1,071,600 872,800 431,300 768,500 443,800

6,407,200 4,492,800 5,745,240 3,890,600 1,608,200

9,568,020 5,646,500 10,770,660 7,458,200 1,220,600

4,000

Nil 62,000

Nil

Nil

73,000 10,000 26,000 40,000

Nil

Nil

5,000 20,000 12,000 10,000

47,000
40,000 311,000 101,800

11,200 109,000 146,100
382,900

311,000
41,200 44,000 179,000

120,000
320,000 110,000 78,400

Nil 25,000
8,000 149,600

* Figures for South Australia not available separately.

Table 2 ($)

114,000 15,000 197,000 169,700 489,700 333,500
Nil Nil Nil
Nil 15,000 20,000 100,000 46,000 90,500 75,000 710,300 295,200
Nil Nil Nil
Nil Nil 15,000 Nil

9,000 2,661,100
47,000 2,467,300
427,700 12,328,500 29,400 3,746,704
409,00032,103,946 307,90020,152,550
Nil 117,000 2,000 192,000
Nil 233,200

Nil 202,500 Nil 872,800 Nil 1,443,500 Nil 1,602,500
35,600 2,262,800 325,500 10,544,800
42,500 3,705,500 685,300 23,539,640 304,300 35,263,480
16,000 82,000 Nil 149,000
8,000 55,000

Nil 12,000 15,000 22,000

489,200
547,200 649,100 913,700

SA&

NSW

Vic.

Qld

NT*

WA

Tas.

ACT Total

1979 April May

51,500 80,000 40,000 160,300 118,500 162,000

22,200 142,000 31,800 94,000

100

5,000 340,800

Nil

8,000 574,600

3470 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

SA&

NSW

Vic.

Qld

NT*

WA

Tas.

ACT Total

June July August September
October November December 1980 January February
March April May
June '.
July
August September October
November
December 1981
January
February March

220,600 875,600 988,700
1,052,900 760,300 186,400 149,000

72,200
332,800 300,800 317,800
173,200 38,300
38,000

247,900 726,700 617,600
1,122,400 413,700 180,600 51,000

68,800 139,700 106,400 85,200 20,000 36,000 12,400

57,700 743,300 262,700 251,200 288,300 65,600 21,000

114,800

Nil 216,500 4,600 41,500

182,800 38,600 205,800 61,800 42,000

136,000 57,400 438,600 133,900 140,400

599,900 87,500 266,200 31,700 167,400

333,600 78,300 360,000 107,400 68,500

184,200 217,800 557,000 118,400 95,400

2,522,960 884,500 2,000,400 384,400 699,200

2,265,900 321,000 1,360,000 41,700 394,100

4,380,400 1,019,900 4,458,700 1,049,600 1,344,000

1,734,500 243,200 939,700 336,400 270,000

1,343,200 146,600 1,050,100 148,800 181,300

748,700 152,100 509,000 56,000 205,200

545,300 534,800 1,044,200

30,600 90,600 204,000

623,200 610,300 804,900

280,900 135,800 254,600

61,100 54,600 345,700

Nil 30,000 82,800 37,000 15,500 29,000
8,000
8,000 47,200 11,200 111,400 5,000 35,600 224,900 45,000 350,600 66,200 22,700 8,000
7,500 21,600 25,500

Nil 667,200 44,000 2,892,100
5,000 2,364,000 31,000 t2,897,500 18,000 1,689,000 4,000 539,900
Nil 279,400
Nil 385,400 Nil 578,200 500 918,000 Nil 1,264,100 Nil 952,800 30,500 1,238,900 144,700 6,861,060 161,000 4,588,700 157,400 12,760,600 15,500 3,605,500 51,000 2,943,700 128,000 1,807,000
25,000 1,573,600 Nil 1,447,700
48,800 2,727,700

* Figures for South Australia not available separately.
t Revised.

Taxation: Concessional Allowances
(Question No. 1651)
Mr Bungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
What action has been taken on the recommendation of the Commissioner for Community Relations contained in his 5th Annual Report for the year 1979-80 (page 63), that the Australian Taxation Office consider the whole question of concessional allowances paid in respect of dependants resident overseas.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
This matter was thoroughly examined in the Report of the Review of Post-Arrival Programs and Services for Migrants (the Galbally Report) dated May 1978.
The Review group, while recognising that many migrants feel a strong obligation to give financial help to family members in their home country, noted that provisions enabling migrants to send money out of Australia were generally adequate to meet any family obligations a migrant in Australia may feel. In recording its belief that it was an unreasonable burden on the Australian taxpayer to allow tax rebates for some of these overseas payments, the Review group noted that it was extremely difficult to check claims as to the existence of the people abroad in respect of whom rebates were claimed, and, more importantly, to take into account their income for the purpose of calculating the rebate.

overseas who continue to be residents of Australia for taxation purposes, or for wives and children awaiting migration to Australia.
No new aspects have been raised which would warrant reconsideration of the matter by the Government and the Australian Taxation Office must, of course, apply the law as it is enacted.
British Pensioners in Australia
(Question No. 1675)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the fact that it is virtually impossible to secure a reply to representations on behalf of British pensioners forwarded to the British Department of Health and Social Security.
(2) Will the Minister examine the position and, if necessary, have discussions with British officials to enable British pensioners in Australia to have their complaints speedily examined.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

After careful consideration of the Report and of all other relevant issues, including especially the substantial cost to revenue caused by the mounting abuse of the rebate attributable mainly to the difficulty in checking claims noted by the Review group, the Government decided to withdraw the rebate in respect of dependants resident overseas from I November 1978. This did not affect rebates for dependants temporarily

(1) and (2) Any difficulties in obtaining replies to representations to the British Department of Health and Social Security on behalf of British pensioners had not previously been drawn to my attention. I have however asked officers of the Department of Social Security to bring the honourable member's question to the attention of officers of the British Department.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3471

Aboriginal Housing
(Question No. 1854)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What action has been taken by his Department on the recommendation contained in the 5th Annual Report, for 1979-80, of the Commissioner for Community Relations (page 58) that public housing appropriate to the needs, values and lifestyles of Aboriginal people in all States and the Northern Territory should be provided.
(2) In what way would acceptance of this recommendation require changes in the policy or practices of his Department.
Mr MeVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The 5th Annual Report of the Commissioner for Community Relations acknowledges that Aboriginals are eligible for housing assistance under general welfare housing programs. In this respect, general eligibility criteria apply to Aboriginal people along with any other groups of persons.
Aboriginals also receive special assistance by way of earmarked grants under Part III of the Housing Assistance Act 1978, and the Commonwealth-Northern Territory Housing Agreement in recognition of their special needs. Amounts of $21.06m and $22. 10m were allocated among the States and the Northern Territory for this purpose in 1979-80 and 1980-81 respectively.
Administration of all welfare housing programs funded through the Department of Housing and Construction is the responsibility of the State Governments. The earmarked funds mentioned above are directed to special programs administered by State authorities in liaison with authorities having special interests in Aboriginal housing including the regional offices of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs. The need to earmark funds to meet the special housing needs of Aboriginals will continue to be recognised in the proposed 1981 Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement.
In addition, the Commonwealth Department of Aboriginal Affairs has for many years funded a special program of grants to State Housing Authorities for housing for Aboriginals. In recent years this program has been controlled by the 1978 Aboriginal Housing Agreement. Participation of Aboriginals in policy formulation and management matters is encouraged under this Agreement. Under this program grants totalling $12.9m and $10.7m have been allocated for 1979-80 and 1980-81 respectively.
Further, the Aboriginal Housing Association program funded by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs allows Aboriginal communities to establish, plan and administer housing schemes. Funding totalled $20.5m in 1979-80 and is estimated to be $22.lm in 1980-81.
Aboriginal Hostels Limited, a company wholly owned by the Commonwealth Government, provides a home environment enabling Aboriginals to avail themselves of education, training and employment opportunities.
The Aboriginal Development Commission makes available concessional home purchase loans to eligible Aboriginals who cannot obtain home finance on the open market.
(2) Commonwealth grants for Aboriginal housing are directed to special programs for Aboriginals which are either administered by or in liaison with the Commonwealth Department of Aboriginal Affairs and with State Government authorities having well defined responsibilities. These practices are considered to be in accordance with the recommendation of the Commissioner for Community Relations.

AIcohoUsm
(Question No. 1925)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 28 Apri11981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to an article entitled The Prevention of Alcoholism: Epidemiological Studies of the Effects of Government Control Measures published in the British Journal of Addiction, 1975 Vol. 70, pages 125-144.
(2) If so, does the article produce a wealth of evidence that restricting sale times and outlets for alcohol is less effective in reducing community intake than cost maintenance through taxation policy.
(3) Does it also confirm that total intake, regardless of source, determines prevalence of alcohol-related illness.
(4) Will the Government undertake public education of these facts and pursue appropriate excise policies, unimpaired by budget-balancing or industry support considerations, as suggested in that article and in my request for submissions from his Department in support of such a policy when I was Minister for Health.
Mr MaeKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) No. It does show that regulation of the accessibility of alcohol is not a major determinant of alcohol consumption. Evidence is produced suggesting that alcohol consumption and the relative price of alcohol (the price of 10 litres of absolute alcohol divided by personal disposable income) vary inversely but this does not prove that price is a major determinant of consumption. The degree of affluence, as reflected in the disposable income, is probably more important.
(3) No. The article contains statistical evidence linking variations in the level of average consumption with variations in the level of occurrence of some chronic alcohol-related problems. These are only associations the meaning of which is uncertain, and no evidence is produced about the associations of variations in the level of average consumption and other alcohol-related problems.
(4) No. The Government's policy on alcohol-related health problems was detailed in the response to the Report of the Senate Standing Committee on Social Welfare: 'Drug Problems in Australia: an Intoxicated Society?', tabled in the Senate on 19 March 1980 which stated that the Government favoured an overall reduction in alcohol consumption and that the Government would take health considerations into account in a budgetary context when setting tax rates on alcohol.
Overseas Aid
(Question No. 1967)
Mr Willis asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
What has been the total Australian (a) overseas development assistance, (b) gross national product, and (c) ODA as a proportion of GNP for each year from
1970-71 to 1979-80 and what is the estimate for each in 1980-81 using the assumed growth in aggregates published in the 1980 budget?
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The following table lists the total Australian (a) overseas development assistance, (b) gross national product, and

3472 J:{EPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(c) ODA as a proportion of GNP for the period specified.

Year ended 30 June

ODA/GNP

ODA GNP

ratio*

1971
1972 1973
1974 1975 1976 1977
1978
1979 1980 1981 (est)

$m

$m

180.6 32,264

0.56

200.5 36,172

0.55

218.8 41,254

0.53

260.8 50,169

0.52

328.1 58,546

0.56

346.9 70,172

0.50

378.3 80,831

0.46

418.5 89,225

0.47

460.5 103,026

0.45

500.2 113,817

0.43

547.9 129,240

0.43

* The ODA/GNP ratio is based on GNP estimates at the
time of the Budget presentation and does not take into account subsequent revisions to Gross National Product.

Warmun Community at Turkey Creek, Western Australia: Water Supply
(Question No. 1988)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 29 Apri11981:
(1) Has his Department received funds from the Department of Aboriginal Affairs for the Warmun Community at Turkey Creek, Western Australia, for the upgrading of the water supply in that community.
(2) If so, what funds were received in each year and for what specific purpose were they received.
(3) Did his Department (a) receive funds to install 2 water bores and (b) arrange for 2 water bores to be drilled and equipped.
(4) Were these water bores drilled and equipped to the satisfaction of his Department.
(5) Are these bores providing an adequate supply of water to the community; if not, why not.
Mr lVIcVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) $111,500 in 1979 to drill and equip bores, provide water storage, extend and upgrade water reticulation and construct four ablution/laundry blocks.
(3) (a) Yes. (b) Two bores existed at the site, one of which was equipped with a windmill. Four new holes were drilled, two of which were productive. One new bore has been fitted with a diesel powered pump, a second bore provided with a new windmill and pump, and a diesel engine installed to supplement the previously existing windmill.
(4) Yes.
(5) Yes, provided the bores and pumping equipment are adequately maintained. The Community is responsible for operational maintenance.
Pneumoconiosis Compensation: Taxation
(Question No. 2018)
Mr Campbell asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 30 April 1981:
(1) Does the Government propose to tax money paid in compensation to victims of pneumoconiosis; if so, what estimated sum will it raise.

(2) Has section 23 of the Income Tax Assessment Act been effective since 1973; if so, why has the Government waited until now to enforce it.
(3) Is a massive social injustice being perpetrated by this occurence; if so, will he advise the Commissioner of Taxation not to proceed against this particularly disadvantaged group.
(4) How many persons are subject to paying tax on this compensation and what is their average age.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Income Tax Assessment Act requires a taxpayer to include in assessable income the gross income derived from all sources in or out of Australia. Because amounts paid by way of compensation to victims of pneumoconiosis are of an income nature they form part of a recipient taxpayer's assessable income. No details are available of the estimated amount oftax involved.
(2) Section 23 of the Income Tax Assessment Act provides for the exemption from income tax of specified classes of income. The section does not operate to exempt from tax amounts paid by way of compensation to victims of pneumoconiosis. The Commissioner of Taxation has, however, advised that in some cases in Western Australia the view was in the past mistakenly taken that these amounts did not constitute assessable income.
(3) Decisions of the courts have confirmed that compensation payments of the type referred to are assessable income. It would be necessary to amend the Income Tax Assessment Act to provide that the amounts be exempt from income tax.
(4) Statistics of this kind are not maintained.
Tertiary Education Fees
(Question No. 2030)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:
(I) Is he able to confirm or deny recent Press rumours that the Government will be reintroducing tertiary education fees, as reported in the Brisbane Courier Mail of25 April 198I.
(2) If fees are to be reintroduced will he give an assurance that tertiary students who have already embarked on an approved post-secondary course and who are receiving Government assistance, will be permitted to complete their course on that basis.
Mr Fife--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Government, following an examination of this matter by the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions, has confirmed that it has no intention of introducing fees for students undertaking courses leading to a first qualification or for those taking recognised double degree and diploma combinations. From the beginning of the 1982 academic year, tuition fees will be introduced for students enrolling for the first time for second or higher qualifications at universities and colleges of advanced education. Fees will not be charged for students holding Commonwealth Postgraduate Awards or scholarships from universities and colleges of advanced education.
(2) Fees will not apply to students for courses commenced before 1982.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3473

Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of Industrial Relations
(Question No. 2129)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Will he provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions did not include the elimination of any functions in this Department which are located in the Australian Capital Territory.
Interest Rates
(Question No. 2145)
Mr Hurford asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the studies undertaken by Professor J. W. Nevile of the Centre for Applied Economic Research at the University of New South Wales show that a rise of one percentage point in the nominal rate of interest is enough to reduce investment in fixed capital by about $250m, in terms of April 1981 prices.
(2) Is there any substance to Professor Nevile's calculations.
(3) If not, what are the reasons.
(4) Is this apparent lowering of levels of investment due to high interest rates contrary to the medium and long term viability and efficiency of Australian industry.
(5) If so, what steps will he take to ensure not only that high interest rates do not produce further increases in the level of unemployment but also that they do not lead to industry being saddled with outdated and uncompetitive plant and capital.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (5) I understand that a paper by Professor Nevile entitled 'Inflation and the Incentive to Invest' refers to the impact that an increase in the nominal interest rate might have on business investment. I also understand, however, that the main point of the paper is to demonstrate the adverse impact that a rise in inflation has on investment, both through its effect on interest rates and through corporate profitability.
It is worth noting that simple regression results, such as those cited by Professor Nevile, do not in fact 'show' anything. They can at best provide only a broad guide to underlying economic relationships and cannot capture all the influences bearing on (in this case) private investment.
It may also be worth noting that if there is one thing that is abundantly clear about the Australian economy today it is that Australia is not suffering from any shortage of new investment at this time. On the contrary, business investment is likely to grow by around 20 per cent in real terms in 1980-81 and recent expectations data from the ABS point to further very strong growth in 1981-82.

Closure of Engineering Courses in Victoria
(Question No. 2150)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(1) Was he and his Department asked to express an opinion on the closure of engineering courses at the Deakin University, Victoria, and at the Bendigo Institute of Technology, Victoria (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1843); if so, what advice was given.
(2) Has he had consultation with the Victorian Minister for Education about these courses.
(3) If so, did the Victorian Minister support the proposals to close these courses and if support was given, what reasons were advanced for this action.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Advice given to me by the Tertiary Education Commission (TEC) in its Report for 1983-84 Triennium included concern for the fragmentation of engineering programs in Victoria and the opinion that some rationalisation was required on the grounds of quality. When preparing its advice, the TEC had regard to the recommendations of the Victorian PostSecondary Education Commission's Working Party on Engineering Education, released towards the end of 1980. In this Report doubts were raised 011 the continuation of certain engineering schools including those at Deakin University and Bendigo College of Advanced Education. This advice was made available to the Government before the decisions under question were made.
(2) and (3) I will be meeting next week with all the Education Ministers to discuss the range of Commonwealth decisions on education arising from the Review of Commonwealth Functions and the Guidelines for the Tertiary Education Commission and the Schools Commission.
The Victorian Government authorities will be among the State and Territory bodies consulted by the TEC on the implementation of the Commonwealth's decisions.
Tax Exemptions: Overseas Airlines
(Question No. 2161)
Mr Campbell asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) Is South African Airways the only international airline that currently enjoys general exemption from Commonwealth sales tax, under item 72A in the First Schedule of the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act.
(2) If not, what are the wholly-owned national airlines that enjoy exemption under this item.
(3) Could the wholly owned national airline of a Communist State enjoy exemption from Commonwealth sales tax under item 72A.
(4) Do any of Australia's principal trading partners grant immunity from any or all of their taxation laws to foreign government trading concerns.
(5) Does this provision give unfair advantage to certain international airlines; if so, what is the justification for certain airlines which are run as profit-making ventures, to be exempted from sales tax because they are owned by a foreign government.
(6) Will the Government give consideration to tightening up the regulations or the Act to ensure that foreign governments only enjoy exemption from taxation in matters directly affecting their diplomatic representation in this country and excluding their trading ventures.

3474 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I am advised by the Commissioner of Taxation that the answer is no.
(2) This is not at this stage public knowledge and, in view of the secrecy provisions of the taxation laws, the Commissioner of Taxation is not prepared to supply the information.
(3) Yes, if on the facts of a particular case the doctrine of sovereign immunity applies.
(4) Recognition of the doctrine of sovereign immunity is not confined to Australia, but no information is available regarding its application by other countries.
(5) The extent of any sales tax advantage would depend on the kind and quantity of purchases of goods made in Australia and may, in practice, be of a relatively minor nature. The justification for any tax exemption is, of course, Australia's acceptance of the doctrine that one government should not seek to tax another. It is to be noted that the doctrine applies only to an arm of government; it does not apply in respect of corporations or other organisations owned by a government.
(6) It is the Government's practice to keep under review aspects of the tax laws on which it receives representations.
Participation in Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting: Department of Education
(Question No. 2175)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(1) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division and (c) 4th Division officers in his Department are engaged (i) full time or (ii) part-time in administrative, policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.
(2) How many officers of his Department are expected to attend the meeting:
(3) What is the expected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel and other expenses.
(4) What other expenses does he expect his Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the meeting.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) One Third Division officer has been seconded on a full time basis to the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, at the request of that Department to assist with administrative arrangements. A further request has been received to provide delegation liaison officers, which is being considered.
(2) At this stage it is not known whether any officers of my Department will be required to attend the Meeting.
(3) See answer to (2).
(4) Nil.
Rules of Broadcasting
(Question No. 2252)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the comment 'better luck next time' allegedly made by a radio 3CR announcer when referring to the attempted assassination of President Reagan on the day of the incident.

(2) If so, does this comment contravene any rules laid down by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes. (2) The Tribunal has advised me that following its examination of an audio recording of the program item in question, the Tribunal advised the management of station 3CR that it considered the matter to be in breach of the Broadcasting Program Standards and that it would be further considered at the forthcoming public inquiry into the renewal of the licence of the station commencing on 10 June 1981.
Commonwealth Council for Rural Research and Extension
(Question No. 2276)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(1) Was the Commonwealth Council for Rural Research and Extension set up in 1978.
(2) If so, who was on the Council.
(3) What has it done.
(4) Has it published reports.
(5) What functions of Commonwealth expenditure was the Council overviewing.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Mr Walter Ives, CBE. (Chairman), Chairman, Primary Industry Bank of Australia Ltd, New South Wales
Dr. J. R. Allen, Director, Sugar Research Institute, Queensland
Professor Stuart Harris, Centre of Resource and Environmental Studies, Australian National University
Dr P. S. Lang, OBE., Pastoralist, Victoria
Professor G. L. McClymont, A.O., Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition, University of New England
*Mr I. McLachlan, Pastoralist, South Australia
Mr R. M. Watts, I.S.0., A.O., Director-General, Department of Agriculture, New South Wales
Mr P. D. A. Wright, Pastoralist, New South Wales
Mr E. N. Fitzpatrick, Director-General, Department of Agriculture, Western Australia (Appointed August 1980)
* Resigned July 1980.
(3) The activities of the Commonwealth Council for Rural Research and Extension up to 30 June 1980 are detailed in its Annual Report 1979-80. A report for the period 1 July 1980 to 30 June 1981 is in preparation.
(4) Yes. (i) Annual Report 1979-80. (ii) Rural Research in Northern Australia.
(5) The terms of reference of the Council were as follows:
Review from time to time, or as directed by the Minister, the entire range of rural research and extension being undertaken in Australia and relate this to the role of agriculture in the Australian economy.
Advise the Minister on priority areas for research and new areas for research, taking into account the research programs of Commonwealth and State instrumentalities, Universities and other institutions.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3475

Develop a working relationship with other Commonwealth authorities such as ASTEC and CSIRO on broad research objectives and the co-ordination of research.
Consider and report on the broad principles under which Commonwealth/industry joint research schemes might operate.
Review the overall relationship between research and advisory services and its adequacy to ensure the practical application of research findings in rural industry.
Invalid Pension Appeals
(Question No. 2306)
Dr Jenkins asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(1) How many appeals were pending concerning the refusal of invalid pension benefits under the guidelines for eligibility existing before 4 May 1981.
(2) What period of time will be taken in reviewing these appeals under the new guidelines for eligibility announced on 4 May 1981.
Mr Hunt--The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Statistics are not maintained for appeals pending concerning refusal of invalid pension. Statistics are, however, collected for the number of medical appeals undetermined. This category includes decisions affecting not only invalid pensions but also other decisions involving medical assessment-for example, decisions relating to sickness benefit and handicapped child's allowance. Further, the category covers decisions involving not only a refusal to grant a pension, benefit or allowance, but also a decision to cancel or suspend the payment of such after grant. The latest available figures show that there were 2492 medical appeals undetermined at 31 March 1981.
(2) It is not possible to indicate the time which will be taken to review appeals against refusal of invalid pension pending at 4 May 1981. All such appeals will however, be handled as expeditiously as possible.
Commonwealth Games Foundation: Income Tax Deductions for Donations
(Question No. 2335)
Mr Humphreys asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that the Income Tax Assessment Act presently makes no allowance for authorisation of income tax deduction for gifts to the Commonwealth Games Foundation.
(2) Will he take steps to have section 78 of the Income Tax Assessmcnt Act amended in order to add the Commonwealth Games Foundation to the list of organisations in regard to which gifts of $2 and upward may be treated as tax deductible; if not, what is the reason.
Mr HowardThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) The matter of allowing tax deductions for gifts to the Foundation was examined some time ago and subsequently reviewed. Against the background that gifts to assist the financing of international sporting or athletic events have never been allowed, the Government decided that gifts to the Foundation should not be tax deductible. I do note, however,

that the Commonwealth is making a substantial contribution towards the Games in a number of ways, including a grant of $IOm towards the cost of capital facilities; up to $11.5m to enable the ABC to act as host broadcaster; $2m in administrative and other support; and the issue of commemorative coinage, which is expected to yield the Foundation up to $1.5m.
Micro-electronics Industry
(Question No. 419)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(I) Did he say in a speech delivered at the first International Conference on Technology for Development on 24 November 1980 that the CSIRO will provide a major impetus to Australia's micro-electronic industry.
(2) Is it a fact that the 1980-81 budget allocation to the CSIRO for the purpose of design of very large scale integration of the next generation of computer chip technology was $1.5 million.
(3) Is he able to state whether comparable expenditure in the micro-electronic industry in (a) Great Britain is $400m, (b) France is $270m, (e) Italy is $130m and (d) West Germany is $IOOm.
(4) Has his attention been drawn to the statement of Dr MacDonald of the Univcrsity of Queensland in Search, Vol. 11, No. II, November 1980, to the effect that the allocation to the CSIRO is a waste of effort given comparable expenditure in other countries and given also the isolation of this research effort from mainline computer research being carried out overseas.
(5) If so, and the position is as stated in parts (2) and (3), will he explain the relevance of his remarks referred to in part (I).
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. In formally opening the 1st International Conference on Technology for Development I referred to my announcement that CSIRO would set up a research group to design very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI). Staff are now being recruited. I reiterate my view that this initiative will provide a major impetus to microelectronic technology in Australia. It will develop an indigenous design capability in Australia, and raise awareness of the enormous potential of custom chips in the late 1980s.
(2) No, it is not a fact. The CSIRO Executive has allocated $500,000 from the Organisation's 1980-81 Appropriation. The project will be financed at the level of $500,000 per annum for the next two years in the first instance. The amount envisaged is $1.5m in to to over 3 financial years.
(3) The comparison drawn between the expenditure of Great Britain, France, Italy and West Germany, and Australia is not valid. The European expenditure supports experimental and theoretical work concerning all aspects of the production of microelectronic circuits, including manufacture at the pilot plant scale. The CSIRO initiative will focus exclusively on the problems of chip design. CSIRO believes that an effort on this scale will be fruitful. In this matter they are not alone.
(4) Yes. I do not accept, however, the conclusions reached in this article. It is based on assumptions specific to the American situation.
(5) The facts as stated in 2, 3 and 4 above vindicate my confidence in the project. It is of considerable importance. CITA

3476 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

has identified microelectronics as a key area of modern manufacturing technology. The CSIRO initiative will give Australian industry access to an important sector of microelectronic technology.
Radio and Television Time Allotted to Political Parties
(Question No. 1042)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
(1) How much time was allocated to the (a) Liberal and National Parties and (b) Australian Labor Party during the period 20 October 1980 to 26 November 1980 inclusive, on the following Australian Broadcasting Commission programs (i) AM, (ii) PM, (iii) the 7 p.m. news in Queensland and (iv) Nationwide in Queensland.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) (i) 26 minutes 14 seconds; (ii) 53 minutes 11 seconds; (iii) 60 minutes 10 seconds; (iv) Il4minutes 11 seconds.
(b) (i) 7 minutes 13 seconds; (ii)22 minutes 21 seconds; (iii) 39 minutes 38 seconds; (iv) l!O minutes 3 seconds.
AM and PM are national public affairs programs and in the period immediately following a Federal Election devoted more time to Government activities, such as the appointment of Federal Ministers, than those of the Opposition. Similarly, items of national interest were included in the main television news bulletins.
Communications in North-western Australia
(QnestionNo.1155)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(1) By what date will the microwave link in the Kimberley region, Western Australia, be operational.
(2) Is this microwave link dependent upon a single land line connection with Perth.
(3) Is it a fact that even with the installation of the microwave link, the communication system to and within the Kimberleys will remain fragile, vulnerable and antiquated.
(4) Will he encourage Telecom Australia to consider immediately the installation of a micowave link to Katherine from Kununurra, WA., in order to provide north-west Australia with an alternative communication link to that provided by the north-south microwave link.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) A microwave link between Port Hedland-BroomeDerby is under construction and is planned to be completed by the end of 1982. An extension of this link connecting Derby-Halls Creek-Kununurra is planned to be completed by the end of 1983.
(2) The microwave links between Port Hedland-Derby and Derby-Kununurra will connect at Port Hedland to the main co-axial cable system between that town and Perth.
(3) The microwave links will be modern and highly dependable. They will employ the latest radio relay equipment duplicated throughout for reliability and powered by solar cells giving independence from ground transported fuel supplies. The antennae and masts will be designed to withstand the cyclonic conditions that occur in the area. The reliability of communications in the Kimberley region will be further enhanced by a microwave link between Perth and Dampier planned for completion in July 1984.

(4) The overall advantage in providing a microwave link between Kununurra and Katherine is well recognised. However, the provision of such a project by Telecom depends on competing priorities for telecommunications services generally in Australia.
Annual Reports and Other Publications: Minister for Communications
(Question No. 1235)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Annual Reports are produced by the following elements of the Communications portfolio:
(a) Department of Communications
(b) Special Broadcasting Service
(c) (i) Australian Telecommunications Commission
(ii) Australian Telecommunications Commission Research Laboratories
(d) Australian Postal Commission
(e) Overseas Telecommunications Commission
(f) Australian Broadcasting Commission
(g) Australian Broadcasting Trihunal.
(2) The cost of these publications for 1979-1980 was:
(a) $1,829
(b) $13,172 (c) (i) $81,289
(ii) $32,000
(d) $47,000
(e) $22,000
(f) $17,619
(g) $12,200.
(3) Other Regular Publications-The following publications are produced by the Commissions indicated:
(i) Service and Business Outlook-Australian Postal Commission. (Annual)
(ii) Service and Business Outlook-Australian Telecommunications Commission. (Annual)
(iii) Contact-Overseas Telecommunications Commission (Quarterly)
(iv) Supplementary Information on ABC ActivitiesAustralian Broadcasting Commission. (Annual)
(a) The costs of publication were:
(i) $2,500 (1980-81 )
(ii) $3,975 (1980-81)
(iii) $31,500 (1979-80)
(iv) $4,735 (1979-80).
(b) The costs for distribution were:
(i) $400

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3477

(ii) Nil.
(iii) $10,474
(iv) Nil
Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Health
(Question No. 1533)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by his Department.
(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable gentleman's question is as follows:
(1) (a) Nil, (b) 399.
(2) $46,596.
Telegrams
(Question No. 1633)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Is it the practice of the Australian Telecommunications Commission to ascertain the telephone numbers of addressees of telegrams and to telephone telegrams through, even though a delivery fee has been paid; if so, what is the purpose of charging the delivery fee.
Mr Sinclail'-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The telegram service offers a personalised message passing service and the fixed component of the telegram charge varies according to the sender's choice of method to be used in passing the message.
It is the practice in cases where the sender simply addresses a telegram to a residential or business address and pays the full charge rate for Telecom to deliver the message by the fastest means available. Quite often this is by telephone or telex. In these cases, the fee charged is not, therefore, for the physical delivery of the telegram but for transmission of the message by the fastest means possible. Should the addressee require a copy of the message which has been telephoned, it can be provided at no additional charge.
Where messenger service would provide the fastest means of delivery or if Telecom judges the messenger delivery would be more appropriate, say for telegrams concerning death, illness, or the like, then this means of delivery is used.
The sender, at the time oflodging a telegram, has the option of specifying messenger delivery by including the paid service indicator 'Messenger' before the address, and in such cases physical delivery of the message will be undertaken. However, in these circumstances it may not be practicable to pass the message to the addressee as quickly as when alternative methods such as telephone and telex are used.
Sale of Postage Stamps
(Question No. 1637)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Does the Australian Postal Commission receive commission or some other payment for selling stamps of Fiji, Christmas Island, Norfolk Island, et cetera; if so, what sum was received from each country or territory in 1979-80.

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Australia Post acts as sales agent, in Australia only, for the stamps, postal stationery and philatelic products of the following overseas postal administrations:
Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Fiji, Nauru,NorfolkIsland, Papua New Guinea, Pitcairn Islands and Western Samoa.
The commission received from this. agency work by Australia Post totalled $1,034,075 in 1979-80. Australia Post does not record the commission on stamps, postal stationery and philatelic items separately.
Details concerning the amount received from each administration arc regarded as 'Commercial,in-Confidence'.
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Communications
(Question No. 1870)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000 or about 20 per cent by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination oftelephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls,made by staff of his Department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) My attention has been drawn to the article.
(2) Supervisors in my Department are responsible for the control of personal calls originated by staff in their area. In line with Directive 591 of 1976, STD barring has been introduced selectively in those Departmental offices where the switchboard equipment makes it possible. In addition, individual metering is in use in one location. Further STD barring will be considered whenever changes to switchboard equipment makes it practicable.
(3) My Department is currently housed in some 30 different locations throughout Australia, and to maintain effective communication, a high volume of official calls is unavoidable. The use of monitoring devices has been considered but given the high volume of authorised calls, the work involved in checking the machines' output for unauthorised calls would be so high as to make it uneconomical.
Participation in Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting: Department of Communications
(Question No. 2165)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 7 May 1981 :
(1) How many (a) 2nd Division (b) 3rd Division and (c) 4th Division officers in his Department are engaged (i) full time or (ii) part-time in administrative, policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.

3478 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) How many officers of his Department are expected to attend the meeting.
(3) What is the expected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel and other expenses.
(4) What other expenses does he expect his Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the meeting.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Only one 3rd Division Officer will be engaged on a full time basis during the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. The same officer together with one 2nd Division and two other 3rd Division Officers will also be involved in preparatory work associated with the setting up of a communications network for the Meeting.
(2) and (3) It is not expected that any officers will attend the meeting and consequently no costs are anticipated.
(4) The anticipated total cost in relation to the involvement mentioned at (l) above including salaries, overtime and travel is $41,000.

Transmitter Power of Radio Station 2KA

(Question No. 2256)

Mr Uren asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:

(1) What ter location

is the current (a) transmitter power (b) and (c) coverage area of radio stations

tr0a)ns2mKiAt-

(ii) 2WS and (iii) 2UE.

(2) Have any proposals which would alter the coverage area of 2KA been put before his Department or been the subject of discussions between his Department and Broadcast Investments Pty Ltd.

(3) If so, what action does he propose to take concerning the proposals.

(4) Have recommendations been made by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal concerning the coverage areas of 2KA and 2WS; if so, what were they.

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(l) 2KA Katoomba (main station) is located at Wentworth Falls, operates with a power of 2000 watts and serves the area approximately within a 12km radius of the transmitting antenna. 2KA Penrith (translator station) is located at Emu Plains, operates with a power of 500 watts and serves the area approximately within a 10km radius of the transmitting antenna.

2WS Blacktown is located at Prospect, operates with a power of 5000 watts and serves the area approximately within a 30km radius of the transmitting antenna.

2UE Sydney is located at Homebush Bay, operates with a power of 5000 watts and serves the area approximately within a 40km radius of the transmitting antenna.

(2) and (3) Discussions regarding 2KA's coverage area between representatives of the licensee company and my Department have taken place.

On 27 April 1981, having considered representations from the Company, I signed a direction to the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal, under section 84 (4) of the Broadcasting and Television Act, to amend the operating conditions of the 2KA translator from 250 watts to 500 watts.

The amended operating conditions will restore the service to an acceptable level. The service had been degraded by an

increase in night-time and man-made interference levels in the area.
(4) The Tribunal has not made any recommendations to the Department of Communications regarding the coverage areas of commercial broadcasting stations 2KA and 2WS.
Anabolic Agents
(Question No. 336)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(I) Is the National Health and Medical Research Council examining the use of anabolic agents as growth promotants at the initiative of the Standing Committee on Agriculture.-
(2) Can he say whether representatives of the drug industry are pressing for the introduction of these agents.
(3) Is he able to say whether the use of such agents is virtually out of control in (a) North America and (b) the European Economic Community.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) It is presumed that the honourable member is referring in his question to the anabolic effects of oestrogenic substances. The Australian Agricultural Council has requested the National Health and Medical Research Council (NH & MRC) to reconsider its long standing recommendation against the use of oestrogens as growth promotants in meal production. The matter is being considered by the Public Health Advisory Committee of the NH & MRe.
(2) Representatives of the industry concerned with drug applications in animal husbandry are interested in the introduction of these agents but it is not correct to say that they are 'pressing' for introduction. Any submissions received from industry concerning such products will be subject to the usual rigorous scrutiny by the appropriate bodies.
(3) I am aware of recent press reports in relation to the use of oestrogens as growth promotants in the EEC but I am not aware of any substantial scientific reports indicating that anabolic agents in general are 'out of control' in either North America or the EEe.
Coastal Surveillance: Expenditure by Department ofHealth
(Question No. 570)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(l) What sum was (a) appropriated and (b) actually spent by his Department on coastal surveillance for (i) 1977-78 (ii) 1978-79 and (iii) 1979-80.
(2) What were the main items of expenditure and the cost attributed to each item.
Mr MacKellarThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) The appropriation for coastal surveillance is mainly under Division 325.2.13 Coastal Surveillance, which provides for payments to contractors. Appropriations for the three years were 1977-78~Nil; 1978-79~$1,830,OOO; and
1979-80~$5,600,000.
There are other funds within the Department's normal administrative items such as salaries and allowances, overtime, travel and subsistence and postage and telephone services. These provide for the involvement of health personnel in the

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3479

administration of coastal surveillance. The amount appropri-
ated under these items is a very minor portion of the Department's administative appropriations and estimates only can be provided.

(b) Expenditure for coastal surveillance was:

1977-78 1978-79 Division 325.2.13
Other Items (estimate only) Total . . . . . .
1979-80 Division 325.2. \3 Other Items (estimate only) Total . . . . . .

Nil 1,828,000
90,000 1,918,000 5,572,000
292,000 5,864,000

(2) Main items of expenditure and the estimated costs attributed to each item are as follows:

1978-79 1979-80

(4) Were the files of his Department regarding tenders (a) shown to or (b) discussed with officers of the Board of Works.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am advised-
(1) No. The grazing lease on Commonwealth land at Avalon Airfield expired on 3 August 1979. In line with Commonwealth policy, offers were subsequently invited for the grazing rights for;I further period. The most suitable offer was considered to be that made by the Melbourne Metropolitan Board ofWorks.
(2) As required by the earlier lease, the house erected by the former tenant became Commonwealth property at the expiration of the lease.
(3) and (4) No.

Salaries and overtime Travel and subsistence
Communications Charter of aircraft
Surface crafl Office requisites, etc.
Stores and supplies Reimbursement to Deparlment of
Business and Consumer Affairs

$ 43,000 25,000 36,000 1,798,000 14,000
1,000
1,000

$ 208,000 *70,600
17,000 5,547,000
12,000 8,300 1,100

- - - - - - _ . _ - - - -1,9-18-,000- -5-,86-4,0-00
- Includes an amount of $21,600 reimbursed to the Department of Transport for expenditure incurred by its officers.

Avalon Airfield, Victoria: Land Purchase
(Question No. 795)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 1t March 1981:
(I) Is the Commonwealth Government planning, or is it engaged in, negotiations for the purchase of a significant area of land east of Avalon Airfield, Lara, Victoria.
(2) If so, what is the purpose of this acquisition.
(3) For which Department is this land being purchased.
Mr Newman--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) To permit the ultimate development of a planned eastwest runway an area of approximately 6.5 hectares will be required on the eastern side of the Airfield to allow the relocation of the northern portion of Pousties Road.
(2) See (I).
(3) The Department of Industry and Commerce.

Avalon Airfield, Victoria: Land Transfer
(Question No. 796)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(I) Was the grazing lease on Commonwealth land at Avalon Airfield, Victoria, recently transferred from a private farmer to the Melbourne Metropolitan Board of Works.
(2) If so, was a house and buildings provided by the previous occupier part of the transfer.
(3) Did officers of his Department have discussions with representatives of the Board of Works regarding the history and nature of anticipated tenders prior to the close of tenders.

Avalon Airfield, Victoria: Lease Renewals
(Question No. 797)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
Was the value of buildings constructed by the private lessee of grazing rights at Avalon Airfield, Victoria, taken into account when determining the allocation of lease renewals.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes. A house only was involved.

Avalon Airfield, Victoria: Grazing Lease Tenders
(Question No. 798)

Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:

Has correspondence seeking an urgent re-examination of grazing lease tenders for grazing rights at Avalon Airfield, Victoria, been answered; if not, why not.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable

member's question is as follows:

.

Your telegrams of 26 September 1980 and 10 October 1980 were not answered in writing. However I am informed that following your second telegram my predecessor's private secretary telephoned you to explain the relevant facts, and that
you indicated at the time that a written response was not necessary. Your second telegram was therefore passed to my department for information only.

Trade Practices Act: Merger Provisions
(Question No. 857)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to recent criticisms of the merger provisions of the Trade Practices Act emanating both from the Victorian inquiry into the newspaper industry and from a number of academic writers in the field of antimonopoly law;
(2) Is there any basis to the thrust of these criticisms that section 50 of the Trade Practices Act as it is structured is almost totally ineffective;

3480 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) Will he lake steps to ensure that the current dominance and control test is replaced by a provision, or a number of provisions, that effectively prevent mergers in substantial markets which have the effect of substantially lessening competition;
(4) Will he confirm the thrust of statements attributed to him upon his appointment that he favoured the curbing of monopoly power both through the Trade Practices Act and more direct forms of anti-monopoly regulation,
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I am aware of some criticism made by Mr Ranald Macdonald of The Age newspaper;
(2) I understand that in making his criticism, Mr Macdonald was referring to the proposed takeover in 1979 of the Herald and Weekly Times Limited Group by the News Limited Group. In that case the Trade Practices Commission stated its intention to take proceedings for a contravention of section 50 of the Trade Practices Act to prohibit the takeover, but News Limited withdrew its offer before that action was taken;
(3) The present section 50 of the Trade Practices Act is the result of a considered decision taken by the Government when it implemented a substantial revision of the Trade Practices Act 1977. The Government has not since then changed its policy in relation to section 50. The Government is, of course, continuing to monitor all provisions of the Trade Practices Act;
(4) I believe, and it is the Government's policy, that the Government has a clear role to play in promoting and maintaining free and fair competition throughout the Australian economy and in preventing the abuse of monopoly power.
Family Health Plan
(Question No. 924)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that financial members of the Family Health Plan are regarded as uninsured because this service is not a registered health insurance organisation.
(2) If so, does this enable doctors providing medical services for the plan to classify patients as disadvantaged and bulk bill for their medical services, despite plan membership costing $450 per annum.
(3) If the position is as stated, does this enable the plan to sell medical cover which appears to be paid for by the plan but which is in fact paid for by the Commonwealth.
(4) Is he able to say whether any of the doctors providing medical services under the plan have any financial interest in the service.
Mr MacKellar--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Yes, however the Family Health Plan has advised that persons classified as disadvantaged do not contribute financially to the Plan.
(3) See (2) above. Under the new arrangements to operate from 1 September 1981, the Commonwealth is to determine eligibility for disadvantaged status. Those who qualify will he made aware of their entitlements and adequate publicity will be given to the fact that they do not have to contribute to any organisation to obtain them.

(4) No. However it is known that Dr Geoffrey Edelsten is a Director of the Geoffrey Edelsten Foundation Limited, which operates the-Family Health Plan.
Underspending of Estimates: Department of Health
(Question No. 1106)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(I) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 325-Administrative, (b) 326Commonwealth Institute of Health and (c) 327-Health insurance.
(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos. 1 and 2) 1980-81; if so, what are the reasons.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Treasurer to Question No. 1101 on 13 May 1981 (Hansard, page 2374).
Air Travel: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1130)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(l) How many travel warrants have been issued for Department of National Development and Energy officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr Anthony---The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) (a) Not applicable. DepartmeI\t of National Development created on 20 December 1977; (b) For the period 20 December 1977 to 30 June 1978: 641; (c) 1560; (d) 1770; (e) 1235.
(2) The cost of all travel in Australia over these periods was $967,816. The component relating to air travel to and from Canberra is not readily available from Departmental records and I am not prepared to authorise the use of resources to identify the particular information requested.
Depo-Provera
(Question No. 1202)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(1) Can h,e state whether the substance Depo-Provera is recommended by any (a) professional, (b) academic or (c) government authority in Australia for contraceptive use.
(2) If so, (a) what qualifications are placed on its use, (b) are any contra-indicatiollS or recommended precautions especially applicable for patients who have difficulty in making an informed judgment for or against this use of the drug and (c) do any of these authorities recommend its use particularly for women who have difficulty in comprehending proper methods ofuse ofalternative contraception.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3481

(3) Will the Government take steps to ensure that (a) due precautions are not relaxed and (b) proper alternative contraception is available and adequately explained in particular to (i) the mentally retarded and (ii) Aborigines with limited understanding of contraceptives and of the English language and 'a high incidence of diabetes; if so, what steps will be taken.
(4) Will he seek the advice of the National Health and Medical Research Council on recommendations to the States for notification or other recording of contraceptive uses of Depo-Provera for statistical analysis of (a) safety, (b) sideeffects and (c) reliability.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No. However I understand Depo-Provera is used by Family Planning Associations, health authorities and private doctors in individual cases where a specific need exists for which no other contraceptive method is considered suitable.
(2) Those organisations which have approached my Department on the use of Depo-Provera as a contraceptive have been advised that the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee (ADEC) has considered progressively available information on Depo-Provera for contraceptive use on a number of occasions. The Committee is of the opinion that the use of the drug as a contraceptive must be regarded as investigational since there are unresolved questions related to its safety. This statement appears in the product information distributed by the company for this drug.
These organisations have also been advised that the ADEC supports the concept of properly controlled clinical trials provided they are designed to help resolve some of the questions raised and provided adequate measures are incorporated in the trial protocol satisfactorily to protect the participants. To date no applications have been made to my Department in this regard.
(3) (a) The Government is not in a position where it can take steps to ensure that due precautions are not relaxed in the situation where a drug is already available and relatively safe and effective for other accepted indications. It is a recognised fact that a doctor may occasionally decide that special circumstances warrant the use of a drug for conditions other than those for which it has been approved. In such circumstances the responsibility for adequately informing the patient or the guardian and for any adverse consequences of the therapy must rest with the practitioner concerned.
(b) Alternative forms of contraception are readily available and the product information relating to these is adequate to enable the medical practitioner to explain the position to his patient. It is a matter for the practitioner to determine what he considers to be the most appropriate method of contraception to suit the particular circumstances of his patients.
(4) Yes. However, it is for the reasons suggested by the honourable member that my Department has encouraged organisations to design properly controlled trials using DepoProvera as a contraceptive.
Annual Reports and Other Publications: Minister for National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1236)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) What annual reports are produced by the Department of.National Development and Energy and authorities under the Minister's aegis.

(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.

(3) Are other regular publications issued by the Depart-
ment of National Development and Energy and these authorities; ifso, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production
and (b) distribution of each.

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(1) and (2) Annual reports and their cost for 1979-80:

Department of National Development and Energy . . . . . . . . . . .
Albury-Wodonga Development Corporation Australian Atomic Energy Commission Australian Safeguards Office Decentralisation Advisory Board National Energy Advisory Council National Energy Research, Development
and Demonstration Council River Murray Commission . . . . . . Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority Snowy Mountains Council The Pipeline Authority . . . . . . .

$
8,200 6,000 17,100 1,270 5,950 1,710
3,720 1,530 1,900 4,830 2,780

54,990

(3) Other regular publications issued:

Costs

(a)
Production

(b) Distri-
bution

Bureau of Mineral Resources (BMR) Yearbook
Geological Branch Summary of Activities
Geophysical Branch Summary of Activities
BMRJournal
AMI Annual
AMI Quarterly Observatory Reports
Petroleum Newsletter
Petroleum titles map and key
Division of National Mapping (Natmap) Statement of Activities
Thematic Mapping Bulletin
Electronic Survey Computing Bulletin
Natmap Retailer
Albury-Wodonga Dev. Corp. Bulletin Albury-Wodonga Dev. Corp. 'Growth
Centre'
Atomic Energy in Australia
AAEC Nuclear News Australian Water Resources Council
Newsletter Compendium of Australian Energy
Research Development and Demonstration Projects

$
3,500
260
260 29,000 20,000 11,000 1,600 2,300 1,700
5,250 3,780
80 340 2,840
1,030 30,130 5,350
1,740
33,750

$
350
150
150 2,300 2,200 1,850
350 1,450
600
250 265
70 800 2,350
960 4,140 1,320
3,600
1,190

153,910 24,345

3482 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Ail,' Travel in Australia: Department ofFinance
(Question No. 1476)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What sum was paid by the Department of Finance, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by that Departm~nt, to each airline for air tr/;lvel within Australia during-1979-80.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Expenditure on air travel within Australia during 1979-80 totalled $82,157.78. Payments to TAA totalled $47,618.61 and to Ansett $34,539.17.

Air Travel in Australia: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 14~5.)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for AdministrativeServices, upon notice, on9 Apri11981:

What sum was paid by his Department, or by departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

During the financial year 1979-80, my Department and

bodies within my portfolio paid some $3,881,000 to various

airlines for travel within Australia by Ministers, Senators,

Members and their stall as well as by departmental and other

officers. The major component of this amount was paid to the

following airlines:

.

Ansett Airlines of Australia Trans-Australia Airlines MacRobertson Miller Airline Services East-West Airlines Operations Ltd Miscellaneous-

$ 1,961,000
1,776,000 62,000 28,000 54,000

Total

3,881,000

- Includes amounts ofless than $20,000 in anyone instance paid to 27 dillerent airlines.

Head Office. Department ofEmployment and Youth Affairs
(Question No. 1503)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many stallare in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Mr Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.

Positions substantively
stalled

CBS National'Director's Office
CBS Operations Division CBS Programs Division CBS Planning and ProlrBllls Division Management Services Division . .

Ni-'fJ 2
-63 57 10 65

264

These stallare based in Melbourne.
(2) No decision has been taken by Government to relocate these sections.
Tea Services: Department ofAdministrative
Services
(Question No. 1615)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many (a) full-time and (b) part-time stall are employed on tea-making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b)-other charges in the provision oftea services in his Department'in 1979-80.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
.(1) (a) (i) 4, (ii) nil, (b) (i) 2, (ii) 3.
(2) (a) $53,281.62; (b) $37,380.00 paid to Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Ltd.
I am advised that the answers to parts 1 and 2 (a) of the question deal with the provision of beverage services in buildings occupied by my Department and where the services are the direct respOnsibility of my Department. The answer to 2 (b) of the question deals with the-provision of beverage services in buildings occupied by my Department where the services are provided by Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Ltd.
I am also advised that there is a third category: in some buildings (such as the Commonwealth Centre in Perth) occupied by several departments where the beverage services are provided by Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Ltd, for reasons of administrative convenience the costs of the services are met by my Department. In 1979-80 they amounted to $593,840.
The answers to other questions asked by the honourable member on this matter need to be read in the light of this information.

Quarantine Procedures and Requirements
(Question No. 1713)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health. upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Can he say whether Philip the Chimpanzee performed at the Happy Holidays show at the Perth Entertainment Centre eady in January 1981.
(2) If so, did Philip arrive by air from San Francisco, USA., immediately before the show.
(3) What quarantine procedures and requirements operated in respect of Philip to ensure that there was no risk to Australian human and animal health.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3483

(4) Were normal quarantine procedures or requirements cornpromised or abbreviated in any way in this case; if so, in what ways.
.Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) Philip the Chimpanzee performed at Perth Entertainment Centre from 5 January to 17 January 1981.
(2) This animal and two other chimpanzees arrived in Perth from San Francisco on 3 January 1981 and left Australia on 21 January 1981.
(3) The Perth Entertainment Centre was registered as a 'B' Class circus under quarantine legislation for the duration of the animals' stay. The animals were subject to the usual preimport conditions with regard to yellow fever and rabies, namely, certification that they had not been in a yellow fever country for the three months preceding export to Australia and had been on rabies-free premises for 12 months. The animals were examined by a United States Government veterinarian with regard to their general health status and tuberculosis. The chimpanzees were accompanied to and from the Perth Airport by a veterinary officer. A veterinary officer previously inspected and approved accommodation at the Entertainment Centre for suitability and security for the purposes of registration as a 'B' Class circus. The chimpanzees remained in their quarters throughout the visit except for stage appearances. Only the trainer had access to these quarters.
(4) No.
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Education
(Question No. 1883)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37 that l,ondon metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000, or about 20 per cent by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of his Department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Fife---The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Personal telephone calls are not controlled, however STD barring has been introduced wherever possible, except in Central Office where Telecom advice was that STD barring was not technically practicable at present.
(3) Staff are informed by Departmental Circular of their responsibility in the efficient use of telephones, particularly the use of facilities for non-official purposes.
Teaching of Languages Other Than English
(Question No. 2013)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 30 April 1981 :

(1) In how many (a) private, (b) State and (c) Commonwealth schools and/or other educational institutions are languages other than English taught,
(2) What is the number of students in each of these courses in each State or Territory.
(3) What is the number of teachers in each of these courses in each State and Territory teaching (a) part-time and (b) full-time courses.
(4) What special qualifications do these teachers have.
(5) What is the (a) basic material provided or (b) source of the teaching materials used in each of these courses.
(6) What sum was allocated in each State by the (a) State and (b) Commonwealth Departments of Education for these courses in each year since 1976.
(7) How many teachers are employed by the (a) private schools and by the (b) State and (c) Commonwealth Departments of Education.
(8) Are the classes held during or after normal school hours.
(9) Is there any choice for after-school classes in (a) State and (b) Commonwealth schools.
Mr Fife -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (3) and (7) Courses in languages other than English are offered at primary and secondary levels in Government, Catholic and independent schools, by part-time and full-time ethnic schools, and by tertiary institutions including the TAFE sector, In addition. some courses arc oiTered by professional associations and by organisations in the private sector. Neither total numbers of students and teachers nor the number of schools and institutions oifering courses are known. My Department is at present coHating information currently available.
(4) It is generally the case that secondary schoolteachers of languages other than English have tertiary qualifications and some professional training in language teaching techniques. This, however, is less likely to be so in primary schools, where classes may be taught by teachers who speak a language other than English but without specialist qualifications. Some programs involve participation of members of ethnic communities. In a few cases teachers and/or other assistance are being provided by foreign governments.
(5) The provision of teaching materials for languages other than English is the responsibility of the authority concerned. However the Schools Commission through its Multicultural Education Program has provided funds for the development and production of language teaching materials. Languages for which materials are currently being produced include Italian, Greek and Dutch. Curriculum and material projects have been undertaken by schools and in some States by community groups. The Curriculum Development Centre has also supported the development of materials for community language teaching, and is involved in the Schools Commission Greek and Italian Curriculum Projects.
(6) Since 1978 the Government in accordance with recommendation 45 of the Galbally review has made additional funds available to the States for multicultural education including the teaching of community languages. The total allocation of $5m has been disbursed over a period of three years by the Schools Commission on the advice of State coordinating committees. In 1979 the total allocation for that year of $0.5m was directed to supporting the teaching of community languages. In 1980 and 1981 $1.5m and $3m respectively were made available for the further development of community languages for other aspects of multicultural education. General purpose recurrent grants from Commonwealth to State or non-Government schools can be used for

3484 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

foreign language teaching at the discretion of the authorities concerned.
The allocation of State funds to particular areas of education is a matter for the education authorities in each State.
The overall State allocations for the Multicultural Education Program for 1979 and 1980 were as follows:

(4) Will the Attorney-General take steps to ensure that these excessive costs for litigants are removed; if so, what steps.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

1979 1980*

New South Wales

Victoria

Queensland

South Australia

Western Australia

Tasmania

Northern Territory

.

Australian Capital Territory

Projects of National Significance

$ 194,500 157,500
82,500 51,500 47,000 16,500

$ 485,500
400,500 206,000 139,000 133,500
48,500 24,000 31,100
121,000

549,500 1,589,100
* Estimated December 1980 prices.
(8) and (9) Courses provided by the education authorities are in general held during school hours as part of the normal school curriculum. Ethnic school classes are mostly conducted outside normal school hours, although some are 'inserted' into normal school programs. At the present time it is estimated that there are between 1,200 and 1,300 ethnic schools in Australia. This figure does not include an estimated 600 'insertion' classes involving about 6,000 children.
The Government supports the teaching oflanguages in ethnic schools, and is providing $30 per capita grants to part-time non-profit-making ethnic schools with an open admissions policy. A survey is to be conducted to determine appropriate support for ethnic schools after an initial two-year funding period.

Costs of Litigation
(Question No. 2041)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:
(1) Can the Attorney-General say whether it is a fact that the Registry of the Supreme Court of New South Wales will only accept Appeal documents typed on foolscap size paper.
(2) Can the Attorney-General say whether it is also a fact that the Registry of the High Court of Australia will only accept Appeal documents typed on A4 size paper.
(3) Is the Attorney-General able to say what is the average cost for re-typing an appeal book relating to an Appeal from the Supreme Court of New South Wales to the High Court of Australia.

(I) I understand that documents prepared for use in the Supreme Court of New South Wales are, as a general rule, required to be on foolscap size paper.
(2) Documents prepared for use in the High Court of Australia are, as a general rule, required to be on A4 size paper. However, I am advised that it is the practice in appeals to the High Court from the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of New South Wales to allow the reproduction of the Court of Appeal appeal book if special representations are made by the parties on the grounds of cost. In other cases parties have photo-reduced the Court of Appeal appeal book, but I am advised that photo-reduction is unsatisfactory in most cases and that the High Court does not encourage it.
(3) No. The cost would vary according to the size of the appeal book.
(4) The size of documents used in proceedings in the High Court of Australia and the Supreme Court of New South Wales is a matter of pactice and procedure within the responsibilities of those Courts. I am advised that there have been discussions between the two Courts on this matter, but that the problems have not yet been resolved. I hope that it will be possible for these problems to be overcome by agreement between the Courts so that the costs of litigation can be kept as low as possihle.
Ranger Uranium Project
(Question No. 2045)
Mr O'Keefe asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) What volume of the planned rate of production of 3,000 tonnes of ore from the Ranger Uranium Project has been committed for sale, having regard to his statement to the Sydney Chamber of Commerce, incorporated in Hansard on 26 November 1980 (page 55), that almost all of the planned rate of production has already been committed for sale overseas.
(2) Who are the customers to whom this uranium has been committed.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) About 90 per cent of total production from the Ranger project, based on an annual production rate of 3,300 short tons Up, for the period 1982 to 1996, has been committed.

(2)-

Customer countries
Japan . . . .
Republic ofKorea JapanFederal Republic of Germany' United States of America

Quantity of uranium
contracted (short tons
U,O,)
2,216
2,500 13,412 20,370 2,250

Government approval of sales contract
Approved prior to December 1972
3 December 1979 11 September 1980 II September 1980 II September 1980

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3485

Customer countries

Quantity of
uranium contracted (short tons
U,O,)

Government approval of sales contract

Sweden* Commonwealth Government Stockpile
Replacement

3,150 1,114

30 April 1981

* Contracts associated with equity interest in ERA.

Northern Territory Disabled Persons: Health Projects
(Question No. 2053)
Mr Tambling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) What financial appropriations have been allocated by his Department for use in the Northern Territory for projects to assist the disabled during 1980-81.
(2) For what specific projects has this sum been allocated.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) For 1980-81, $700,000 has been appropriated for a proposed new program to provide certain categories of aids to disabled people throughout Australia, including the Northern Territory. It is hoped that the program will commence in the Northern Territory in the near future.
In addition the Government extended the medical benefits scheme from 1 January 1981 to cover orthodontic and related treatment for cleft lip and palate patients aged less than 22 years. This initiative is expected to cost the Government $1 m in 1980-81 for the whole of Australia. A specific figure for the Northern Territory is not available as this assistance is made available to patients by way of medical benefits.
Commonwealth Parliament Offices: Payment of Staff
(Question No. 2261)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:
Does the proposed elimination of the cash mode of salary payment as recommended in the Review of Commonwealth Functions (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1844) apply to staff in Commonwealth Parliament Offices.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 1981 contains an amendment to the Audit Act 1901 to provide that any payments of remuneration or allowances to Commonwealth employees shall not be made in cash, unless the Minister for Finance otherwise determines.
The staff in Commonwealth Parliament Offices come within the definition of 'Commonwealth employee' for the purposes of the Bill.
It is expected that a few exemptions will be granted mainly in respect of industrial type payrolls. Many other forms of salary payment are now available including cheque, pay to cheque account, savings bank, approved credit unions and approved building societies. The proposed elimination of cash pays should thus not present great difficulties; it will, however,

remove an element of risk to life and property which is present in the cash distribution system.

Albury-Wodonga Development Corporation

(Question No. 2429)

Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:

(I) What was the cost of (a) producing and (b) distributing the 7th Annual Report of the Albury-Wodonga Development
Corporation for 1979-80.

(2) What was the cost of maintaining the public affairs unit of the Corporation in each of the last five years.

(3) Does an article 011 page 7 of the Report claim that population is growing at the rate of 3.3 per cent.

(4) If so, how can this be reconciled with a statement on page 6 showing percentage annual increases in population of 3.07,2.64 and 2.83 respectively during the last three years.

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) (a) The cost of producing the 7th Annual Report of the Albury-Wodonga Development Corporation for 1979-80 was $6,783, including $5,490 pre-printing costs, some 90 per cent of which was expended to produce common base material
used for the production of Annual Reports of the Albury Wodonga (New South Wales) Corporation and the Albury Wodonga (Victoria) Corporation as well as the Albury-
Wodonga Development Corporation.

(b) Distribution is not complete. However total costs will

be less than $100.

.

(2) The cost of maintaining the public affairs unit of the Corporation in each of the last five years is as follows:

1975-76-$99,447, 1976-77-$135,946, 1977-78$100,914, 1978-79-$108,569, 1979-80-$1I 5,580.

(3) Yes.

(4) The statement on page 7 refers to the annual popu-
lation growth over the period 1971-79 in the Albury-Wodonga
urban area. The figures on page 6 refer to the growth in the Albury-Wodonga Statistical District which includes the Albury-Wodonga urban area as well as the outlying areas.

Migrant and Refugee Education
(Question No. 395)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) How many adult migrant and refugee education teachers are employed in each State on an (a) permanent, (b) temporary, (c) casual and (d) hourly basis.

3486 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

, (2) How many persons in each State are estimated to be in need of English classes,
(3) How many English classes arc (a) conducted or (b) financed in each State under the Adult Migrant and Refugee Education program.
(4) How many students are taking part in the Adult Migrant and Refugee Education program in each State.
(5) How many of the students referred to in part (4) were admitted to Australia as (a) immigrants and (b) refugees.
(6) What provisions (a) are or (b) were there toincrease staff and funding in this area with more than 100,000 immigrants coming to this country.
(7) What is the standard material used by the students and teachers in the courses for Adult Migran ts and Refugees.
(8) Can he say what new curriculum and/or materials are (a) used, (b) being prepared or (c) in the process of being prepared by his Department and/or the Department of Education.
(9) How many persons are employed on curriculum development referred to in part (8).
(10) How many of the persons employed on curriculum development (a) speak fluently a language other than English, (b) have formal qualifications in linguistics or (c) have special expertise or traioing in the preparation of curriculum materials.
(11) How many of the teachers employed on the Adult Migrant and Refugee Education Program (a) speak fluently a language other than English, (b) have formal qualifications in this specific area, or (c) have special expertise or training in teaching Adult Migrants and Refugees.
(12) Are there any plans to broaden or change the Adult Migrant and Refugee Education Program.
(13) What mechanisms of consultation with the State Ministers and/or Departments of Education regarding the Adult Migrant and Refugee Education Program are there.
(14) Is ultimate responsibility for the program and the employment of teachers vested in the (a) State Department of Education, (b) Federal Department of Education, (c) Schools Commission or (d) his Department.
(15) How many officers are employed on the administrative side of (a) the Adult Migrant and Refugee Education Program, (b) curriculum development, (c) State administration and (d) any other area.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Some 2000 teachers are employed in the Adult Migrant Education Program throughout Australia. The bulk of these are employed on an hourly paid basis. The position regarding permanent teachers varies according to the appropriate mix of full-time and part-time staff needed to facilitate a positive and substantial benefit to stablility, quality and effectiveness of program services. Victoria, Western Australia and Tasmania have no permanent teachers employed in the program. New South Wales has some 123 permanent teacher positions, Queensland 6, South Australia 9 and the Northern Territory 6. Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia employ some full-time temporary teachers and in New South Wales a number of hourly paid staff work on a full-time basis. As staffing arrangements are the responsibility of the States, my Department does not keep detailed statistics of the number of teachers in the categories listed.
(2) There is no direct information available on the number of persons in each State in need of English classes. The Galbally Report estimated from a broad appraisal of 1976 Census data that in May 1978 there were some 400,000 adults in Australia whose fluency in English was 'low'. Currently, there

are research projects underway to implement Galbally Recommendation 10 aimed at obtaining information on the English language and related needs of migrants in Australia. Further data will become available from the 1981 Census.
(3) and (4) The Commonwealth provides the funds for the Adult Migrant Education Program in each State (some minor rental charges for the use of schools and halls are not met by the Commonwealth). There is a range of courses provided under the Adult Migrant Education Program which includes initial settlement courses and, as part of the on-going program; day and evening classes, full-time and part-time courses, correspondence tuition, courses at the workplace, specific purpose English courses to meet employment needs and English by television. In addition a voluntary Home Tutor Scheme helps men and women who are unable to take advantage ofother learning opportunities.
It is estimated that in 1980-81 some 750 on-arrival courses will be held encompassing some 15,000 students. It is expected that within the on-going program there will be about 105,000 enrolments in 1980-81.
(5) Migrants and refugees are not separately identified in Adult Migrant Education Program statistics.
(6) Funding for the Adult Migrant Education Program nationally has increased substantially in recent years as shown by the following figures:
1976-77-$8.8m; 1977-78-$I2.4m; 1978-79-$17.9m; 1979-80-$23.3m; 1980-81-$28.9m (appropriation).
Ninety-five per cent of the budget for the Adult Migrant Education Program (excluding living allowances) is for salary and salary-related costs of persons employed by States and non-Government bodies conducting services within the program.
(7) and (8) A detailed syllabus has been developed for the on-arrival program and supplied to teachers working in that program. This work has been well received in Australia and commended by international experts.
Pilot materials based on that syllabus have been prepared including slides, cassettes, charts and language skill practice materials, with a view to national production of the materials. The idea has met with limited success and some further development is necessary before national production is possible. The development of further national course material for student and teacher use is at present under consideration.
The State Adult Migrant Education Centres develop and use a range of materials with the benefit of audio visual equipment provided for the program. Particular attention is being given to the development of individualised materials for use by students according to what they see as their own needs.
A course syllabus and accompanying materials have been prepared for use in the courses-in-industry program. A course syllabus and accompanying materials have been developed for the programs run for particular occupational groups, e.g. nurses and motor mechanics and for professionally qualified people.
The trialling of the ASLPR (a uniquely Australian language proficiency rating scale) has been concluded and techniques have been developed for establishing proficiency levels according to the scale (through the observace of actual language behaviour within given situations and settings). The ASLPR is being increasingly used at all levels of the program. It assists classroom teachers to determine the capabilities-- and therefore the course requirements for individual students-as well as providing an instrument for broader needs assessment and course planning and development at the State and national levels.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3487

(9) Curriculum development is undertaken by working parties, the membership of which includes staff of the State Adult Migrant Education Services and outside consultants, or by contracted specialists. A joint Commonwealth/States Committee on professional aspects of the Adult Migrant Education Program has been established to oversee curriculum and materials development. The Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs services the working parties, is responsible for liaison, undertakes some editing of the material produced and arranges the production of material. The number of staff involved is two.
(10) No Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs staff are directly employed on curriculum development.
The staff referred to in part (9) above speak a language other than English, have undertaken studies in the teaching of English as a second language andin linguistics.
(11) My Department does not keep statistics on the qualifications of the teachers who are employed by the States. The States have in-service training arrangements for teachers in the program. Under GalbaUy Recommendation 7, funds have been provided for in-service training and teacher development, especially for the On-arrival program. Two national in-service conferences have been held for Officers-in-Charge and Teachers-in-Charge with funds provided under this Recommendation. Funding has also been provided for local inservice arrangements, initially as a follow up to those conferences, and subsequently to assist the continuing development of teacher skills in planning and conducting courses, developing materials and evaluating outcomes.
(12) The Adult Migrant Education Program underwent change and reshaping following the Government's acceptance of the Galbally Report. Reshaping and development are continuing in accordance with the objectives of the Adult Migrant Education Program, viz:
1. To provide English language learning opportunities for migrants and refugees from non-English speaking backgrounds including specific need groups to meet personal, social and employment needs and to equip them to understand and make use of social institutions including those institutions through which they may wish to pursue educational advancements.
2. To provide information about living in Australia.
(13) There are various mechanisms of consultation regarding the Adult Migrant Education Program:
(i) Consultative committees in each State comprising senior officers of the State Adult Migrant Education Services and DIEA Regional Offices.
(ii) Commonwealth/State meetings of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs officers.
(iii) Commonwealth/State meetings of Ministers for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.
(iv) Joint Commonwealth/States Committee ori professional aspects of the Adult Migrant Education Program.
(v) State level Migrant Settlement Councils.
(vi) Consultations between senior officers from the States and DIEA Central and Regional Offices on budget and program matters.
(vii) Joint Commonwealth/State Co-ordinating Committee on the Home Tutor Scheme.
(viii) Joint Steering committees in States to oversee the implementation of studies and surveys.
(ix) Day to day liaison between DIEA Regional Office and the State Adult Migrant Education Services officers.
(14) My Department as my delegate is responsible for arranging the provision of courses in accordance with the Immigration (Education) Act. This co-ordinating and arranging role has recently been confirmed in the Prime Minister's statement on the Review of Commonwealth Functions. The States

or other agencies with whom the arrangements are made for the provision of courses are responsible for the employment of
teachers and for their terms and conditions of service.

(15) The number of Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs personnel employed on the Adult Migrant Education Program in the Department's Central and Regional
Offices, as at 30 April was:

Central Office

15

Regional Offices

31

46

Chemical and Biological Defence
(Question No. 491)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
Further to his predecessor's answer to parts (9), (10) and (II) of Question No. 5359 (Hansard, 22 May 1980, page 3198), what is the definition of the term 'chemical and biological defence' in the two agreements referred to.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The two arrangements referred to are the Technical Cooperation Program, which is administered in Australia by the Defence Science and Technology Organisation, and the Basic Standardisation Agreement, which is administered by the Army. Neither contains a definition of chemical and biological defence. The terms are interpreted by the participating countries in accordance with common usage. The definition of chemical and biological defence which is applicable to Australia's involvement in both arrangements is that stated in the Australian Joint Services Staff Manual Glossary: 'The methods, plans, procedures and training required to establish defence measures against the effects of attack by chemical and biological agents.'

Unemployment in New South Wales
(Question No. 538)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) How many persons were registered as being unemployed in the Commonwealth Employment Office areas of (a) Hurstville, (b) Bankstown and (c) Campsie, New South Wales, in (i) 1978, (ii) 1979 and (iii) 1980.
(2) How many of these persons in each of the areas and years referred to were (a) immediate former school leavers seeking their first job and (b) under 25 years of age.
(3) How many persons in each area and year referred to in part (1) and registered as unemployed in each of the categories referred to in part (2) were found work.
Mr N. A. BrownThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The monthly average of the number of persons who were registered as unemployed and awaiting placement with each of the specified Commonwealth Employment Service (CES) office areas during (i) 1978, (ii) 1979 and (iii) 1980 were:

3488 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Hurstville Bankstown Campsie

1978
3,513 3,333 3,604

1979
3,227 3,404 3,423

1980
2,764 3,203 3,074 (X)

(2) (a) Information on immediate former school leavers seeking their first job is not collected by the CES. The CES definition of school1eavers is that they comprise all persons under the age of 21 years who, at the time of registration, had ceased full-time primary or secondary education within the previous six months. This applies irrespective of whether such persons had been employed at any time during that period.
The monthly average of the number of persons who were registered as unemployed and awaiting placement and who were classified by the CES as schoolleavers for each of the specified areas and years were:

1978 1979 1980

Hurstville Bankstown Campsie

239

239

185

178

141

138

292

308

2S5(X)

(2) (b) Not available.
(3) The total number of placements* made by the CES of registrants classified as school leavers during each of the specified areas and years were:

1978 1979 1980

Hurstville Bankstown Campsie

395

553

299

448

452

334

162

196

l7l(X)

* Excludes persons registered with the CES who found
their own employment.
Information is not available on persons under 25 years who were registered as unemployed and who were placed by the CES.
(X) Excludes figures for April 1980 which were not collected due to an industrial dispute.

Service by Australian Army Officers in United Nations Truce Supervisory Organisation in Palestine
(Question No. 592)
Mr Milton asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
Will the Minister consider the declaration of Service by a small contingent of Australian Army officers in the United Nations Truce Supervisory Organisation in Palestine during the 1960's and early 1970's as eligibility for repatriation and Defence Service Homes benefits.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The question of providing Repatriation and Defence Service Homes benefits to members of the United Nations Peacekeeping, Monitoring and Observing Forces and to members of similar forces has been considered on many occasions.

Although it was recognised that they would be placed in a position where injury or death could occur in the course of their duties, they were not required to engage enemy forces in military operations and were not considered to be on 'special duty' in a 'special area' as defined in the Repatriation (Special Overseas Service) Act 1962.
Consideration of this matter involves more than service in Palestine. It would also have to include the extension of benefits to al1 serving Defence members and others involved in peacekeeping forces e.g. those in Cyprus.
However, members of peacekeeping, monitoring and observing Forces are eligible to claim compensation under the Commonwealth Employees' Compensation Act 1930-1970 which has since been replaced by the Compensation (Commonwealth Government Employees) Act 1971. Special United Nations compensation provisions also applied to their service.
Social Security Appeal Procedures
(Question No. 760)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(1) What procedures are followed in appeals lodged by Federal Members of Parliament on behalf of aggrieved social security recipients or unsuccessful social security applicants against a decision of (a) a Social Security branch office, where the appeal is lodged with the State Director of Social Security and (b) a State Director of Social Security, where the appeal is lodged with the Minister for Social Security.
(2) What is the average time taken to process these appeals.
(3) What was the average time taken in 1980 to process appeals made to the Social Security Tribunal on decisions concerning (a) invalid pensions, (b) age pensions, (c) Unemployment benefits, (d) supporting parents benefits, (e) family al1owances, (f) widows' pensions and (g) special benefits in (i) Brisbane, (ii) Sydney, (iii) Melbourne, (iv) Adelaide, (v) Perth, (vi) Darwin, (vii) Hobart and (viii) Canberra.
(4) Are Social Security Tribunals in each State required to have as a member of the Tribunal a representative of the medical profession.
(5) Is it a fact that the Social Security Tribunal in Brisbane has been without a representative of the medical profession as a member of the Tribunal for several months; if so, why.
(6) If the Brisbane Tribunal has been without a representative of the medical profession has this resulted in delays of up to 4 to 5 months in processing appeal applications.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Where an appeal is lodged against a decision made by an officer in a Social Security branch office or by a State Director, and that appeal has not previously been considered by a Social Security Appeals Tribunal, the appeal is referred to the Tribunal for registration and is then handled in accordance with the normal procedures governing social security appeals. These procedures require, among other things, that the decision appealed against be reconsidered by the Department of Social Security and then, if the appeaJis not to be conceded at this stage, dealt with by the Tribunal.
Where an appeal has previously been considered by a Tribunal which has recommended dismissal of the appeal, since 9 September 1980 the unsuccessful appellant may appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. The State Director of Social Security in the case of representations made to him

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3489

from a Federal Member of Parliament, and the Director General of the Department in the case of representations to the Minister for Social Security, could still review the decision appealed against where, for example, additional evidence was supplied, notwithstanding this further right of appeal. The Federal Member is, of course, advised of the outcome of the appeal. Representations from Federal Members not involving an appeal are dealt with in accordance with usual departmental procedures.
(2) Statistics on the average time taken to process these appeals are not collected separately from statistics for all finalised appeals dealt with by the Social Security Appeals Tribunals.
(3) Statistics on the average time taken in 1980 to process appeals made to the Social Security Appeals Tribunals are not available by pension, benefit or allowance. The average processing time shown in the table below is for finalised appeals dealt with by the Social Security Appeals Tribunals by State and Territory. The average processing time measures the number of working days between the date of registration of the appeal by the Social Security Appeals Tribunal and the date of the Tribunal's recommendation. Where the Tribunal recommends dismissal of the appeal, the date of the recommendation is the same as the date of finalisation. However, where the Tribunal recommended the appeal be upheld, processing time does not include the period between the date the Tribunal made a recommendation and the date the Department finalised the appeal, for which statistics are not available.

(4) No. A Social Security Appeals Tribunal has a doctor as one of its members only when dealing with medical appeals under the Social Services Act 1947. There is no requirement to have a doctor when a Tribunal is dealing with a nonmedical appea\.
(S) A medical practitioner was appointed to the Social Security Appeals Tribunals in Queensland on 27 May 1981 and I expect to make additional appointments soon. A major obstacle in the making of such appointments prior to this was the reluctance of suitable doctors to accept appointment at the then prevailing rates of remuneration. However, after I raised this matter with the Minister for Administrative Services, a new determination was made by the Remuneration Tribunal on 4 May 1981 increasing the sitting fees payable to all members of the Social Security Appeals Tribunals.
(6) The delay in appointing doctors to the Queensland Social Security Appeals Tribunals has unfortunately meant that some medical appeals have not been handled as expeditiously as might otherwise have been the case, but it is not possible to say how many appeals have been so aft-ected. It is important to note however that the right of appeal operates in addition to, rather than in substitution for, the review process which previously operated, and that delays in the appointment of doclors to the Tribunals have in no way delayed this process, which involves the Department of Health and, as appropriate, external medical specialists.

SOCIAL SECURITY APPEALS TRIBUNALS AVERAGE PROCESSING TIME OF FINALISED APPEALS DEALT WITH BY TRIBUNALS: NUMBER OF
WORKING DAYS
States: 1 January 1980 to 31 December 1980

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

NT ACT

Processing time under 3 months Processing time 3 months andover Processing time aJl cases

41.9
(67.8%) 10S.3
(32.2%) 62.3
(100%)

37.5 (78.S%)
103.9
(21.5% ) S1.8
(100%)

25.2
(85.6%) 94.0
(14.4%) 35.1
(100%)

30.5
(80.2%) 96.5
(19.8%)
43.5 (100%)

28.4 (88.1%)
97.9 (11.9%)
36.7 (100%)

22.9
(98.9%) 71.S
(1.1%) 23.4
(100%)

28.3
(77.3%) 94.7
(22.7%) 43.4
(100%)

49.1 (71.4%)
188.6 (28.6%)
89.0 (100%)

Notes: Statistics on processing time for the quarter ended 31 March 1980 in NSW and Queensland, and for the quarter ended 30 September 1980 in Victoria, are not available. Statistics for those States in the table above are based on the remaining three quarters in 1980.

Disabled Children: Education Assistance
(Question No. 909)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
Has the Government announced that it wishes to give assistance and encouragement to parents attempting to provide education in a normal school for their disabled children as opposed to special schools and sheltered employment; if so, in this International Year of Disabled Persons will this assistance include telephone concessions to families caring for disabled children at home.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question.

the integration of a further 300 handicapped children into regular schools, to operate from 1981. In addition, priority will be given to funding projects that will result in the movement of as many children as possible from special to regular schools. Government and non-government school systems, and schools. will be eligible to apply for grants for projects. The funds may also be used to:
(a) provide support to enable isolated handicapped children to attend neighbourhood regular schools;
(b) fund projects designed to test new ways of fully or partialIy assisting handicapped children already integrated into regular schools; and
(c) facilitate the enrolment of handicapped children who are beginning their formal schooling into regular primary schools.

The Government announced on 20 August 1980 that an additional $101 will be provided under the Schools Commission's Special Education Program for extra Staff resources to assist

The provisions of this program do not include telephone concessions for families caring for disabled children.

3490 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Underspending of Estimates: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs
(Question No. 1102)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(l) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 286-Administrative and (b) 288Commonwealth Employment Service.
(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, 'Statement on savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142Appropriations Acts (Nos 1 and 2) 1980-81; if so, what are the reasons.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The original 1980-81 Appropriations made for my Department for Division 286-Administrative and Division 288-Commonwealth Employment Service were those presented to the Parliament in Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1980-81. The Government considered my Department's estimates in the light of its policies in respect of particular areas of expenditure and of general financial and economic objectives.
The general principles applied to the preparation of estimates by my Department are set out in the Directions issued by the Secretary of the Department of Finance under the Authority of the Audit Act 1901. These Directions are long standing and have been endorsed by successive Governments. The relevant general principles are set out in Finance Direction 6.3 and provide in essence that:
(i) Estimates shall represent a realistic assessment of the sums expected to be spent and shall be based on current or known costs. Items of a recurring nature may be estimated on the basis of experience.
(ii) Estimates shall not include amounts in respect of proposals which are so far from firm that it is not possible to form any real estimate of what payment, if any, will be made.
(2) The Department of Finance Information Paper, 'Statement of Savings Expected in Annual Appropriations Made By Acts Nos. 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos. 1 and 2) 1980-81', sets out amounts by which my Department estimated, at the time of preparation of the Appropriation Bills (Nos. 3 and 4) 1980-81, expenditure under the Appropriation Items concerned would at 30 June fall short of the Appropriation originally made. What actual underspending will occur in respect of those or other Items cannot be stated with certainty at this stage. The estimated savings would rellect for the most part the following circumstances:
(i) Current expectation that events would not occur by 30 June 1981, in cases where financial provision had been made in the Appropriation Acts (Nos. 1 and 2) 1980-81 in the then expectation that they would occur by that date.
(ii) Compliance with Government policy that, as far as practicable, savings be offered as offsets to additional funds sought in the Appropriation Bills (Nos. 3 and4), 1980-81; and
(iii) The results of efforts by Departmental management to improve efficiency and thereby reduce costs.

Underspending ofEstimates: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No.n08)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 360-Administrative and (b) 364Overseas service.
(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos. 1 and 2) 1980-81; ifso, what are the reasons.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member's attention to answer No. 1101 given by the Treasurer on behalf of the Minister for Finance in Hansard of 13 May 1981, page 2374.
Departmental Air Travel: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs
(Question No. 1137)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) How many travel warrants have been issued for his Departmental officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The information requested is not readily available in Departmental records. I am not prepared to authorise the use of staff resources to undertake the task of identifying the particular information requested.
Departmental Air Travel: Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1148)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(I) How many travel warrants have been issued for Department of Veterans' Affairs officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) The information sought by the honourable member is as follows:
(a) 1,066. (b) 880. (c) 772. (d) 993. (e) 697.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3491

(2) Details of the cost of air travel in the periods concerned are not readily obtainable from Departmental records and I am not prepared to authorise the use of resources to obtain the information.
Social Security Appeals Tribunal
(Question No. 1189)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(1) When did it become mandatory for one position on the Social Security Appeals Tribunal in each State to be set aside for a medical representative.
(2) Can the tribunals function without a medical representative.
(3) For what periods have the tribunals been without a medical representative.
(4) What is the remuneration made available to a medical representative on the tribunal.
(5) Does the remuneration differ among tribunal members.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) On 9 September 1980 the former Minister for Social Security announced that suitably qualified medical practitioners would be appointed to Social Security Appeals Tribunals to enable those tribunals to consider appeals against decisions of the Department of Social Security which involve medical assessment.
(2) Yes, for the purpose of considering appeals of a nonmedical nature.
(3) Medical practitioners were first appointed to the Social Security Appeals Tribunals in Victoria, Western Australia, Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory in December 1980, in South Australia in January 1981, in New South Wales in February 1981, in the Northern Territory in March 1981, andin Queensland in May 1981.
(4) Medical practitioners appointed to the Social Security Appeals Tribunals receive remuneration, in accordance with a determination made by the Remuneration Tribunal, at rates equivalent to the sessional fees payable from time to time to senior medical specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions. The current rate is $34.50 per hour.
(5) Yes. Non-medicalmcmbers of Social Security Appeals Tribunals receive remuneration at the rates of $135 per day (Chairman) or $115 per day (other member), in accordance with a determination made by the Remuneration Tribunal. Such members receive 50 per cent of the daily rate for meetings ofless than three hours' duration.
Financial Assistance from the Department of Social Security
(Question No. 1190)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
Which of the following organisations have applied for financial assistance from the Department of Social Security since January 1976, for which grants have they applied and with what success:

(a) Aid for the Blind (Queensland)
(b) Aurora Clinic
(c) Aurora Foundation for the Blind (Queensland)
(d) Australian Association for Better Hearing
(e) Autistic Children's Association of Queensland
(f) Blind Training and Placement Centre (g) C.H.I.L.D.
(h) Catholic Education Centre for Deaf Children
U) Deaf Society (Queensland)
(k) Epilepsy Association of Queensland
(I) Help Industries Ltd
(m) Intellectually Handicapped Persons Association of Queensland
(n) Leprosy Mission
(0) Motivational Activity Centre Handicapped (MACHI)
(p) Mis&ion to Lepers
(q) Muscular Dystrophy Family Support Association
(r) Paraplegic Welfare Association of Queensland
(8) Pony Riding for the Disabled Association
(t) Queensland Industrial Institution for the Blind
(u) Queensland Society for Crippled Children
(v) Queensland Society of Blind Citizens
(w) Queensland Spastic Welfare League
(x) Queensland Sub-Normal Children's Welfare Association
(y) Queensland Training and Placement Centre for the Blind
(z) Ryden-Cheshire (Qld) Foundation
(aa) Special Education Parents Organisation
(ab) Sporting Wheelies and disabled Sport and Recreation Association
(ac) Welfare Association for the Autistically Handicapped
(ad) Windsor Day Care Centre for Intellectually Handicapped Children, Wilston, Queensland
(ae) Friends ofBrain Injured Children
(at) ANSUA (A New Start for the Under-Achiever) and
(ag) SPELD (Society for the Prevention and Elimination of Learning Difficulties).
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Many of the organisations listed have applied for assistance from the Department of Social Security since 1976.
The following tables provide details, according to information held in my Department's offices, of:
(A) Organisations which have applied for financial assistance and have been, or will be, funded;
(B) Organisations which have applied for financial assistance and whose applications are still under consideration;
(C) Organisations which have applied for financial assistance and whose applications have been rejected; and
(D) Organisations listed by the honourable memher Cor which there is no record of an application for financial assistance.

3492 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(A) ORGANISATIONS WHICH HAVE APPLIED FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE AND HAVE BEEN, OR WILL BE, FUNDED

Organisation

Details of financial assistance applied for

Financial assistance provided
------

e Autistic Children's Association of Queensland
g C.H.I.L.D. h Catholic Education Centre for Deaf
Children Deaf Society Qld (Incorporated)
Help Industries o Motivational Activity Centre Handi-
capped (MACHI)
Paraplegic Welfare Association of Queensland
Pony Riding for the Disabled Association u Queensland Society for Crippled Children
v Queensland Society for Blind Citizens w Queensland Spastic Welfare League

Capital, Salary, Equipment, Rent, Maintenance, Handicapped Children's Benefit
Capital, Salary
Capital, Equipment, Maintenance Capital, Equipment, Salary, Rent
Capital, Salary, Equipment, Maintenance, Training Fees Capital, Salary, Equipment, Rent
Capital, Salary, Equipment, Maintenance,Rent
Capital, Equipment, Maintenance Capital, Equipment, Salary, Maintenance
Capital Capital, Salary, Equipment, Rent, Maintenance, Training Fee, Handicapped Children's Benefit

(i) Capital, salary, equipment, maintenance subsidies and Handicapped Children's Benefit have been paid under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act
(ii) Three residential projects have been approved under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act for rental subsidy commencing 1981-82.
Project receives recurrent funding under the Childrens Services Program. approval in principle has been given for the construction of a new centre.
Centre has received capital, equipment and maintenance grants under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act.
(i) Activity Therapy Centre currently being funded for recurrent costs under the Handicapped Persons Act.
(ti) Capital subsidy has been approved for adult residentials for payment in 1980-81.
Sheltered Workshop is currently receiving subsidy under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act for recurrent costs in all subsidy types.
(i) Activity Therapy Centre receives assistance under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act.
(ii) A capital grant has been approved for an adult residential for 1980-81.
(i) Residential project approved for capital subsidy under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act.
(ii) Activity Therapy Centre receives rental subsidy and both facilities receive subsidy for recurrent costs under the same legislation.
Training Centre has received salary, equipment and maintenance under the Handicapped persons Assistance Act.
(i) Capital, equipment, salary, maintenance subsidies have been paid under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act.
(ii) Further projects to be funded
under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act within current triennium, 1980-83.
Personal Care Subsidy currently being paid under the Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act.
(i) Capital, salary, equipment, rent, maintenance subsidies and Handicapped Children's Benefit have been paid under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act.
(ii) A capital grant has also been ap-
proved under the Childrens Services Program.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3493

Organisation x Queensland Sub-Normal Children's
Welfare Association
y Queensland Training and Placement Centre for the Blind
ag SPELD (Society for the Prevention and Elimination of Learning Difficulties)

Details of financial assistance applied for Capital, Salary, Equipment, Rent, Maintenance, Training fee, Handicapped Children's Benefit
Capital, Salary, Equipment, Rent
Administration Costs

Financial assistance provided
(i) Capital, Salary, Equipment, Rent, Maintenance subsidies and Handicapped Children's Benefit have been paid under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act.
(ii) A capital grant has also been approved under the Childrens Services Program.
Activity Therapy Centre has received rent, salary and equipment subsidies under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act. A grant to assist in the administration of a remedial reading course has been approved under the Childrens Services Program.

(B) ORGANISATIONS'WHICH HAVE APPLIED FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE AND WHOSE APPLICATIONS ARE STILL UNDER CONSIDERATION

Organisation

Details of financial Assistance applied for

a Aid for the Blind (Queensland) *Help Industries
m Intellectually Handicapped Persons Association of Queensland
r *Paraplegic Welfare Association of Queensland
w *Queensland Spastic Welfare League
x *Queensland Sub-Normal Children's WeHare Association
y "Queensland Training and Placement Centre for the Blind
ad Windsor Day Care Centre for Intellectually Handicapped Children, Wilston, Queensland
af ANSUA (A New Start for the Under Achiever)

Capital, Salary, Equipment Capital, Salary, Equipment Capital, Salary, Equipment
Capital, Salary, Equipment Capital, Salary, Equipment, Rent, Maintenance Capital, Salary, Equipment
Capital, Salary, Equipment
Salary, Rent, Equipment
Capital or Rent, Salary, Equipment

*These organisations also receive funding as detailed in TableA.
(C) ORGANISATIONS WHICH HAVE APPLIED FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE AND WHOSE APPLICATIONS HAVE BEEN REJECTED
k Epilepsy Association of Queensland
(D) ORGANISATIONS FOR WHICH THERE IS NO RECORD OF AN APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
b Aurora Clinic c Aurora Foundation for the Blind (Queensland) d Australian Association for Better Hearing f Blind Training and Placement Centre n Leprosy Mission p Mission to Lepers q Muscular Dystrophy Family Support Association t Queensland Industrial Institution for the Blind

z Ryden-Cheshire (Qld) Foundation aa Special Education Parents Organisation ab Sporting Wheelies and Disabled Sport and Recreation
Association ac Welfare Association for the Autistically Handicapped ae Friends of Brain Injured Children
Integration of Handicapped Children into Regular Schools
(Question No. 1195)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the estimate of the Director of Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Services at Melbourne's Austin Hospital, Dr Bruce Tonge, that more than 20 per cent of children under 18 years of age suffer from chronic illness or disability.
(2) If so, does Dr Tonge estimate that this percentage is increasing.
(3) What is the Government's commitment in respect of the integration of handicapped children into regular schools.
(4) Will the total 1980 allocation of$lm for the integration of handicapped children into regular schools be increased for the next school year.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Although I am unaware of the basis of Dr Tonge's estimate, the Australian Health Survey conducted by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) in 1977-78 revealed that 19 per cent of children under 5 years, 27 per cent of persons between the ages of 5 and 14 years and 32 per cent of persons aged 15 to 24 had a chronic condition (ie. any permanent disability; any illness, injury or impairment which a respondent claims to have had for more than six months; illnesses under control e.g. diabetes, epilepsy).
Because a dissection of the above data by single year ages is not available, the percentage relating to such persons under the age of 18 years cannot be accurately determined.
The ABS plans to repeat the Australian Health Survey in 1983. No later figures for comparative purposes will be available until the survey is completed.
The definition of a chronic condition used in the Health Survey covers a wide range of illnesses and disabilities of varying levels of severity. I presume many of the children of school age who are included could be attending normal schools. The

3494 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

relevance of the Survey to the Government's supplementary program to assist, the integration of handicapped children into normal schools cannot be readily assessed.
(3) The Government's commitment in respect of the integration of handicapped children into regular schools is to provide $lm (subject to norma! allowance for price rises) in 198! for:
(a) projects that will result in the movement of as many children as possible from special to regular schools;
(b) support to enable isolated handicapped children to attend neighbourhood regular schools;
(c) projects designed to test new ways of fully or partially assisting handicapped children already integrated into regular schools;
(d) facilitating the enrolment of handicapped children who are beginning their formal schooling into regular primary schools.
Of these purposes it is intended that priority should be given to the first one, which is concerned with the movement of children from special to regular schools. '
Applications from systems and their schools and from nonsystemic schools are appraised by panels in the States and the Northern Territory representative of Education Departments, Catholic Education Commissions, Associations of Independent Schools and the Schools Commission. The recommendations of appraisal panels are submitted for my approval. Grants are offered and payments are made to systems and individual schools for approved projects.
(4) For 1982 the Government has maintained expenditure, in real terms, on the integration of handicapped children into regular schools. This expenditure will be more closely related to the special education programs for government and nongovernment schools by being incorporated as an element of these programs in 1982.
Annual Reports and Other Publications: Department ofIndustry and Commerce
(Question No. 1234)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notic.:e, on 9 April 1981:
l. What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.
2. What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
3. Are other regular pUblications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
1. Industry and Commerce Annual Report, Australian Manufacturing Council Annual Report, Australian Tourist Commission Annual Report.
2. $12,585.
3.-

Publication

Cost of

Cost of

production distribution

$

$

Journal of Industry and Com-

merce . . . . . . . .

2,592

Major Manufacturing and Mining

Investment Projects (Sched-

ules) . . . . . . . . .

9,217

Publication
Recent Policy Developments Australia-Conventions Diary Statistical Review

Cost of

Cost of

production distribution

$ 1,395
5,834 7,390

$ 1,200

26,428

1,200

Annual Reports and Other Publications: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 1249)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications in 1979-80.
(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; is so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) The Departmental Annual Review, incorporating the report on the Adult Migrant Education Program.
(b) Committee on Overseas Professional Qualifications Report.
(c) National Accreditation Authority for Translators and Interpreters (N.A.A.T.I.) Report.
(d) Report of the Australian Institute of Mulicultural Affairs.
(2) (a) $6,338. (b) $2,025. (c) $253. (d) Not applicable. (3) (i) Australian Immigration Consolidated Statistics: (a) $5000 in 1979-80. (b) Distributed through the departmental and Foreign
Affairs mailing system. Other distribution is on request. (ii) Australian Immigration Quarterly Statistical Summary: (a) $24001979-80. (b) Distributed as in 3 (i). (iii) Population Report: (a) 1979-80 $1200. (b) $1350.
Employment of Private Consultants: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 1275)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80; if so, (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3495

Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) 9.
(b), (c) and (d) Private consultants or consultancies in 1979-80.

Consultant

Purpose

1979-80 Expenditure

Australian Council Finalisation of methfor Educational Reodology of evaluation

search

of on-arrival courses for migrants

Dr C. Allen, Tutor, To provide a syntactic Dept of Linguistics, analysis of English

Australian National Language Core Sylla-

University

bus material for the

Initial settlement

program

Dr W. G. Coppell and Intensive study of the Associates, English language needs Macquarie Univerof migrants living in

sity, New South the Parramatta area

Wales

Dr D. Ingram, Senior Academic Consultant

Lecturer, Departto the Joint Committee ment Languages and on Professional aspects

Literature, Mt of the Adult Migrant

Gravatt CAE

Education Program

M. S. J. Keys Young, Planners

Studies of the settlement experiences of selected groups in Sydney (based on Fairfield) and in Mel-

bourne

Dr C. Price, Department of Demography, Australian National University

A demographic study to analyse intermarriage trends and, fertility patterns amongst ethnic groups

W. D. Scott & Co.

Migrant> Information Needs Survey

Prof. Western, Prof. of Sociology, University of Queensland

Study of the settlement experience of Spanish settlers in Brisbane (based on the Darra, Wacol, Inala areas)

Dr C. M. Young, Australian National University

Study of employment needs and aspirations of ethnic youth, commencing with Turkish and Lebanese groups

in Sydney and Melbourne

$ 2,425
829
4,000 1,422 35,000
17,800 40,000 8,500 28,650

Employment of Private Consultants: Department of Housing and Construction
(Question No. 1282)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on9 April1981:
Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80; if so, (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.

Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes. The Department of Housing and Construction is a major user of private consulting firms, particularly architects, engineers, quantity surveyors and other associated professional and technical disciplines. The Department also places contracts with firms for technical personnel services.
Private consultants are employed for planning and design of Commonwealth building and engineering works.
Approximately 1,200 contracts were placed with consultants and contract personnel firms in 1979-80.
A detailed list covering all of these contracts is too extensive to present in answer to this question; all con~racts over $1,000 are published in the Commonwealth Gazette. The value of individual contracts in 1979-80 varied between $500 and $500,000.

Female Officers and Employees: Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1358)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April1981:
(1) How many female officers and employees are employed in the Department of Veterans' Affairs, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females are appointed or commenced employment in the Department of Veterans' Affairs during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Prime Minister to Question No. 1336. (Hansard, 5 June 1981, p.3314.)

Industrial Action: Department ofAboriginal Affairs

(Question No. 1385)

Mr Dungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(1) How many officers or employees in the Department of Aboriginal Affairs have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last two years.

(2) How many manhours wllre involved in these actions.

(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.

(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken

in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regu-

lations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what

occasions.

>

Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(1) (a) 1979-80-182; 1980-81-165.

(b) 1979-80-23 officers were involved in restrictive work action.

3496 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

1980-81-None. (2) 1979-80 -1123 man hours due to strikes. 1980-812173 man hours due to strikes. 1979-80 - 1029 man hours due to restrictive work action. (3) No. (4) Twenty-three officers were stood down without pay because of their failure to obey directions to process Ministerial correspondence and associated material during July 1979.
Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department ofImmigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 1405)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 198 J :

(1) Have any officers and employees of his Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.
(2) What is the Division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Seven officers of the Department have been granted permission to engage in outside employment.
(2) The Divisions, approximate salary levels and nature of outside employment in each case are as follows:

Office
Canberra
Melbourne
Sydney Sydney Sydney
Sydney Hobart

Division
Third
Third
Third Third Third
Fourth Fourth

Salary
$ $J 8,879
$14,247
$15,981 $11,895 $11,895
$10,647 $10,417

Date of approval
7.7.80
20.3.77
9.1.78 13.2.81 16.9.80
23.4.80 March 79

Nature of employment
Translation (work not performed; approval being withdrawn). Part time language teacher for two hours Saturday mornings, secondary school. Ballet teacher, four hours per week. Casual translator averaging 1 hour per week. Waiter for four hours on Friday and Saturday nights. Take away food bar attendant. Barman for four hours on Saturday nights.

Air Travel in Australia: Department ofIndustry and Commerce
(Question No. 1468)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
What sum was paid by his Department, or by Departments formally encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Airline
Ansett TAA East West Sovereign Masling Geelong Air Travel

Amount
$ 141,033 242,427
1,200 480 380 195
385,715

Head Office: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1517)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(I) Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so when.
Mr WilsonThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am advised by my Department:
(1) Yes; as per table below:

Section
Artbank Northern Territory Island Services Cell Office of the Administrator, Nor-
folk Island Public Lending Right

Location Sydney Darwin Perth
Norfolk Island Sydney

Staff 5 2 3
3

(2) Decisions to relocate units of Government employment to Canberra are taken by Government on the advice of the
Location of Australian Government Employment Committee (LAGE). an IDC chaired by the Public Service Board. The advice tendered to Government by the LAGE Committee is based on submissions by the relevant departments, and consultations with interested bodies such as statT organisations.
Any plans to relocate the sections in Canberra is a matter for LAGE consideration and subsequent decision by
Government.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3497

Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 1535)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by his Department.
(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
MI' Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) and (b) 129 officers employed in my Department in Australia have their telephone rental and part of the charges made paid by the Department. 125 officers in overseas posts also have part of their telephone charges met by the Department. (1n some cases these costs are met as a condition of overseas service.)
(2) The cost of semi-official telephones for officers in Australia in 1979-80 was $16,850. The cost of phones installed in residences of officers overseas in 1979-80 was $16,752.
Recycling of Paper: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 1583)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Has any action been taken by the Department of Social Security to re-cycle paper; if so, what action.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The Department of Social Security makes use of facilities to recycle paper.
Generally waste paper from offices in all States and Territories, except Tasmania and the l'lorthern Territory, is recycled. Companies operating under government contract undertake this task. Some waste paper, for example from staff rubbish bins and from offices in country areas where a recycling service is unavailable, has to be burnt.
In Tasmania and the Northern Territory a recycling service is not available and all waste paper is burnt.
Offices in States and Territories bind suitable obsolete paper and it is used by staff as writing pads.
Recycling of Paper: Department of Education
(Question No. 1586)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Has any action been taken by his Department to recycle paper, if so, what action.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Paper of an unclassified or non-sensitive nature is collected from the Department's offices in Canberra on a daily basis for the purpose of recycling by commercial interests. Similar arrangements exist in the States.

Where the Regional Offices of my Department are located in Commonwealth Government premises, collection is arranged by the Department of Administrative Services.
Recycling of Paper: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 1591)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Has any action been taken by his Department to recycle paper; if so, what action.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No action has been taken by the Department of the Capital Territory to recycle paper. However, for several years the Department has actively encouraged waste paper and cardboard recycling ventures by private enterprise. This initiative has been supported by the National Capital Development Commission through the LD.C. on Waste Disposal.
Collection centres have been established by the Department in Jolly Street, BeIconnen; Botany Street, Phillip and at the BeIconnen and Mugga Lane Landfills. These centres are cleared regularly by Canberra Paper and Cardboard Recycling Company.
It is estimated that in Canberra the company is collecting a total of 10,000 tonnes of recyclable paper and cardboard annually, of which 1,200 tonnes is generated from Government buildings and about 1,000 (onnes from the recycling centres.
Other contractors have entered the paper recycling business in Canberra, but their effect has not been significant.
The volume of material presently being recycled is consistent with the original expectations of the Australian paper manufacturing industry.
Tea Services: Department ofIndustry and Commerce
(Question No. 1598)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many (a) full time and (b) part time staff are employed on teamaking and distribution in (i) and Head Office and (ii) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his Department in 1979-80.
Sir Phillip LynchThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) Ten full time officers
(i) Five officers are employed in ANZAC Park West Building (ACT) and four in Edmund Barton Building (ACT)
(ii) One full time officer is employed in the Department's Milsons Point Office, Sydney.
(b) Nil
(i) Nil (ii) Nil
(2) (a) $102,017. This amount includes the costs incurred in 1979-80 by the former Department of Productivity, that is (i.e. $54,807). In regard to the cost of services provided to the

3498 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Government factories by the Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Ltd the honourable member is referred to the Minister for Administrative Services' answers to parliamentary question 1615.
(b) Nil.
Demolition of Commonwealth Dwellings
(Question No. 1770)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many Commonwealth dwellings in the Australian Capital Territory have been demolished in each of the last three years, and what was the reason for each demolition.
(2) How many private residences have been resumed for demolition in the same period and for what reasons.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) 1978-79-precise number not available but not more than 23; 1979-80-141; 1980-81-23. Demolition occurs when Commonwealth dwellings are in such a condition that they can no longer be economically maintained or upgraded.
(2) None.
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1889)
Mr Bungery asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000, or about 20 per cent by use of monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of the Department of Veterans' Affairs controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the' introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in the Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.
(2) Telephones are for official use only, although in an emergency private calls may be made. Private trunk calls are booked through the switchboard operator following approval by the officer's section head and the costs of such calls are to be remitted immediately to the Collector of Public Monies. It is not permitted to use STD for private calls. Where the switchboard equipment permits, STD access is restricted to those extensions where access is considered essential to the efficient operations of the officers concerned. All other extensions are barred from STD and details of trunk calls made from any extension are recorded by the switchboard operator. Where the equipment does not permit STD barring, switchboard operators carry out regular monitoring of calls.
(3) Monitoring devices, when available, are installed to record details of calls made and the information received is reviewed by senior staff members. The limited number of monitoring devices available and costs involved prohibit permanent installation on all extensions.

The Department of Veterans' Affairs is conscious of the need for economies in telephone usage and regular reviews are carried out in all areas of operations. Staff are made aware of Departmental policies in this regard and are encouraged to restrict telephone usage to essential business matter.'
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Housing and Construction
(Question No. 1891)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000 or about 20 per cent, by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of his Department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr M"Veigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(J)Yes.
(2) .Telephones in the Department of Housing and Construction are STD barred to the maximum extent possible, consistent with efficiency.
Current instructions to staff do not allow access to STD for private calls. An officer making a private call is required to obtain the approval of his supervisor, book a trunk call through the switchboard operator, obtain the cost of the completed call from the operator and pay the Receiver of Public Moneys.
(3) Consideration has been given to the use of telephone monitoring devices. Some of the Department's offices have installed monitoring devices and negotiations are continuing with Telecom to extend this control.
Motor Vehicle Industry
(Question No. 1915)
Mr Burr asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What is the annual cost of providing assistance to the Australian motor vehicle industry by (a) direct subsidy, (b) grant, (c) tariff protection, (d) quota protection and (e) other forms of State or Commonwealth assistance.
(2) Is he able to say how many persons are employed by the motor vehicle industry.
(3) What would be the cost of providing an annual pension to all motor vehicle industry employees at a rate equivalent to male average weekly earnings.
Sir Phillip' Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) to (e) The assistance package for domestic passenger motor vehicle production is made up of a number of interrelated measures. The protective effect of many of these measures, for example, quotas, local content plan, is difficult to quantify in dollar terms. These difficulties are heightened when estimates of the subsidy equivalent of the protective incidence of the assistance package are aggregated and then evaluated on a 'per employee' basis.

Answers to Questions

10 June 198 [ REPRESENTATIVES 3499

The latest available estimates of assistance accorded to passenger motor vehicle production are contained in the Industries Assistance Commission's draft report 'Passenger Motor Vehicles and Components-Post 1984 Assistance Arrangements', released on 24 February 1981. Discussion of the effect of the assistance package on consumer prices and the allocation of productive resources is contained in Chapter 6 (especially pp 97-103) of the Commission's report. In appendix 8 of the report, the Commission discusses the assumptions under which its analysis has proceeded including some of the limitations of its approach.
(2) The latest available figures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics based on the manufacturing census for 1978-79 estimate employment for the motor vehicles and parts industry at 76,664.
The Industries Assistance Commission's analysis of employment in passenger vehicle production is contained on pp 47-48 of the draft report. From evidence received the Commission estimated that in March 1980 about 65,000 persons were employed in the production of passenger vehicles and components. Of these, approximately 60 per cent were employed by the five Plan manufacturers.
The Commission's estimates arc broadly consistent with estimates by the Department of Industry and Commerce which indicate around 69,000 persons are currently employed in the industry-38,500 by the five Plan manufacturers, 400 in assembly outside the Plan and about 30,000 in over 700 establishments engaged in the production of automotive components.
These figures cover employment in the manufacturing sector only and do not include employment in related areas such as importing distribution and servicing. Estimates provided to the Commission by the Dealer's Association indicated that in 1979 dealers employed about 70,000 persons. Employment by importers is estimated at 12,800 in December 1980.
(3) The Australian Bureau of Statistics estimatc of average weekly earnings per employed male unit is $290.00 for the December quarter 1980. On this basis and the lAC and departmental figures provided in (2) above the annual cost of a pension to passenger motor vehicle manufacturing industry employees would be between $980.2m and $1040.5m.
Taxation on Profit from Elder Smith Goldsbrough Mort Ltd Share Transactions
(Question No. 1945)
Mr Hurford asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the reported $16.5m profit taken by Mr Robert Holmes a'Court and his Bell Group from the trading in shares of Elder Smith Goldsbrough Mort Ltd.
(2) Is it a fact that this profit will not be taxable pursuant to section 26AAA of the Income Tax Assessment Act, because the group has sold or is selling a subsidiary company which holds the Elders shares and is not selling the shares recently purchased.
(3) Is it the Government's intention that this profit should be taxable; if so, what action will be taken.
(4) Is it the Government's intention that this profit should be taxed, what is the reason.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2), (3) and (4) Because the secrecy provisions of the income tax law prevent the Commissioner of Taxation from informing either myself or any other person about the affairs

of individual taxpayers, I am not in a position to comment on the tax consequences of the transactions to which the honourable member refers.
I have, however, asked the Commissioner to examine the question of possible weaknesses in section 26AAA of the Income Tax Assessment Act. The matter is one of considerable complexity but I expect to receive a report from the Commissioner soon.
Regulation of Oil Prices
(Question No. 1949)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :
(1) Does the recent report of the Prices Justification Tribunal on Prices for petroleum products, state that the Tribunal proposes to remove the return on the retailing investment component from the wholesale list price of motor spirit from January 1982.
(2) If so, is it the Government's intention to require that this price adjustment be made.
(3) Will he ensure that the Tribunal is able to conduct the further inquiries needed to enable the new list prices to be determined.
(4) Is the Government proposing to deregulate oil prices by abolishing the Tribunal at a time when oil companies have been seeking 3c per litre more than the Tribunal is prepared to allow and when there is so much more to be done.
Mr Moore-- The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Prices Justification Tribunal, in its report of 31 March 1981 into the prices of petroleum products, stated that it proposed to remove the return on retail investment component from the maximum justified wholesale prices of motor spirit in January 1982.
(2), (3) and (4) On 27 May 1981 I introduced legislation into the Parliament to establish a Petroleum Products Pri9ing Authority. This body will have powers similar to those the PJT currently has in relation to petroleum product pricing, and will be able to consider matters such as the extent to which motor spirit prices include a return on investment by the companies in retail outlets.
Industries Assistance Commission Report on Wheelchairs
(Question No. 1954)
!VIr Duffy asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(1) Was the final Industries Assistance Commission report on wheelchairs signed on 23 December 1980 and submitted to thc Minister.
(2) If so, when is it expected that the report will be released.
(3) If the recommendations will be dealt with during 1981, will he be mindful of the fact that 1981 is the International Year of Disabled Persons.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) r tabled the report in the Parliament on 26 May 1981
following the Government's decision to reduce the tariff on mechanically propelled wheelchairs from 34 per cent to 20 per cent and the tariff on hand propelled wheelchairs from 36

3500 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

per cent to 20 per cent, in each case over a period of two years, as recommended by the Industries Assistance Commission.
(3) The Government was mindful of the fact that 1981 is the International Year of Disabled Persons when it considered the lAC report and made its decision thereon. The Government was also conscious of the scheme it announced in the budget to provide aids, inoluding wheelchairs, free of charge to the disabled, subject to specialist medical prescription.

Students in Tertiary Educational Institutions
(Question No. 2010)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 30 April 1981:
(1) What proportion of schoolleavers proceed to full time tertiary education in (a) Australia (b) The United States of America and (c) Japan.
(2) Is he able to say what proportion of students in tertiary educational institutions in (a) Australia, (b) the USA and (c) Japan pay tuition fees.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) A survey carried out by the Australian Bureau of Statistics in May 1980 revealed that in Australia 22.2 per cent of persons who left secondary school in 1979 studied full time in 1980 at a post-school educational institution (inc1udinguniversity, college of advanced education and technical and further education institutions).
(b) and (c) Comparable information on schoolleavers is not readily available for the USA and Japan. The following table, while not relating specifically to school leavers, does show the proportions of persons of particular ages attending tertiary education institutions (excluding technical and further education institutions in the case of Australia) on a full time basis. These figures are the latest available from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Interpretation of the figures should take into account such factors as differences in education systems, the emphasis placed on part time education in Australia (particularly through apprenticeships) and deficiencies in the scope and coverage of the statistics. A description of how the education systems in each of the three countries are classified is contained in 'Classification of Educational SystemsSummary Volume' OECD Paris 1975.
TERTIARY PARTICIPATION RATE~) PER CENT 1976

Age Australia

Japan USA

17

8.6

18 14.6

19 l4.S

20 11.2

21

7.1

22

4.3

23

2.8

24

2.0

S.9 40.1 32.2
40.9 36.9 2S.l 30.S 2S.4 26.1
1.3 19.7 1.1 13.9 0.2 13.8

(a) Persons of specified ages enrolled full time in tertiary education as proportions of persons of those ages in the population.
Source: 'Educational Statistics in OECD Countries'- OECD, Paris 1981.
(2) (a) In Australi!!, since 1974, tuition fees have not been imposed at tertiary institutions for vocationally oriented courses, or courses leading to awards. Most students at universities, colleges of advanced education and technical and further education institutions are in this category, the notable

exceptions being TAFE students enrolled in adult education courses. The recently announced decision that tuition fees be re-introduced in universities and colleges of advanced education for students undertaking degrees and diplomas subsequent to an initial tertiary qualification except for recognised double degree or diploma combinations and postgraduate students in receipt of Commonwealth Postgraduate Awards or holders of university and college of advanced education postgraduate awards will take effect for new enrolments from the beginning of 1982.
(b) In the USA I understand that it is general practice for tertiary institutions to charge all undergraduate students tuition fees. Recent information indicates that these fees range from approximately $US200 to $US 1000 per year at state funded institutions. Annual tuition fees at private institutions range up to $USSOOO p.a.
(c) In Japan all undergraduate students pay tuition fees. The scale offees charged is not readily available.
Refugees
(Question No. 2014)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 30 April 1981:
(1) What proportion of the annual expenditure of his Department is allocated for (a) immigrants and (b) refugees, considering that the money allocated under the Galbally Report did not make any specific provisions for refugees.
(2) Were approximately 20,000 refugees allowed into Australia in 1980.
(3) Have there been any specific funds allocated by his Department for the settlement of refugees.
(4) What provisions are there to cater for the specific needs of (a) refugees and (b) the increased number of immigrants, in 1981-82.
(S) For what programs and policies specifically concerning (a) refugees and (b) immigrants is his Department responsible and what sum was allocated to these specific, separate programs in each year since 1977.
(6) What proportion of his Department's expenditure on (a) refugees and (b) immigrants was spent on administrative expenses in each of the same years.
(7) With what other (a) Commonwealth and (b) State departments does his Department share responsibilities for the settlement of (i) refugees and (ii) immigrants.
(8) What consultative mechanisms are there between his Department and the States concerning the settlement of (a) refugees and (b) immigrants.
(9) To what degree are the various States consulted on the number of (a) refugees and (b) immigrants they are capable of settling on a (i) long and (il) short term basis.
(10) What provisions, such as special funds, etc., exist to help the States to cope with the speedy and successful settlement of (a) refugees and (b) immigrants and what sum was paid for this purpose in each year since 1977.
(11) How many (a) refugees and (b) immigrants are currently staying in the various settlement centres in each State.
(12) How many of the (a) refugees, (b) immigrants or (c) other categories received assisted passage since 1977 and what was the country of citizenship of the recipients.
(13) What projects exist to cater for the speedy settlement of (a) refugees and (b) immigrants in each State.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Question.I'

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3501

(1) Programs administered by DIEA to facilitate settlement are designed for immigrants. In this respect refugees are regarded as a category of immigrant. In general, no specific allocations are made for the various categories of immigrants.
(2) 21,692 persons entered Australia in 1980 under the Refugee and related programs.
(3) Apart from programs referred to in (i), funds are available to reimburse voluntary agencies for expenditure on clothing and other necessities provided to needy refugees immediately on arrivaL A revolving fund has been established and administered by voluntary agencies (CALFRIC) to provide establishment loans up to a maximum of $600 for refugees. Payment of special benefits by Department of Social Security is payable from day of arrival where required rather than after seven days in the case of certain other immigrants.
(4) This will be taken into consideration in the context of the 1981-82 Budget.
(5) Various programs are administered by DIEA to facilitate the settlement of migrants. Specific programs may be identified from the recommendations of the Galbally Report which the Government accepted in full and is implementing and also from details of votes administered by DIEA within its appropriations.
(6) Total administrative expenses of DIEA are set out in departmental appropriations. No breakdown between the various components of the Department's activities is available.
(7) Department of Social Security, Commonwealth Employment Service, Department of Administrative Services, Department of Education, State Adult Migrant Education Services, State Ministries of Immigration and/or Ethnic Affairs, health authorities and others.
(8) Meetings of Commonwealth and State Ministers for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and meetings of Commonwealth and State officials are held twice a year. Extensive consultative arrangements apply with State Adult Migrant Education Services. There are Migrant Settlement Councils in all States and Territories with Commonwealth and State/Territorial Government representatives on them.
(9) The intake of refugee and other migrants is discussed at each six-monthly meeting of Commonwealth and State Ministers for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs as one of the principal agenda items. There are also regular consultations with the States at official level. Discussions encompass both short-term and long-term considerations.
(10) State Adult Migrant Education Services are responsible for the majority of the Adult Migrant Education Program which is virtually wholly funded by the Commonwealth from funds appropriated to DIEA. Joint funding arrangements are available for State Governments for the employment of interpreters and translators. Details of funds made available for these purposes may be obtained from Budget papers.
(11) As at 11 May 1981, there were the following numbers of refugees and migrants at migrant centres.

Endeavour East Hills Westbridge Cabramatta

IndoEastern

Total

Chinese European refugee Migrant*

New South Wales

221

222

443

285

797

169

966

17

275

323

598

519

258

17

275

12

IndoEastern

Total

Chinese European refugee Migrant'

Fairy Meadow

222

24

246

24

Eastbridge Enterprise Midway Wiltona

Victoria

503

17

520

44

512

68

580

267

806

96

902

219

635

112

747

12

Queensland

Wacol

487

22

509

112

South Australia

Pennington

288

94

382

13

Western Australia

Graylands

329

275

604

96

Tasmania

MtStCanice

52

52

3

Northern Territory

Tamarind

78

78

Totals

5,463

1,439

6,902

1,624

* Migrants other than refugees.
In addition, migrant centres provide some accommodation for non-migrants-48 people (mainly apprentices) resided in the centres as at 11 May 1981.
I would draw the honourable member's attention to the fact that some State Government's also run centres which offer accommodation to migrants.
(12) Details can be found in Tables 14 and 23 in. the Australian Immigration Consolidated Statistics 1979. A copy has been forwarded to the honourable member.
(13) See (5). The Community Refugee Settlement Scheme has been established to facilitate the successful settlement of refugees directly into the community.

Immigration
(Question No. 2016)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 30 April 1981 :
(I) How many applications for (a) visitors', (b) permanent settlement and (c) temporary resident visas to Australia have been (i) approved and (ii) rejected since 1978 and from which countries were the (A) successful and (B) unsuccessful applications made.
(2) How many persons permitted to enter Australia without a permanent settlement visa since 1978 have permission to work in Australia.
(3) What provisions were there for (a) housing, (b) education, (c) employment, (d) social security, (e) health or (f) other areas for newly arrived permanent or temporary arrivals since 1978.
Mr Macphee--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) and (c) SeeTableA.
(b) See Table B.
(2) Arrival of persons for temporary residence ('T' category).

3502 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Period
1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81
(first six months)

No. of

No. of

workers dependants

27,527 31,908 45,823 22,932

8,991 9,374 8,059 6,041

Total persons
36,518 41,282 53,882 28,973

Note: Visitors are not normally permitted to undertake employment here. In applying for entry, visitors are required to make a declaration that they will not seek employment or undertake formal studies during the period of their intended stay in Australia.
Students may undertake vacation employment and/or employment as an integral part of their course and/or in the form of practical experience at the completion of their . courses. This is normally permitted where it is necessary to obtain registration or acceptance as a member of a professional body and where this necessary work experience cannot be gained in their own country. They may also undertake some part-time employment as long as this does not interfere with their academic progress.
Temporary residents include high level staff for Australian branches of overseas companies, academics for educational and research institutions, entertainers and sportsmen and certain professional and technical workers with special expertise who are often required in the early stages of establishment of some new developmental enterprises, Figures are not available by category by period of stay but the majority of specialised workers come for short periods, Usually temporary residents are eligible to remain for periods up to four years. The dependants of working age of temporary residents are not prohibited from undertaking employment or studies in Australia. The working holiday maker schemes involve reciprocity and the work is incidental to the holiday,

(3) Migrants entering Australia for permanent residence have the same entitlements as ordinary residents of Australia in regard to the matters raised. In more specific terms:
(a) housing-certain migrants and refugees are entitled to initial accommodation in migrant centres; family reunion categories are expected to be accommodated initially at least by a sponsoring close relative; generally permanent arrivals are eligible for State Government provided housing on the same basis as normal Australian residents, waiting periods varying from State to State;
(b) education-migrants and their dependants have the same access to education as other residents but in addition special programs of English language learning are available for both adults and children from funding provided mainly by the Commonwealth;
(c) employment-the facilities of the Commonwealth Employment Service are available for all migrants and refugees;
(d) social security-permanent arrivals are entitled to aU social security provisions on the same basis as other Australian residents-" residential requirements apply in certain instances;
(e) health-most medical and hospital organisations have special arrangements for newly arrived migrants ensuring that they can acquire adequate cover from the date of arrival without any waiting period. The Government has decided that migrants and refugees will be eligible for bulk billing for medical services for six months after arrival. Migrants and refugees are subject to health screening before visas are issued;
(f) other areas-an extensive range of programs is available to facilitate the settlement of migrants and refugees including those covered by recommendations of the Galbally Report.
Access to matters covered hy (a) to (f) by temporary arrivals varies according to the condition of their entry.

Table A VISITOR, STUDENT AND TEMPORARY RESIDENT VISAS REFUSED AND ISSUED OVERSEAS

Country in which visitor, student and temporary resi~
dent visas were refused and issued

Visitor visas

Student visas

Temporary resident visas

Refused

Issued

Refused

Issued

Refused

Issue-d - - -

1978 1979 1980 1978 1979 1980 1978 1979 1980 1978 1979 1980 1978 1979 1980 1978 1979 1980

Algeria A.R.Egypt Argentina Austria Bahrain Bangladesh Belgium Brazil Bulgaria Burma Canada Chile China, P. Rep. of Czechoslovakia Denmark Eire Fiji

13 31

47 45

2

126 175 186 352 374 498

7 \0 15

28 47 119

6t 112 143 985 1,223 1,732

24

76 79 59

14

1,612 2,531 2,822

4

191 156 182

33 36 21 474 574 449 2

10 10 7

12 18 7

13

7

2 106 136 152

75 168 151

16 19 17

12 16 18 874 1,338 t,676

12

50 54 49

19 13 12 766 869 859

35

31 28 25

30 54 15

12

19 46 85

15 39 41

12

71 66 66 13,577 17,928 21,018 14 46

\01 124 \30 42 40 19 2,\04 2,750 3,133

156 163 180 553 1,269 879

"32 30 25

21 47 123 416 776

12 26 110

37 61 145

392 461 384

49 28 89

20 22 22 1,556 2,005 2,417 4

23 36 34

192 157 234

13 10 17 1,198 2,178 2,370

7 6 11 39 44 81 225 299 344

1,092 1,024 847 4,812 5,526 6,420 56 242 48 271 379 251

2

262 219 233

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3503

Country in which
visitor, student and tempQrary resi-
den~ yis~~were
refused and issued

Visitor visas Refused

Is>ued

Student visas Refused

Issued

Temporary resident visas

Refused

Issued

Finland
France G.D.R. Germany F;R. of
Ghana
Greece Hong Kong Hungary .
India Indonesia Iran Is. Rep. of
Iraq Israel Italy Jamaica Japan . Kenya Korea, Rep. of Kuwait Lao, P. Dem. R. of
Lebanon Libya Malaysia Malta Mexico Nauru Netherlands, the New Caledonia
New Zealand Nigeria
Pakistan PapuaN.G.
Peru Philippines, the Poland Portugal Romania Saudi Arabia Singapore Solomon Islands South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland
Syria Tanzania Thailand Tonga . Trinidad and Tobago
Turkey United Arab Emirates . United Kingdom US. America USSR.
Vanuatu Venezuela Vietnam Western Samoa Yugoslavia Zambiat Zimbabwe

15

7

4 514 578 653

1 10

302 147 175 3,509 5,430 5,612

4

2 35

152 180 230

326 201 219 15,15427,049 31,710

21

4 90

72 67 68

75 38

993 839 810 3,472 4,162 4,199

4 13 102

5

2,057 1,611 1,916 7,273 9,259 14,281 692 908 19 299

513 722 666

1

1

156 209 374 2,060 2,496 2,680 38 70 75 109

*411 *355 461 *4,054 *3,701 8,758 *120 *.. 103 *353

*180 973 *.. *1,130 660 *.. *50

*.. *3

63 103 101 137 274 201

2

7

61 217 *92 1,221 1,508 *433

4

7 *"

5

426 427 343 8,020 8,977 10,084

7

IS

I

27 109 95

4

26

77 56 13 19,663 25,520 30,270 28 26 *.. 317

11 10 59 1,148 1,213 1,128

2

57

*32 NIP

9 19

'" 68 *738 949 1,003
36 NIP 287 369 NIP

4

'60 NIP

NIA

*.. NIA *4 *., N/A *" '" N/A

'" *399 *" *255 357 352 603
NIP 10 *67 NIP 46 *69 NIP

*1 50 *84 NIP

609 575 709 6,039 6,792 11,133 4,120 3,904 1,179 1,372

52 53 31 .188 940 931

2

I

I

1

477 625 838

10

17

5 559 766 847 II

58

48 82 55 9,983 14,830 16,476

I

16

56 29 43 6,978 7,474 8,116

5

2

150

388 255 243 6,938 6,925 8,365 123 47

6 43

*1

5

2 *51 190 295 *121 185 58 '7

123 153 159 304 289 287 633 808 778 62

'50 303 183 *3,169 4,281 4,421 *13 58 22 "523

13 23 20 61 193 211

1

4

382 492 838 2,203 3,212 3,951 24 11 38 212

16 45 38 744 1,000 1,111

78 105 74 183 203 196

2

22

*381 78 71 *420 575 1,067 '" 75

5 *1

496 116 324 8,154 9,926 13,935 307 279 195 314

3

8

9 405 507 568

29

255 243 147 6,026 7,948 8,915 93 40

82

27 30 31 511 663 766

3

73 106 75 534 647 825 42 75 10 169

23 29 48 2,933 3,852 4,973

2 29

39 27 22 3,620 5,611 6,734

12

2 15

'69 256 213 "63 201 188 *"

1

*.. 147 143 *166

6 *2.5.

*1 76

162 155 207 2,679 2,992 3,913 46

273

Figures included with Fiji

PIC PIC lIS

145 331 618 218 342 778

8 16 45 29

171 163

32 29

13 11

5

523 297 25

149 178

"310 612

6 '15

15

I

25 *4"6

20 28

336 400

44 108

54 65

*.. *,

"2

994 2,278

3

19

8

22 46

28 37

143 106

17 24

43 68

73 56

604 505

2

183 193

2

**""
N*IP"
NIA 24
NfP
3
1 12 17
*"
*, ,.

5 24

217 376

37 64

118 134

1 15

147 138

46 46

22 23

I

5 *"

37 "54

282 272 7

44

32 56 59

4 366 540 729

22 32 121

813 873 696

10

1

9

2

167 172 278

21 17 397 305 253

23 52

10 507 472 629

'" 9 '160 542 869
*.. "39 21 '8

5 17 74

*.. 404 201 *31

346 391 605

10 44

6

4,156 5,696 7,401

17 42 39

*72 224 285

NIP .1

*"

*., N/A
*58

'5

*, ,

38 *98 NIP

*10

6 690 453 578

43 27 22

17 44 78

26 18 16

2

285 254 323

72 59 17

2 336 454 367

*" 23 17

I

55 81 42

48 18 *221 295 361

8

5

6

220 173 435

176 139 217

19 II 16

3

2

*1 40

6

580 576 807

23 23 17

201 299 198

38 34 59

42 35 40

200 218 255

165 192 173

"9 *., 5

I 5 *7

152 162 500

34

15

39

' " N I P
595

",. 437

33 NIP "" 325 NIP 303 69,747 103,242 97,903 141

2*7"6

" NIP 378 109

196

.. NIP 187 507

4*0"4

" NIP "12 12 86 7,228 9,268 11,095

213 266 272 58,627 71,331 82,746

7 21 65 603 719 652 11 20 16 7,273 9,584 11,081

6 4 577 654 547 22 722 847 692

I
*., 12 31 53

85 384 85

2

2 20 18

Figures have been included with Chile

No figures available

2 'I

162 365 512

*1

77 82 69

*"

9 13 30

543 614 498 3419 5,326 5,132

2

3

3

4

305 229 231

71

Figures have been included with South Africa (Applications were processed in Pretoria) and figures arc included in S

11,993 11,613 11,882 294,186 393,356 443,650 6,731 7,250 3,299 6,265 6,619 8,259 729 643 388 '29,454 '36,806 '43,929

Notes: The numbers of applicants approved for temporary entry to Australia are not recorded separately from the number of persolls issued with visas, (It is
estimated that very few persons approved for temporary entry would not proceed to the visa issue stage). Includes (a) 4993, (b) 5856, (c) 7054 dependants,
*Part of period only.
t Zambia: Figures for 1978 and 1979 have been included with Tanzania
N/A-No figures available
NIP-New Post

3504 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

TableB APPLICATIONS FOR PERMANENT SETTLEMENT APPROVED AND REFUSED 1977-78 TO
JULY-FEBRUARY 1980-81

Applications approved (persons)

Applications refused July-Feb. (persons)

July-Feb.

Country

1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

United Kingdom Ireland Austria Belgium Czechoslovakia Denmark Finland France Germany Hungary Netherlands Norway Poland Sweden Switzerland USSR Iceland Bulgaria Cyprus Greece Italy Malta Portugal Romania Spain Yugoslavia Bahrain Arab Republic of Egypt Iran Iraq Israel Lebanon Kuwait Saudi Arabia Syria (including Jordan) Turkey Sudan Morocco Canada USA Bolivia Argentina Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Jamaica Mexico Peru Uruguay Venezuela Paraguay Ethiopia Kenya Mauritius Nigeria Zimbabwe Seychelles South Africa Tanzania Zambia Madagascar

21,288 530 372 .63 6 210 209 430
1,414 39
901 25 160 195 363 10 3 9 575 1,486 2,541 613 699 91 178 1,902 45 276 (b)36 45 91 2,223
6
1,111
934 1,183
10 1,229
273 1,023
107 39 17
89 571 25
2
1 336 3,30"3 123

11,032 254 444 38 5 139 136 413
1,168 33
1,020 30 144 151 336 34
12 298 970 2,177 475 466 20 165 1,332 38 236
27 132 916
5
66 692
857 1,285
5 828 97 621 77 33 19
8 102 417 18
8
32 56 5 571 23 3,253 14 37 1

24,681 505
2,701 96 II 452 198 624
1,842 25
[,788 82 175 321
544 44 16 12 135 1,055 3,022 792 405 110 472 1,867 40 146
41 71 756 23 41 92 992 1
819 1,818
21 564 81 490 57
9 31 30 160 275 29 10 6 47 230 4 561 51 3,319 5 11

26,888 502
1,966 109 16 583 118 615
2,411 22
1,592 68 197 282 524 63 5 4 209
744 1,691
953 622 128 565 1,379 28 138
7
423 24 21 65 822 9 5 632 1,605 3 199 46 281 26 33 26 22 46 108 11

21,128 217 660 [8
152 471 3,334 881
88 62 12 488 97
24
1,015 1,037 1,638
25 2,458
3 418 988 230 1,434 (b)637 30 73 1,811
397
2,622
,,
242 534
18 1,947 1,138 2,619
304 120 15 23"5 1,119 41

25 150
5 785 35 2,342

9 580
3,127 103

19,850 25
555 12
189 431 2,098 2,652
175 65 12 475 227
1 1
[47 484 1,803 202 4,016
6 258 832 862 772
22 60 2,205
316 1,332
38
808 1,192
83 4,859 1,120 1,674
256 155 52
402 1,158
56
33 621 131 659 46 1,889
14 95

13,807 177 819 153 1 201 385
1,616 3,360
205 107 13 403 344
10
53 543 1,444 436 2,666
1 954 2,558 401 2,249
IS 256 514 265 261 490 712
2.8.
1,191 3,025
76 2,248
477 2,308
377 111 72 109 512 1,025 160 13
5 48 844 142 952 77 2,501 70 20

11,767 301 848 85
244 174 216 6,329
345 48 14 257 436
690 989 1,065 453 689 94 1,365 3,210 21 709
2
1,062 190 86 702 999 100 191 862
2,101 59
991 478 882 489 133 57
58 598 520 215
17
28 566 114 1,073 57 1,958

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3505

Applications approved (persons)

July-Feb.

Applications refused (persons)

July-Feb.

Country

----

Malawi Uganda
Morocco Bangladesh
Burma China Hong Kong
India lndonesia Japan
Korea Malaysia Pakistan The Philippines
Singapore Sri Lanka Thailand
Fiji New Caledonia Vanuatu
New Zealand Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands

1977-78
29 146 73 2,458 813
109 237 1,788 93 1,202 867 349 279 412 65 (d)35 218 91

1978-79
40 62 313 1,455 573
128 368 1,260 60 1,473 604 218 216 462 52 67 175
14

1979-80
7
3 26 82 461 2,437 578 299 149
1,789 134
2,506 546 206
(a)34 474 38 26 210 259 23

1980-81
5
11 49 (b)125 1,520 369 587 261 10 1,061 208 1,712 436 101
415 50 14 126
249 4

1977-78
58 1,167
70 774 2,395
6 (d)72
546 97
11,590 368 910 60 387 65 (d)4 24
(c)821

1978-79
16
45 2,610
174 1,207 3,795
22 115 1,002 198 10,179 235 507 14 1,691 69 45 72

1979-80
9 4 188 46 1,265 275 1,154 3,796 182 110
1,824 32
9,527 856 317 (a)5
1,309 36 17 39 24 5

1980-81
43 152 (b) 19 578 3,851 236
15
1,396 100
7,809 846 90
1,446
11 55 408 12

All countries

56,674 39,314 63,093

57,491 73,224 77,421 72,830

62,006

(a) 2 months only (b) 3 months only (e) 4 months only (d) 6 months only
1980-81 Figures are preliminary.
The figures exclude refugee applications processed by the special refugee task forces in Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia.

Taxation Avoidance
(Question No. 2021)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:
(1) Further to my question without notice to him on 9 April 1981 (Hansard, page 1519) in relation to the weakness of section 26AAA of the Income Tax Assessment Act, is he now able to confirm that (a) a $16.5m tax-free profit was made by the Bell group of companies for its sale of shares in Elder Smith Goldsborough Mort Ltd, and that this transaction reveals a weakness in this section of the Act; (b) in November of 1979 the Bell group made a similar tax-free profit of $llm by selling a subsidiary company, Bell Air Charter, which has purchased shares in Ansett Transport Industries Ltd for the Bell group during a takeover attempt and (c) in August 1980 the Bond group used a similar device to make a tax-free profit of $32m by selling a subsidiary, Narla prospecting company, which had purchased shares in the White Industries organisation.
(2) Was he aware of these manipUlations of the Act lo avoid laxation; if so, should earlier action have been taken to block this blatant lax avoidance.
(3) Will he give an assurance that appropriate action will be taken to strengethen the appropriate provisions of the Act and that this action will be made retrospective.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) As I mentioned in my reply to the honourable member's question of 9 April 1981 concerning this matter, I

cannot precisely affirm or deny a particular tax position of an individual taxpayer. That is because the secrecy provisions of the income tax law prevent the Commissioner of Taxation from disclosing information about the affairs of any taxpayer.
(3) As I also said in my answer to the honourable member's question of 9 April 1981, I have asked the Commissioner of Taxation to examine the question of possible weakness in section 26AAA of the Income Tax Assessment Act. The matter isby no means free of complexity but I expect to receive the Commissioner's advice soon.
Unemployed Meatworkers: Retraining
(Question No. 2032)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that over 400 meatworkers have become redundant as a result of the closure of the Borthwicks meat works in Brisbane, Queensland.
(2) Will unemployed meatworkers be eligible for (a) retraining under the NEAT Scheme and (b) the Relocation Assistance Allowance given the current recession and the uncertain future in the meat processing industry throughoUl Australia.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.

3506 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) (a) and (b) Yes. Subject to their meeting the normal criteria for those programs.
Sale of Publicly-owned Enterprises in Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2084)
Mrs Kelly asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
What gift duty or tax will be payable on the sale of publiclyowned enterprises and facilities in the Australian Capital Territory.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Gift Duty Act 1941 now has no application except in respect of gifts made before I July 1979.
Liability for stamp duty depends upon the nature of a transaction including, in respect of the proposed sales referred to, any conditions ofsale which may be fixed by the Parliament.
Section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969 provides, however, for exemption from stamp duty of conveyances by or in the name of the Commonwealth.
Discontinuance ofProjects in Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2116)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) What sums have been spent on (a) feasibility studies, (b) analysis of client needs and (c) preliminary consultations in drawing up the briefs for the (i) National Biological Standards Laboratory,' (ii) Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Building, (iii) National Library extensions and (iv) Canberra Law Courts in the Australian Capital Territory.
(2) What sums have been spent on (a) design, drafting and plans and (b) site purchase and preparation for each project referred to in,part (I).
(3) Have tenders and/or contracts been let; if so will he provide a list of these and the cost of each.
(4) What work has already been carried out.
(5) What will be the cost of reneging on existing contracts and/or tenders already let.
(6) To what purpose will the proposed sites for these projects now be put, in view of decisions outlined in the Review of Commonwealth Functions (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1838).
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am advised by the National Capital Development Commission that:
(1) (a) $26,412 has been expended on feasibility studies for the National Library Extension. Internal resources were used to undertake feasibility studies for the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Building (Russell Drive Offices) and the Canberra Law Courts and these costs are not separably identifiable.
(1) (b) $37,499 has been expended on operational appraisal studies for the National Library Extension. Internal resources were used to analyse client needs for the Russell Drive Offices and the Canberra Law Courts.
(1) (c) Internal resources were used to conduct preliminary consultations on architectural briefs for the Russell

Drive Offices, National Library Extension and the Canberra Law Courts.
(2) (a) It is estimated that the following sums have been spent on design, drafting and plans:
Russell Drive Offices-$125,000 National Library Extension-$580,696 Canberra Law Courts-$165,371
(2) (b) $33,926 has been expended on site preparation for the Russell Drive Offices. No site preparation work had been undertaken for the National Library Extension or for the Canberra Law Courts. No funds were expended on land acquisition for these projects.
(3) The following contracts had been entered into on the Russell Drive Offices:
Siteworks and excavation-$133,355 Plumbing and drainage-$305,035 Project Management agreement-$420,ooO
Tenders had not been called for the National Library Extension or the Canberra Law Courts.
(4) Siteworks and excavation to the value of $33,926 has been undertaken at Russell Drive Offices. A further $184,622 has been expended on purchase of materials, plant and machinery hire, site establishment and on-site labour.
(5) The estimated cost of terminating the Russell Drive Office contracts is $50,000.
(6) The projects identified by the honourable member have been deferred and the sites will be retained.
I am advised by the Minister for Housing and Construction that:
(1) The following sums are estimated to have been expended on the National Biological Standards Laboratory (NBSL) project:
Development of initial client brief and feasibility study-$130,000
Refinement of client brief and preliminary design- $340,000
Design development and full documentation- $2,200,000
(2) The following contracts have been let for the NBSL project:
Micro-processor and model room-$73,OOO ACT Electricity Authority-$18,900 OCT (site fencing)-$5,830 Site sign-$I,OOO Cladding prototype--$3,700 Site testing-$5,553 Site works-$292,667
(3) The following work has been carried out on the NBSL project:
Micro-processor and model room-60 per cent complete ACT Electricity Authority-complete DCT (site fencing)-80 per cent complete Sign-complete Prototype-complete Site testing-complete Site works-80 per cent complete
(4) All contracts let on the NBSL project will be completed.
(5) The NBSL project has been deferred and the site will be retained.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3507

Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 2141)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Will the Minister provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of the Department of Veterans' Affairs that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review, of Commonwealth Functions is implemented.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Prime Minister to question No. 2119. Hansard 5 June 1981, p. 3317.)
Taxing of Subsidised Rentals
(Question No. 2160)
Mr Campbell asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) Did he say in his Press release No. 132 of 25 September 1980, that the Government was going to amend the Income Tax Assessment Act in relation to paragraph 26 (e) relating to the taxing of subsidised rentals; if so, when does he expect to introduce the legislation.
(2) Will the coastal towns of the Pilbara Region, Western Australia, be covered by the amended legislation or will they have to rely on an amendment to section 26AAA of the Act.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Government remains committed to an amendment of the income tax law as outlined in my statement of 25 September 1980 and in my further statement of 13 October in which I indicated that the amendment would apply from the beginning of the 1977-78 income year. The necessary legislation cannot be got ready before the winter recess. It can be expected vcry early in the Budget sittings.
(2) The areas to be covered by the amending legislation will be announced when the legislation is brought forward.
Occupational Safety and Health
(Question No. 2198)
Mr Hawke asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:
(1) Does he regard as appropriate the statements contained in the 1979-80 Annual Report of the Department of Productivity that occupational safety and health is an area of considerable concern to the Department and that the social and economic cost of industrial accidents is known to be massive.
(2) Will he outline the reasons underlying the decision of the Committee for the Review of Commonwealth Functions to abolish two national committees operating in the area of occupational safety and health.
(3) Does he intend that the policing of such an important area of employee welfare should be left in the hands of employers in the private sector.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(l) The social and economic cost of industrial accidents is

know to be massive, and the Government will play its part in

efforts to reduce this toll.

.

(2) The Committee for the Review of Commonwealth Functions was charged with reviewing functions to determine which properly belonged to the Commonwealth and which
might more appropriately be handled elsewhere. Its recommendation to scale down activities in the subject area and transfer residual activities to the Department of Industrial
Relations was agreed by Government. The Minister for Industrial Relations will be considering how best to handle the work of the two committees that are to be abolished.

(3) The responsibility for administering safety and health
legislation applying to the workforce rests with the States. The Government will be anxious to co-operate with them in this important area of employee welfare.

Mandata System: Department of Foreign Affairs
(Question No. 2214)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Has the Mandata System been introduced in his Department and Government instrumentalities under his control; if so, what was the (a) cost of (i) the equipment, (ii) installation, (iii) site preparation, (iv) acquiring or renting sites and (v) other additional factors associated with the introduction of the system and (b) total cost of introducing the system.
(2) Were any reductions in the staff of personneljestablishment units achieved as a result of introducing this system; if so, what (a) reductions in staff and (b) cost savings were achieved in each year since its introduction.
(3) What staff (a) savings or (b) increase is expected with the termination of the Mandata System.
(4) What is the anticipated Ca) extra cost or (b) savings resulting from the termination of the Mandata System.
Mr Streei-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Mandata System was not introduced into my Department.

Mandata System: Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 2232)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(1) Has the Mandata System been introduced in the Department of Aboriginal Affairs and Government instrumentalities under the Minister's control; if so, what was the (a) cost of (i) the equipment, (ii) installation, (iii) site preparation, (iv) acquiring or renting sites and (v) other additional factors associated with the introduction of the system and (b) total cost of introducing the system.
(2) Were any reductions in the staff of personneljestablishment units achieved as a result of introducing this system; if so, what (a) reductions in staff and (b) cost savings were achieved in each year since its introduction.
(3) What staff (a) savings or (b) increase is expected with the termination of the Mandata System.
(4) What is the anticipated (a) extra cost or (b) savings resulting from the termination of the Mandata System.

3508 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Viner--The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) No.
(2), (3) and (4) Not applicable.
Social Security: Reviews of Pension and Benefi t Entitlements
(Question No. 2264)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:
(1) Did the Minister say in reply to my question No. 750 (Hansard, 2 April 1981, page 1339) that reviews of pension and benefit entitlements in other countries are not carried out by field officers hut are carried out by mail.
(2) If so, is the form of this review similar to what is known in Australia as a P.E.R. Review.
(3) Is the Minister satisfied that this is an adequate way of checking on pension and benefit entitlements, given that under the Social Services Act persons in Australia in receipt of pensions must subject themselves to the scrutiny of Social Security field officers in order to satisfy certain eligibility requirements.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) In reply to Question No. 750 of 10 March 1981 (Hansard, 2 April 1981, page 1339) I said that reviews of pensions payable overseas are generally carried out by mail.
(2) The review known as the P.E.R. review is carried out in respect of pensions payable overseas other than those payable through the Geneva office. In that office a local program similar to the P.E.R. is undertaken. In addition to the scheduled reviews other reviews may be undertaken as and when the need arises.
(3) The Department of Social Security does not have field officers overseas and it does not have staff located in every country where pensions and benefits are payable. The review of pensions payable overseas does, therefore, present problems which do not arise in Australia. However, every efrort is taken to ensure that pensioners and beneficiaries living overseas continue to meet the eligibility conditions as laid down in the Social Services Act.
Tertiary Tuition Fees
(Question No. 2265)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 13 May 1981 :
Do Honours and Masters Qualifying degrees fall within the category of recognised double degree or combination courses, as referred to in the Review of Commonwealth Functions in connection with tertiary tuition fees (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1843).
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Honours years or Master's qualifying years are undertaken as parts of or as extensions to undergraduate courses and therefore where students undertake these studies in relation to first qualifications they will be exempt from the payment of tuition fees.

Investment Allowances
(Question No. 2277)
Mr Kerin asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(I) What items will be classed as certain new plant and equipment for the purposes of the reduced investment allowances referred to in attachment F to the Prime Minister's statement on the Review of Commonwealth Functions.
(2) What will be the cost of this change to primary producers.
Mr HowardThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The classification includes all new plant and equipment to which the investment allowance applies. Broadly, the investment allowance applies to plant or articles within the meaning of the depreciation provisions of the income tax law, subject to specifically identified inclusions and exclusions.
The reduced investment allowance rate of 18 per cent will generally apply in respect of expenditure incurred after 30 April 1981 on the acquisition or construction of an eligible unit of property. However, the former rate of 20 per cent will continue to apply where the expenditure is incurred under a contract entered into on or before 30 April 1981, or is incurred in respect of the construction of an eligible unit of property by the taxpayer the construction of which commenced on or before that date.
(2) The increase in income tax payable by primary pr(J-. ducers as a result of the proposed reduction in investment allowance is estimated at about $7m in a full year.
Prices Justification Tribunal
(Question No. 2279)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
What have been the savings to (a) consumers and (b) primary industry as a result of inquiries by the Prices Justification Tribunal in respect of (i) stevedoring, (ii) spare parts, (iii) fuel and (iv) wool broking.
Mr Moore -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
A number of PJT inquiries including those into stevedoring, spare parts, petroleum products and wool broking found that prices charged by the companies, or some of the companies, concerned were higher than justified or that proposed price increases were not wholly justified.
In some of those inquiries the PJT determined precisely the justified prices for particular products, but in other cases it indicated the order of price reduction warranted or simply invited companies to review their mark-ups in particular areas of activity.
In the case of petroleum products the oil companies at times have been unable to obtain in particular localities, because of market conditions, not only the prices they had proposed to the PJT but the prices found justified by the P1T.
In view of these and other considerations it is not possible to quantify the savings that may have flowed to consumers or to primary industry as a result of companies' complying with the P1T's findings. Savings to consumers that may have resulted from particular PJT inquiries need to be weighed, against the cost of the PJT's operations, including the direct cost to the Budget, the cost to business in complying with PJTprocedures and the wider effects of price regulation on business investment and the market place.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3509

Commonwealth Employment Service Office at Newcomb, Victoria
(Questiou No. 2300)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(I) Has any understanding been given to the Bellarine Shire Council, Victoria, that premises for a new Commonwealth Employment Service Office at Newcomb, Victoria, will be leased from the Shire in 1981-82.
(2) If so, were the premises which were to be leased part of a new development and were the arrangements to be made through Mr P. Gude, then a member of the Victorian Parliament.
(3) Does the Government intend to proceed with .this arrangement.
(4) Will he treat this matter as urgent in view of the need for the Council to finalise its financial arrangements for 1981-82.
Mr N. A. BrownThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) Some discussion has taken place with the Shire of Bellarine but no undertaking has been given that premises for a new Commonwealth Employment Service Office at Newcomb will be leased from the Shire in 1981-82.
(2) The premises discussed were part of a new development. No arrangements were to be made through Mr P. Gude.
(3) The Government does not intend to establish an office of the CES within the Shire of Bellarine in the fomeeable future.
(4) The Shire of Bellarine has been advised that aCES office will not be established in its area.
Social Security: Entitlement Reviews
(Question No. 2305)
Dr Jenkins asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(l) Did the Minister recently announce that the Department of Social Security would conduct a pilot program of selective entitlement reviews which would concentrate on clearly identified areas where the risk of abuse is greater.
(2) If so, (a) when will this pilot program commence, (b) who will conduct the program and (c) what selective entitlements are to be investigated.
Mr Hunt~The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.
(2) (a) The pilot review program will be phased in over the next three months.
(b) The pilot review program will be undertaken by staff of the Department of Social Security.
(c) The pilot review program will be broad based and will include reviews in pensions, benefits and family allowances areas.

Research Paper on Unemployment Statistics
(Question No. 2311)
Mr Willis asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 26 May 1981:
(I) Has the research paper on unemployment statistics in Australia for which the Australian Bureau of Statistics provided assistance, referred to in the ABS Annual Report for 1979-80, page 16, been completed; if not, when is completion expected.
(2) Will the paper be published; irso, when.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social ~ecurity has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) A research paper titled 'U nempl6yment Statistics in Australia' was prepared in the Research and Statistics Branch of the Development Division of the Departmentin 1979. During the preparation of the paper, comments on a draft version were requested and received from the Australian Bureau of Statistics. The paper forms part of a series of research papers that have been prepared and distributed by the Development Division of the Department of Social Security.
(2) The research paper was released in July 1979 and was given a wide distribution to such organisations and individuals as Commonwealth and State Departments, researchers at Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education" various community organisations (such as ACOSS) and libraries. Copies of the paper were provided in July 1979 to the ParliamentalY Library. Copies of all the research papers in the series prepared by the Developme!1t Division of the Department of Social Security are available on request.
S,ocial Security: Entrepreneurs
(Question No. 2340)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(1) Is there a special category of entrepreneurs who gain easier entry into Australia.
(2) If so, (a) what are the required'qualifications regarding the financial status of these persons and (b) is it necessary for these persons to have a minimum of $200,000 for investment in Australia.
(3) Was he consulted by the (a) Minister for Health, (b) Minister for Social Security or (c) Prime Minister before entrepreneurs were included in the list of disadvantaged persons eligible for free hospital and medical treatment for six months after arrival in Australia.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Provision does exist for the entry of entrepreneurs who will establish and take an active part in running enterprises which will benefit Australia. The benefit may take the form of introducing new technology, improving exports or increasing employment. Persons who enter under these provisions must satisfy the normal character, health and settlement requirements for migration. Entrepreneurs are exempt from reaching a pass score in the economic factors section of NUMAS, Australia's Numerical Migrant Selection System, as the rules governing the appropriate levels of capital and income required for eligibility are sufficient to guarantee economic viability in Australia.

3510 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) (a) and (b) There are no fixed or minimum financial requirements for entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs must possess sufficient personal and unencumbered capital to establish the enterprise proposed in their application successfully. The actual amount will depend on the nature and magnitude of the enterprise.
(3) The decision to provide medical and hospital cover for migrants for the first six months in Australia was taken following completion of the usual consultative arrangements.
Bank Mergers
(Question No. 2345)
Dr Jenkins asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice; on 27 May 1981:
Will recent bank mergers cause staff retrenchments in the banking industry; if so, (a) what is the expected number of retrenchments, (b) will his Department initiate retraining programs for retrenched staff and (c) what other measures will his Department provide to assist retrenched staff.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) The companies involved in proposed bank mergers have not advised me of the numbers of retrenchments, if any, which might result.
(b) and (c) Any retrenched bank staff would have access to the normal range of retraining programs and services provided by my Department.
Tax Concessions for Land Clearing
(Question No. 2349)
Mr West asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(I) When applying the provision of tax concessions for land clearing, does the Government make a distinction between environmentally sensitive lands, such as semi-arid lands prone to loss of soil and desertification, and other less sensitive lands, in order to avoid encouraging the loss of fragile environments by discretionary application of the provision.
(2) What estimated sum is lost to revenue as a result of the tax concession.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Section 75A of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936, under which deductions are allowable, in equal instalments over 10 years, for expenditure incurred in clearing land on which a business of primary production is carried on, does not provide the Commissioner of Taxation with any discretionary authority of the kind referred to in the honourable member's question.
(2) The available statistics of deductions allowed under section 75A for the various classes of expenditures that qualify for deductions on the basis of that section do not include separate information on the revenue cost of deductions in respect ofland clearing.
Care and Use of Animals in Research
(Question No. 2459)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
(1) Has the CSIRO drawn up a Code of Practice in respect to the care and use of animals in research.
(2) If so, over which research laboratories does this code have applicability.

(3) Does his Department carry out inspections of laboratories to ensure compliance with this code; if so, how often are inspections made.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) In 1979 the National Health and Medical Research Council and CSIRO prepared and distributed widely a 'Code of Practice for the Care and Use of Animals in Research in Australia' to promote humane behaviour towards experimental animals. Copies of this publication are available from the Australian Government Publishing Service (ISBN 006204640).
(2) This Code of Practice is an adjunct to Commonwealth and State legislation. It is widely used by research laboratories as a guide to good practice.
(3) No. The Code is a guideline, not a law.
Department of Veterans' Affairs: Medical Arrangements
(Question No. 2497)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
(1) Is there dissatisfaction within the Victorian section of the Department of Veterans' Affairs, in particular, with the medical arrangements.
(2) If so, has the Minister examined the reasons for these complaints which have been detailed by the RSL State President, Mr Bruce Ruxton.
(3) Is there any substance to the complaints: is so, what action has been taken to eliminate the causes for complaint.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) I am not aware of any general dissatisfaction within the medical arrangements in the Victorian Branch of my Department. However, there has been criticisms of some individual medical opinions given by Department Medical Officers by the Victorian State Executive of the Returned Services League of Australia.
(2) Yes.
(3) The criticisms are based on a very few selected cases and any general criticism on this basis appear to be unwarranted. Departmental Medical Officers should not be judged only on a very few complaints amongst more than 30,000 claims and appeals handled each year. On the rare occasion where a complaint is found to be justified the medical officer concerned has been counselled; however in other cases no justification can be found for the complaints.
War Graves
Mr Thomson-On 28 May 1981 (Hansard, page 2742) Mr Donald Cameron asked me, as the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, without notice:
Has the attention of the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs been drawn to reports that the Maltese Government is considering bulldozing a war cemetery for the purpose of constructing a housing estate? Is the Minister aware that that cemetery contains the remains of several Australian servicemen? Will the Minister give consideration to an Australian Arlington? Will the Minister cause a costing to be

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3511

done to ascertain how much money would be needed to transfer home the remains of all of Australia's sons and daughters in war cemeteries overseas? In the interim, will the Minister protest to the Maltese Government about this possible desecration?
The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I am aware of the recent reports in the media that the Maltese Government wants to bulldoze the graves of Commonwealth war dead in Malta. The reports are incorrect.
The Commonwealth War Graves Commission in England, of which Australia and other Commonwealth countries are corporate members, is responsible for the Commonwealth war graves throughout the world, including those in Malta. There are also war graves of nine foreign countries and some 5,000 non-war British burials in the Malta cemeteries.
In 1979, the Maltese Government asked the British to remove the remains of the 7,303 buried in the Capuccini, Pembroke and Pieta cemeteries, and concentrate them in the Mtarfa cemetery where there are 1,440 graves. 200 Australian graves are involved. Considerable extra land would need to be provided at Mtarfa I\nd the cost would run into some millions of dollars.
Australia and the other Commonwealth countries are opposed to the proposed move of the graves except if it can be shown (and it has not so far been done by the Maltese Government) that there was such an overriding and urgent public need for the land to be used for other essential purposes as to justify disturbance of the graves. Australia has been kept fully informed on the negotiations which have been going on with the Maltese Government since the original request was made in 1979. The Commonwealth War Graves Commission has received many requests from relatives to transfer the remains of war dead to their home country. However, the Commission's policy, which was established after the First World War and reaffirmed after the Second World War, is that the graves should not be disturbed except on the grounds of overriding public interest. Agreements have been negotiated with many Foreign Governments on these lines. The Commission is bound to adhere to this policy which was laid down by its Participating Governments, including Australia.
A detailed costing of the transfer of the war graves of all Australian veterans back to Australia and the establishment of a National Cemetery for this purpose, would not be practicalor productive in view of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission's policy. There are Australian war graves in over 2,500 cemeteries throughout the World and it is possible that a very large proportion of the relatives of the war dead would strongly object to the disturbance of the remains. All Australian war dead are commemorated in the Australian War Memorial in Canberra. The Australian Government has also established and maintains Gardens of Remembrance in most of the capital cities for the commemoration of those veterans whose deaths were war-related and who are not officially commemorated in civil cemeteries.
Superannuation: Tax Deductibility
(Question No. 400)
Dr Everingham asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:

superannuation provisions and advising that from discussions with the Taxation Office it seemed that the new amendment would exclude ,employees drawing a retiring allowance of up to a year's salary or a limited pension in place of superannuation.
(2) If so, will he clarify who is and who is not entitled to tax deductibility and remove any anomalies.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Under section 82AAT of the Income Tax Assessment Act a person may be allowed a deduction, up to a limit of $1,200 in an income year, for contributions made in the year to a superannuation fund approved by the Commissioner of Taxation under paragraph 23 (ja) or section 79 of the Act. The deduction is not available where, in relation to the person's service in that year, it could resonably be expected that superannuation benefits would be provided on his or her retirement (or for his or her dependants in the event of death) under an employer-sponsored superannuation fund or statutory superannuation scheme referred to in the legislation.
It is not clear from the form letter referred to whether, and to what extent, the persons referred to would be eligible for the deduction, but the Commissioner of Taxation would provide advice to persons concerned once the relevant facts were placed before him.
Minister for Administrative Services: Staff
(Question No. 442)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) How many persons are employed on each ministerial staff.
(2) What are the Public Service classifications and salary levels of these persons and what other emoluments (both fiscal and otherwise) are provided to them.
(3) Will he provide similar details in relation to staff employed in each Minister's office in each of the preceding five years.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The details sought by the honourable member are contained in Tables A and B which have been prepared by my Department.
(3) Compilation of the information requested would require commitment of considerable staff resources which I am not prepared to authorise. However, the current Ministerial staff establishment totals 190 compared to 242 for the previous Government. The following table provides a breakdown of these aggregate figures.

Ministerial officers consultants, et cetera. Press Secretary and related grades Support

1981 1975
65 94 8 31 117 117
190 242

(I) Has his attention been drawn to a form letter from the Marketing Manager of the State Government Insurance Office (Qld) referring to the 1981 Budget announcement on

The Government has thus exercised a proper economy in providing staff for Ministers, in contrast to the approach of the previous government.

3512 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

On the other hand it has provided 47 staff for the Oppomembers details of the current Opposition staff establishment sition compared to 38 provided by the previous government to is shown in Table C. the then Opposition. For the information of honourable
TABLE A

Minister
Prime Minister Trade and Resources Industry and Commerce Communications National Devel0l'ment and
Energy Foreign Affairs Primary Industry Treasurer Defence Finance Industrial Relations Attorney-General Social Security Education Transport Health Immigration and Ethnic
Affairs Science and Technology Administrative Services Employment and Youth
Affairs Business and Consumer Affairs Capital Territory Veterans' Affairs Aboriginal Affairs Housing and Construction Home Affairs and Environ-
ment

MO
GradeS Conand sultants above
4

MO Grade MO MO MO 3Aor Grade 3 Grade 2 Grade 1
4A or4 or 3 or2 2
2

Electorate A.P.S. secretary(personal Press (personal secretary SecStenosecsecretary Grade 1 retary/ secretary retary Grade 2) or 2) typist Grade I

2

2

2

2

1

71

2

2

2 2 2

2 2 2 2

Total

13

14

25

26

55

31

Other 2

Total 22 9
8 10
6 6 6
6 6
6
6 6 6 190

In addition, each Minister may, as a Senator or Member, also employ an Electorate Assistant.

TABLE B Salary Rates for Ministerial Staff as at 1 May 1981

Classification

Salary Range ($) p.a.

'Ministerial Officer, Grade 5 *Ministerial Officer, Grade 4A
*Ministerial Officer, Grade 4
'Ministerial Officer, Grade 3A
'Ministerial Officer, Grade 3 "Ministerial Officer, Grade 2
"Ministerial Officer, Grade 1 *Clerk, Class 9
"Journalist, Grade A4 Journalist, Grade Al Electorate Secretary Personal Secretary, Grade 2
Assistant Private Secretary, Grade 2 ElectorateJLegislative Assistant Personal Secretary, Grade I Assistant Private Secretary, Grade I
SecretaryJTypist
Steno-Secretary, Grade I
Clerical Assistant, Grade 6

35,250 33,739 32,228 26,689-27,555 24,954-25,821 21,491-22,359 17,718-18,299-18,879 23,224-24,083 29,792 23,694-24,581
15,692-16,099-16,507
14,030-14,585-15,140-15,700
14,095-14,473-14,846
12,574-12,949-13,334 11,444-11,725-12,007 13,433-13,779-14,127

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3513

Classification

Salary Range ($) p.a.

*Ministerial Staff Allowance of $5664 per annum, in addition to salary, is payable to occupants of
these positions but the Journalist Grade A4 and both the Journalist Grade Al on the Prime Minister's
staff and the Journalist Grade Al on the Deputy Prime Minister's staff receive Ministerial Staff Allowance of $11,328 per annum. Ministerial Staff Allowance is byway of compensation forlong and irregular hours and overtime is not payable.
Members of Ministerial staff are employed under the Public Service Act. With few exceptions e.g. the payment of Ministerial Staff Allowance to the categories mentioned above (*) they receive only normal
Public Service entitlements to payment of travelling allowance, overtime etc.

Fees paid to consultants in Ministers' Offices as at 1 May 1981

Prime Minister's Office-

Professor D. Kemp

MrD.Budd

..

Professor J. Rose (part-time position)

Professor C. Walsh (part-time position)

50,000
46,950 9,900 (l) 8,183 (2)

Treasurer's OfficeProfessor J. Hewson (part-time position)

9,900 (3)

(J) The University of Melbourne is also paid $9,900 a year to compensate for the time spent by Professor Rose away from his university duties.
(2) The University of Adelaide is also paid $16,365 a year.
(3) The University of New South Wales is also paid $9,900 a year.

Leader of the Opposition Deputy Leader Leader of Opposition in Senate Deputy Leader in Senate Opposition Party
Total

TABLE C

Opposition Staff Establishment as-a-t 1-M--ay-1-9-81---------------------

Steno-

MO

MO

MO

Press Elecroratc

APS

APS secretary

Grade 4A Grade 3 Grade 2 secretary secretary Grade 2 Grade I Grade 1

Total

4

13

1

6

1

1

7

1

1

5

2

3

11

16

4

4

18

47

Primary Industry Bank
(Question No. 575)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) What sums have been lent by the Primary Industry Bank to (a) primary producers and (b) others in each of the last 5 years.

$m

Farming and grazing Fishing Other

213.8 3.7
45.4

Total

262.9

Loan approvals made to these groups in each of the years 1979 and 1980 were:

(2) What sums have been allocated or are to be made available to the Primary Industry Bank for allocation to primary producers in each of the next two years.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) The Primary Industry Bank of Australia Ltd was established in July 1978 and began providing refinance loan funds to banks and other lenders for on-lending to individual primary producers (including fishermen and foresters) in November 1978. As at 14 January 1981 (the latest date for which such information is available) PIBA retlnance loans outstanding, classified by broad industry group, were as follows:

1979 1980

Farming and grazing
Fishing Other

108.6 96.0

1.9

1.2

16.1 13.2

Total

126.6 11004

(2) Over the next two financial years the greater proportion of PIBA's funding requirements is expected to be raised by public borrowings (as has been the case in the past). To date,
funds totalling $101m, repayable over eight years, have been deposited with PIBA from the Income Equalisaton Deposits Trust Account. (Details of such deposits are provided in
Annual Reports on the operation of Part II of the Primary Industry Bank Act 1977 which arc tabled in the Parliament.) The Government has undertaken to continue its support for
PIBA by the provision of a three year funding commitment
for the bank's operations. This commitment will cover the

3514 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

three financial years beginning 1981-82 and discussions between PIBA and the Commonwealth on the means for giving effect to the commitment are now taking place.
Australian Participation in Resource Projects
(Question No. 600)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that 10 out of the top 14 shareholders of Western Mining Corporation represent holders of 29 per cent of its issued capital and that four out of the top 10 shareholders of Mount Isa Mines representing holders of 11.1 per cent of its non-Asarco-owned issued capital are nominee companies.
(2) Is it also a fact that given the recent inflows of portfolio ~nd investment capital, these holdings, and similar holdings 10, for example, Conzinc Rio Tinto Australia and Pan Continental, means that the Australian participation in existing or proposed resource projects has fallen below the specific guidelines for Australian participation in the natural resource sector.
(3) Will he take up with the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs the question of amendments to the Companies BIll 1980 to require nominee companies to disclose the proportion of their shares registered under names which are held on behalf of a non-resident; if not, how does he propose to ensure that the existing foreign investment guidelines are enforced.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Data released by the Stock Exchange indicate that as at 29 September 1980 10 of the largest 14 shareholders in Western Mining Corporation Holdings Limited were nominee companies and that these companies held 28.9 per cent of the issued capital of WMC. Stock Exchange data also indicate that as at 5 September 1980 four of the top 10 shareholders in MIM Holdings Limited were nominee companies and that these companies held 11.1 per cent of the issued capital of MIM (excluding that held by ASARCO Incorporated).
(2) and (3) In cases where the shareholdings of nominee companies could be of significance in relation to the requirements of foreign investment policy, companies concerned have been asked to ascertain whether the beneficial ownership of the shares they hold in the company is Australian or foreign. Companies have provided such information on request. Section 36 of the Foreign Takeovers Act provides legislative power for information relevant to foreign takeover matters to be sought as necessary but experience to date has been that it has not been necessary to take action in pursuance of that Section. With regard to the provisions of the Companies Bill 1981, Section 261 provides companies with the power to obtain information as to the beneficial ownership of their shares.
Commemorative Gold Coin
(Question No. 667)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
(I) When was the decision made to mint the commemorative koala gold coin.
(2) Was the original estimate of demand for the coin approximately 30,000 and the actual demand for the coin approximately 100,000.
(3) What restrictions were placed by the Royal Australian Mint on the total number of coins to be produced.

(4) Was there a closing date for orders for the coin.

(5) How many coins had been sent as at 1 January 1981.

(6) Who was contracted to deliver the coins.

K(7)~ Wew re ar~ rangements

for

delivery

of

the

coins

cancelled' '

(8) Was Interstate Parcel Express Company (IPEC) contracted to deliver the coins; if so, when.

(9) Was there a contract in writing between IPEC and the Royal Australian Mint for delivery of the coins,

(10) When did IPEC take delivery of the coins and on what dates and in what quantities were the coins despatched by
IPEC.

(11) Is it a fact that periods of more than one week elapsed between the time the coins were received by IPEC from the Mint and the time IPEC despatched them. .

(12) Is it also a fact that on at least one occasion IPEC received a large number of coins for despatch, but did not de~
spatch them and, in due course, returned them to the Mint; if so, (a) what period of time elapsed before IPEC returned the coins and (b) did IPEC offer as a reason for returning the coins that they were experiencing security problems.

(13) When was (a) the Controller of the Mint and (b) he informed (i) of the break-in at fPEC's Melbourne depot and the theft of approximately 40 gold coins and (ii) the loss of ap-
proximately 30 gold coins in a consignment despatched on 25 November 1980 for delivery to Brisbane (lPEC Docket No.
118/775).

(14) Was a telephone call by my office to (a) the office of the Controller of the Mint and (b) to his office on 20 January
1981 the first information either the Controller or he received about the loss of this sccond consignment of 30 gold coins.

(15) When did IPEC inform the Controller of the Mint of the loss of the coins.

(16) Did JPEC inform the Queensland Police or Australian Federal Police of the loss of the second consignment of coins;
If so, when.

(17) Are the New South Wales Police, Queensland Police and Australian Federal Police now investigating the loss of the second consignment; if so, what is the result of their
investigations.

(18) Did his office receive a request from me for him to re-
lease a statement to the media (a) confirming the loss of that consignment, (b) explaining the administrative problems wbich has caused extensive delays to the despatch of coins to those who had ordered them and (c) assuring people who had
already paid for coins as early as September 1980 that they would receive their coins although further delays could be
expected.

(19) Did he issue a statement, in view of the concern of many persons who had ordered the coins but had not received them at that stage; if not, why not.
(20) Is he now able to say whether the coins lost in IPEC consignments will be replaced.

(21) Have those persons whose coins are among those now missing been informed of that fact by the Mint.

(22) With whom are the coins insured and what was the
value of the coins on current market prices as at (a) 1 January 1981 and (b) 25 February 1981.

(23) What is the total current market price of all the missing gold coins.

(24) Has the Mint replied to written inquiries concerning delays in despatching the coins; if so, to how many.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3515

(1) The decision to mint the commemorative koala coin was announced on 10July 1979.

(2) The Controller of the Mint has advised me that the
planning estimate for gold proof coins was 30,000 and actual demand was approximately 120,000.

(3) The numher of gold proof coins produced was effectively limited by the Mint's capacity to produce coins of that type bearing in mind the overall production program. No restriction was placed on the production of the uncirculated
coin.

(4) The closing date for gold proof coins was 19 September 1980 and for gold uncirculated coins 12 December 1980.

(5) The Controller of the Mint has advised me that at 1
January 1981 39,192 gold proof coins and 195,247 gold uncirculated coins had been despatched from the Mint.

(6) The Controller of the Mint has advised me that {PEC Pty Ltd and Wards Express were contracted to deliver the gold coins.

(7) The Controller of the Mint has advised me that arrangements to deliver the coins were not cancelled but IPEC
withdrew from the contract stating that the delivery of gold coins was not compatible with IPEC's normal business. Wards
Express continued to deliver go\d coins.

(8) and (9) The Controller of the Mint has advised me that a contract in writing for IPEC to deliver gold coins was signed on 16 October 1980.

(10) The Controller of the Mint has advised me that IPEC
took the first delivery of gold coins on 21 October 1980 and continued on a regular basis until the last delivery was taken on 17 December 1980. During this period IPEC received from the Mint 22,238 gold proof coins and 9,067 uncirculated gold
coins.

(ll) The Controller of the Mint has advised me that there were delays of over one week between IPEC's receipt and delivery of some coin consignments.

(12) The Controller of the Mint has advised me that IPEC returned 6,172 coin consignments to the Mint, 72 because
IPEC could not complete delivery and 6,100 when the company withdrew from the contract.

(I) All these consignments were returned on or before 23 December 1980. These consignments were 'accumulated over approximately one month.

(b) The reason given by IPEC forreturning the 6,100 consignments referred to above is provided in (7) above.

(13) (a) The Controller of the Mint has advised me that:

(i) he was informed of the break-in to IPEC's Melbourne depot orally in early November and this was confirmed in writing on 8 December 1980 in a letter from ITLC (IPEC's insurance company), and

(ii) advice on the Brisbane coin loss was received on 20

January 1981.

'

(b) I was informed (i) of the break-in to IPEC's Melbourne depot on 24 December 1980, and (ii) of the Brisbane
coin loss on 22 January 1981.

(14) The Controller of the Mint has advised (a) Yes; and (b) Yes.

(15) The Controller of the Mint has advised me that IPEC informed him of the Brisbane loss on 21 January 1981.

, (16) The Controller of the Mint has been advised by IPEC that they reported the Brisbane loss to the Queensland Police on 16 December 1980.

(17) The Controller of the Mint has advised me that the Queensland, New South Wales and Victorian Police are

actively engaged in investigating both the Brisbane and Melbourne gold coin losses and at this stage the results of these investigations are confidential to the police forces and IPEe. The involvement of the Australian Federal Police is limited to making enquiries in Canberra on behalf of State police forces.
(18) Yes (to all parts).
(19) A statement was not issued as the people whose coins had been confirmed as stolen were to be contacted directly by the Royal Australian Mint.
(20) I have instructed the Mint to issue replacement coins to substantiated claims involving missing consignments.
(21) The Controller of the Mint has advised me that all clients whose coins have been reported by (PEC as missing have been informed, in writing, that their coins will be replaced.
(22) It was a condition of the contracts with the carriers that appropriate insurance arrangements be made by them. The particular insurers concerned arc a matter between the carriers and those insurers. The market price for the gold coins varies greatly but a guideline price from the larger coin dealers would be in the vicinity of $600 for the proof coin and about $250 for the uncirculated coin. Those prices apply to both dates.
(23) The Controller of the Mint has advised me that the total current market value for all the gold coins reported as missing is approximately $52,000.
(24) The Controller of the Mint has advised me that all written enquiries to the Mint about delays in despatch of gold coins will be answered. At this stage approximately 7,000 replies have been made.
Adelaide Airport
(Question No. 733)
Mr Scott asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to reports in certain sections of the Adelaide press that the Adelaide Airport could soon be handed over to the South Australian Government.
(2) If so, is there any substance in the reports.
(3) Does he propose to take any action on this matter, if so, what.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) There is no substance in the reports with regard to Adelaide Airport in particular other than to observe that the Government is continually reviewing its functions to ensure that there is no unnecessary intrusion into areas more appropriate for administration and control by others including the private sector, State and Local Governments.
The Commonwealth's commitment to ensure an efficient and effective national air transport system, its obligations with regard to international agreements relating to civil aViation, and the need to regulate standards to ensure safety, together with the sheer magnitude of the task of operating a capital city trunk route airport, make it unlikely that ownership and control would be passed to a body other than a State Government, City Council or a State Statutory Body.
(3) No action to transfer any State Capital City Airport is currently in hand and certainly would not be contemplated without fullest consultation with relevant State Governments,

3516 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Adelaide Airport
(Question No. 734)
Mr Scott asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the concern being expressed by residents of Adelaide, South Australia, over the continuous and persistent noise of aircraft utilising Adelaide Airport; if so, (a) will he establish permanent noise monitoring facilities at a suitable location adjacent to or near the end of runways 05 and 23 at Adelaide Airport and (b) make periodical reports of these facilities.
(2) If he will not undertake to do so, what is the reason.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to the number of public meetings held by residents living adjacent to Adelaide Airport who have consistently supported the proposal that an immediate start be made to the establishment of an alternative airport at a more suitable site north of Adelaide, thereby ena~ling more efficient operation of airlines and obviating inconvenience to residents in the area.
(4) Has he a proposal to establish an airport north of Adelaide; if so, what are the details.
(5) Has he had discussions with tlie Government of South Australia; if so, what was the nature of the discussions.
(6) Will he set up a committee to investigate the siting of an alternative airport to the current Adelaide Airport.
(7) Will he give an assurance that (a) the current curfew will be maintained at Adelaide Airport and will not be broken except in the case of emergency, (b) there will be no extensions of the current airport beyond its existing boundaries and (c) the introduction of quieter aircraft and the implementation of aircraft control for quieter aircraft movement will be expedited.
(8) Is action proposed to subsidise overseas travellers for the ,:ost of inter-State connecting flights; if so, what are the detalls.
(9) Will he ensure that Defence Service aircraft will not be permitted to use the Adelaide Airport unless there is some urgent reason which makes use essential.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(a) and (b) No.
(2) The information that would be obtained from a permanent noise monitoring facility at Adelaide Airport would not justify the cost of an installation, particularly since the noise levels of aircraft operating in Australia are known.
(3) Yes. 1 understand that there are a number of residents' groups from areas under the flight paths associated with Adelaide Airport who are pressing for its relocation.
(4) No.
(5) and (6) In December 19801 met with the South Australian Minister of Transport. Among other things we agreed to set up a South Australian Airfields Committee comprising both Commonwealth and State officials. The task of this Committee will include oversighting the implementation of agreed recommendations of the Joint Government Advisory Committee on Adelaide's Airline-Airport Requirements. Two important points made by that Committee were:
the Commonwealth and State Governments should adopt policies to retain and develop the existing Adelaide Airport as the primary regular public transport airport for the Adelaide region through to the year 2005

for the longer term aviation needs of the region action should be taken to secure the availability of an alternative major airport site in the Two Wells/Virginia area.
(7) (a) At this time, there are no plans to change the curfew at Adelaide Airport. The existing curfew conditions permit operations by jet aircraft in circumstances other than an emergency; for example, for extreme passenger hardship. It is my intention that this provision continue.
(b) There are currently no proposals to extend the airport beyond its existing boundaries.
(c) It is a requirement that all Australian-registered jet aircraft operating, or expected to operate, at Adelaide Airport meet, or will meet, the noise certification standards of the International Civil Aviation Organisation.
(8) No. Intending international travellers to and from Adelaide may take advantage of Australian-originating 'add-on' fares and 'See-Australia' fares. These fares were introduced in 1979 to extend the benefits travelling to and from non-gateway ports. The Australian-originating 'add-on' fares offer a 30 per cent discount off the normal economy fare for domestic travel in conjunction with advance purchase international air travel. The 'See-Australia' fares are available for travel within Australia in conjunction with international promotional fares such as apex or excursion fares at 30 per cent discount off the normal economy fare.
(9) Operations by Department of Defence aircraft at Adelaide Airport are carried out from time to time in order to ensure the most economic use of resources and to enhance efficiency. It is not proposed to embargo use of Adelaide Airport by military aircraft.
Department of Transport: Television Advertising
(Question No. 946)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) What sum was spent on television advertising by his Department and instrumentalities under his control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No expenditure was incurred by the Department of Transport on television advertising during 1979-80.
The Australian National Line spent $4,182 Trans-Australia Airlines spent $1,447,275, Qantas spent $240,865.
Australian National Railways undertook no television advertising in its own right during 1979-80. However a contribution for advertising was made to Railway of Australia Committee (ROA) , the Melbourne based Secretariat which represents all Government owned rail systems.
Australian National Railways contribution to ROA's 1979-80 Advertising and Publicity Budget was $89,407 of which $27,000 was spent on direct television advertising.
(2) Australian National Line (a) $2,202, (b) Nil, Trans-Australia Airlines (a) $62,649, (b) $104,049, Qantas (a) $9,634, (b) $4,817.
Specific details on ROA expenditure are not available.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3517

Cost of Epidemiological Study of Vietnam Veterans
(Question No. 993)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
(1) What is the total estimated cost of the Commonwealth Institute of Health epidemiological study of Vietnam veterans, as at 31 March 1981, and what is the period for which this estimate has been made.
(2) Does this estimate represent a ten-fold increase in cost over earlier estimates.
(3) If the estimated cost has increased, what is the reason for the increase.
(4) Has the Commonwealth Institute of Health identified a control group for the epidemiological study, as at 31 March 1981, if so, (a) what is the size of that control group, (b) in what way are the ages and health profiles of the control group comparable to those of the Vietnam veterans and (c) what steps has the Commonwealth Institute of Health taken to ensure that the control group has not been exposed to chemicals, such as those used in Vietnam whether used by civilians or the military, since the end of hostilities and the spraying program in Vietnam.
(5) Is it a fact that his News Release of 22 March 1981, released in Adelaide, was designed to prepare both the general public and Vietnam veterans for the Government's decision to phase out completely the Commonwealth Institute of Health epidemiological study; if so, will this occur and what other steps is the Government taking to examine and determine the claims of both Vietnam veterans and public servants, who served in Vietnam during the war.
(6) What has been the cost to the Government of the Commonwealth Institute of Health epidemiological study to 31 March 1981.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) The estimated cost of the Commonwealth Institute of Health epidemiological study of the Vietnam veterans for the year 1980-81 is $300,000. The original estimate of the total cost of the study was $2m. The eventual total cost will depend on the methodology adopted as a result of the pilot study now in progress.
(2) and (3) See answer to question (1).
(4) Yes.
(a) 10,600 (approximately).
(b) Age similar to those who served in Vietnam. Health as yet unknown.
(c) Information will be gathered during the course of the study. Appropriate adjustments will be made in analysis if other exposure is detected.
(5) No. It represents an update on the progress of various aspects of problems of Vietnam veterans.
(6) $140,000.
Defence Service Home Loans
(Question No. 1006)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:

(1) How many persons were on the waiting list for Defence Service Home Loans as at 1March 1981.
(2) What sum was available for Defence Service Home Loans as at 1 March 1981.
(3) What are the terms of repayment of these loans.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) At 1 March 1981, 2,538 applicants were awaiting settlement of a loan upon the expiration of the waiting period. The loans were due for settlement between March 1981 and December 1981.
(2) New lending is financed mainly from internally generated funds, of which the major element is principal repayments by current borrowers that are received throughout the year. Thus, it is not practicable to nominate a sum available at I March 1981 for loans. The Budget estimate of funds to become available for lending in 1980-81 was $111.5 million.
(3) Loans are normally repayable over a maximum term of 32 years by equal monthly instalments. Interest is charged at the rate of 3.75 per cent per annum on the first $12,000 at 7.25 per cent per annum on amounts between $12,001 and $15,000 and at 10 per cent on the amount of the loan exceeding $15,000. The average interest rate on a maximum loan of $25,000 is approximately 6.9 per cent per annum. The normal monthly instalment on a loan of $25,000 is $160.75.
Fuel Ethanol
(Question No. 1043)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) How many experimenter's licences for fuel ethanol production have been issued to (a) farmers, (b) other individuals, (c) educational institutions and organisations, (d) other nonprofit organisations, (e) companies and (f) other bodies.
(2) What output is envisaged from each of these producers.
(3) What measures has the Government established to monitor the output of the producers, the safety and success of the operations.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) 8, (b) 3, (c) 2,(d) I, (e) 4, (f) O.
(2) Output of fuel ethanol to date has been negligible. It is not envisaged that any experimenter will be in substantial production this year due to long lead-times involved in both equipment and foodstock-crop development.
(3) The Experimenter's licence scheme is jointly administered by the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs and the Department of National Development and Energy. The Department of Business and Consumer Affairs is responsible for providing the legal basis for the scheme and for ensuring that any ethanol produced is accounted for. The Department of National Development and Energy is monitoring production by means of periodic reports from experimenters, and will be conducting workshops from time to time to enable experimenters to compare notes and assist each other through sharing of experience. That Department has also produced a brochure for experimenters which includes safety matters both in respect of the production of ethanol and of its experimental use in internal combustion engines.

3518 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Underspending of Estimates: Department of Transport
(Questiou No. 1105)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(I) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 655-Administrative and (b) 685Bureau of Transport Economics.
(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, 'Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142Appropriation Acts (Nos I and 2) 1980-81', ifso, what are the reasons.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The or;ginal 1980-81 appropriations made for division 655-Administrative and 658-Bureau of Transport Economics were based on agreed estimates which were determined in accordance with the principles outlined by the Treasurer in his reply to Question 1101.
(2) The expected savings referred to in the Department of Finance Information Paper were offered as a result of circumstances given by the Treasurer.
Cost of Abolishing Means Test for Age Pensions
(Question No.nSl)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(1 ) What is the estimated cost at current rates of abolishing (a) the means test for age pensions (i) for women aged 60 to 64 years and (ii) for both sexes aged 65 to 69 years, (b) the partial means test for those persons aged 70 years and over and (c) the means test for service pensioners.
(2) Would approximately one-third of these sums be recovered via the taxation clawback.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(l) (a) the additional full year cost at the rates current on 8 April of abolishing the income test on age pensions is estimated to be
(i) some $410m for women aged 60 to 64 years; and (ii) some $390m for men and women aged 65 to 69 years.
(b) the additional full year cost at the rates current on 8 April of abolishing the income testing of pension increases on age pensions for persons aged 70 years and over is estimated to besome$153m.
(c) the Department of Veterans' Affairs has advised that the additional full year cost at the rates current on 8 April of abolishing the income test on current service pensions is estimated to be: $18.1m for those aged 65 to 69 years, $28.7m for those aged 60 to 64 years, $13.lm for those aged 55 to 59 years, and $4.2m for those aged under 55 years.
The additional full year cost of abolishing the income test on pension increases for service pensioners aged 70 years and over is estimated to be $9.7m.
The above figures include the additional cost for male service pensioners and their spouses and also female veterans receiving pensions in their own right. In addition, it is estimated that there are 272,000 surviving veterans (plus 201,300 wives)

who have not yet tested their eligibility for service pension. Of this group, it is estimated that 30,000 have already reached age pension age and are included in I (a). A further 188,000 have not yet reached the qualifying age for service pension. The cost of abolishing the income test in respect of the remainder, who would qualify for service pension, that is 54,000 veterans and 39,960 wives, is estimated at $267.3m in a full year.
These estimates are gross costs, as they make no allowance for the revenue that would be gained from taxation of the payments concerned.
(2) The Commissioner of Taxation has advised that the additional income tax that would be payable if the income test were to be abolished in respect of these payments would be almost one-third of the estimated cost.

Female Officers and Employees: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 1349)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many female officers and employees are employed in the Department of Social Security, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in the Department of Social Security during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr HuntThe Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1336 provided by the Minister assisting the Prime Minister (Hansard, 5 June 1981, page 3314).

Air Travel in Australia: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 1486)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

What sum was paid by his Department, or by departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.

Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Trans Australia Airlines Ansett Airlines Advance Airlines Qantas MacRobertson Miller Airline Services Ansett Air of South Australia
Bush Pilots Emu Airways . . AppolloAir Elton Investments

$ 426,191 238,681
212 578 46,004 2,018
397 1,397
710 354

Total

716,542

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3519

Recycling of Paper: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 1590)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
Has any action been taken by his Department to recycle paper; if so, what action.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Paper is recycled in the Australian Capital Territory, Victoria, Queensland, South Australia, and Western Australia by contracts between various paper recycling companies and the Department of Administrative Services. No action is taken in Tasmania and the Northern Territory as amounts of paper are too insignificant to warrant contracts from companies. New South Wales officers are mostly in leased premises and office waste is removed by the building contractor.

Tea Services: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs
(Question No. 1607)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many (a) full time and (b) part time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his Department in 1979-80.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's questionis as follows:
(I) (a) (i) Head Office Melbourne-l full time.
(a) (ii) Nil.
(b) (i) Head Office Canberra-I part time.
(b) (ii) Regional Offices-4 part time.
(2) (a) $56,885-including $27,160 paid to Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services (CACS) Ltd. This service is used in offices where cafeterias are located in the same building as the Department.
(b) Other charges are not separately identified in the Department's accounting records.

Transport Australia Calendar

(Question No. 1684)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(1) What was the cost of the Transport Australia calendar

for 1981.

'

(2) How many copies were produced and to whom were they given.

(3) What benefit is anticipated to Transport Australia by production and distribution of the calendar.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) $6,623.

(2) (a) 10,000.

(b) (i) One thousand five hundred to each Regional Director of the Department for distribution outside the Department to industry, State Government Departments and

instrumentalities, service organisations, aero and boat clubs, media, etc. It was not meant for internal office use, apart from those areas which are visited by members of the public or industry. There are five regions viz. New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia/Northern Territory, Victoria/ Tasmania, Western Australia.
(ii) One thousand to the Divisions of the Department, to cover areas not covered in (b) (i) above.
(iii) One thousand two hundred copies sent to specific addresses, who have close ties with the Department of an official nature. Areas covered included all modes of transport, air, land and sea. Recipients of the calendar commented favourably on the purpose and content of the calendar.
(3) The aim of the calendar was to place before industry and outside agencies the wide range of activities of the Department, especially Commonwealth contributions to safety in all modes.
Commonwealth Government Purchases of Pencils and Ballpoint Pens
(Question No. 1762)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
What was the quantity and cost of purchases of (a) pencils and (b) ballpoint pens by the Commonwealth Government in 1979-80.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
During 1979-80 the following purchases were made against period contracts arranged by my Department including stock for the Common Use Stores:

Quantity

Cost

(a) Pencils (b) Ballpoint pens

1,994,278 3,426,104

$ 152,735 144,227

Purchases by other departments under period contracts arranged by my Department or from other sources are not available.

Commonwealth Government Purchases of Paper
(Question No. 1763)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What was the quantity and cost of paper purchases by the Commonwealth Government during 1979-80.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
During 1979-80 purchases of paper were made against contracts arranged by my Department as follows: 6,396 tonnes; $7,337,955.
The figures include stock for the Common Use Stores. Purchases by other departments under period contracts arranged by my Department or from other sources are not available.

Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 1887)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:

3520 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000, or about 20 per cent by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination.of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of his Department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Moore-The answer -to 'the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Yes. In State offices (other than Western"'Australia) all extensions except those of senior officers are barred to STD. In the Fremantle office, technical difficulties prevent the barring of extensions toSTD, whilst in Perth SUbscription to the PABX rests with Department of Veterans' Affairs which has been advised that there are no objections to total barring.
In Central Office very few extensions are barred to STD. Personal trunk calls are required to be booked through the departmental switchboard operator. Prior to booking the call the caller must obtain approval from the accountant. The switchboard operator will then place the booking through the trunks operator. After thecall, the cost is obtained and a voucher forwarded to the accountant who then debits the caller with the cost of the call. See also (3) below.
(3) Yes. The Department of Business and Consumer Affairs in 'Canberra is the subscriber to a multi user telephone exchange. It is arninging the installation of extension metering equipment which, when connected, will allow better monitoring by providing information on an individual departmental user basis. In addition, new telephone technology, sucli as a Stored Programme Control (SPC) PABX, is ~urrently under active consideration by the Department.
Urban Public Transport
(Question No. 1907)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the article which appeared in the Age of Saturday 4 April 1981, in which he was reported as having said that it was doubtful that the $75m allocated as additional funds for developing urban public transport by the Government would be distributed, in view of the need to restrain Commonwealth budgetary outlay.
(2) If so, is there any substance to the report.
(3) If the report is correct, were these additional funds to be allocated as part of the Government's election program.
(4) Is there any substance to the claim that Victoria will now lose $22.5m of the additional funds which could have been used to build more trams and trains.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2), (3) and (4) Following the recent Review of Commonwealth Functions, the Commonwealth has decided to discontinue specific purpose grants to the States for urban public transport after 30 June 1981. At the Premiers' Conference on 4 May 1981, the Commonwealth announced that the States' overall entitlements for 1981-82 under the tax sharing arrangements would include a specific adjustment to take

account of the termination of a number of specific purpose payments, including $50m f9r urban public transport.
Whereas the urban public transport program was due to expire in 1982-83, the $50m incremental adjustment to the 1981-82 tax sharing arrangements now forms part of the base for the calculation of total tax sharing c<ntitiements in future years. The new arrangements allow each State to determine how much will be allocated for urban public transport in light of its own assessment of relative State priorities.
Insurance Industry
(Question No. 1976)
Dr Klugman asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 29 April 1981 :
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the Australian insurance industry's underwriting loss of $73m in 1978-79 and a prediction by the Federal Insurance Commissioner, Mr Kirkpatrick, of a loss exceeding $1 OOm in 1979-80.
(2) What were the non-underwriting profits of the industry during those years.
(3) Is he concerned about the industry's ability to meet its commitments.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The underwriting loss of $73m referred to by the honourable member was incurred by private sector direct underwriters for the calendar year 1979. The underwriting loss for the year 1978-79 was approximately $38m. I am aware of the comment made by the Insurance Commissioner that a predicted $100m underwriting loss for the year ended 30 June 1980 was conservative. Actual figures now available for this period show that private sector direct underwriters incurred underWriting losses totalling approximately $151m.
(2) For the 1978-79 and 1979-80 financial years nonunderwriting profits for private sector direct underwriters were approximately $254m and $316m respectively.
(3) It is well known that a very competitive situation has existed in the industry for some time, with resulting pressure on underwriting results, and the industry is having to cope with other factors adversely affecting these results. However I am aware of no reason to suggest that the industry does not have the overall financial strength to meet its obligations. It might be noted that, on the basis of data compiled by the Insurance Commissioner, in the two years 1978-79 and 1979-80 net profit from the insurance business of private sector direct underwriters totalled $317m. I would also draw the honourable member's attention to pages 18 and 19 of the Insurance Commissioner's Annual Report for 1979-80 which indicate that in recent years up to 1978-79 (the latest year for which this information is available) there has been continued overall improvement in the assessed solvency margins of direct underwriters in the private sector.
Import Duty on Spare Parts
(Question No. 2011)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 30 April 198J :
(1) Is it a fact that import duty on spare parts is making the cost of repairing many machines an uneconomical practice.
(2) Is the gear-box assembly of a Robin Brush Cutter subjected to full import duty whereas the machine itself has little or no duty placed on it; if so, what is the reason for this.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3521

(I) In the absence of detailed descriptions of the machines and specific parts to which the question refers, it is not possible to answer this question.
(2) Based on information available to the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs, a Robin Brush Cutter, imported as a complete entity, would be classified within item 84.49 of the Customs Tariff, and would be dutiable at 2 per cent. However, a gear-box for the cutter, if imported separately, would be classified within item 84.63.69 and would be subject to duty at rates ranging from 7.5 per cent to 25 per cent depending on the country of origin of the gear-box.
Entry of a gear-box at a concessional rate of 2 per cent may be appropriate under the Customs By-law system. This would need to be discussed with the By-law Branch of the Department of Business and Consumer AITairs.
Rural Loans to Fishermen
(Question No. 2027)
Mr Humphreys asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:
(1) What was the (a) number and (b) total sums of rural loan approvals to fishermen which were refinanced by the Primary Industry Bank in 1980.
(2) Did he state in December 1980 that increases in bank overdraft interest rates would not apply in drought areas; if so, will fishermen be exempted from the recent increases.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Primary Industry Bank of Australia has advised that it approved refinance loans in 'respect of 17 endborrowcrs in the fishing industry during calendar year 1980 to a total value of $1.6m.
(2) The facts of the understanding reached with the banks in December 1980 in relation to bank interest rates in drought-declared areas are:
rises in interest rates following the raising of the official ceiling on small bank advances effective from 3 December 1980 will not apply to those adversely affected by drought in drought-declared areas for the duration of the drought;
those affected in drought areas may include people other than primary producers;
the interest rate concession will be administered by banks on a case-by-case basis on application by individual borrowers to the respective banks;
the arrangements will apply to interest rates on both new and existing loans.
Company Takeovers
(Question No. 2035)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 5 May 1981 :
(l) Further to his answer to part (4) of my question No. 725 (Hansard, 29 April 1981, page 1775) what reasons did the Trade Practices Commission give for threatening to take proceedings for a contravention of section 50 of the Trade Practices Act in respect of the attempted takeover of the Herald and Weekly Times Group by News Limited.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to statements issued at the time of the attempted takeover referred to in part (1) on behalf of the News Limited group making it clear that the group was not dropping its takeover bid because of proposed action by the Trade Practices Commission and that the group did not

consider itself to be in breach of section 50 of the Trade PracticesAct.
(3) How would the present set of merger criteria detailed in the Act have prevented News Limited from taking over the State operations, includingVictoria, of the Herald and Weekly Times Group where the takeover of that State operation would not give News Limited control or dominance in that market or increase News Limited's control or dominance in that market.
(4) Is he able to say whether it is because of the inability of the post-1977 provisions of the Trade Practices Act to regulate the type of control referred to in part (3), that the Victorian State Government set up its current inquiry into that State's newspaper industry.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) In a media release dated 30 November 1979 the Trade Practices Commission stated it had been prepared to take proceedings against News Limited because its proposal to acquire marginally more than 50 per cent of the shares in Herald and Weekly Times Limited would have given it control of that company and consequently one-company dominance in a number of markets.
(2) I am not aware of statements of the kind referred to in the question and a search by my Department of the press clippings it has relating to the attempted takeover did not, I understand, reveal reference to such statements in the press reports. I am informed, however, that News Limited ,issued a statement on 22 November 1979 which said, in part "Mr Rupert Murdoch, chief executive of the News group of companies, today announced that in view of e'vents in the last 48 hours, including the unwarranted intervention of the Trade Practices Commission, the News group at this time does not intend to make an offer to all the ordinary shareholders of Herald and Weekly Times Ltd to acquire marginally in excess of 50 per cent of the issued ordinary capital of that company.".
(3) See my answer to (1).
(4) I am unable to comment on the reasons of the Victorifln State Government in deciding to set up the inquiry referred to, other than to note that the Victorian 'Premier was reported as saying, at the time the inquiry was announced, that the inquiry had not been prompted by the News Limited/Herald and Weekly Times takeover bid.
Northern Territory Disabled Persons: Social Security Projects
(Question No. 2051)
Mr Tambling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) What financial appropriations have been allocated by the. Department of Social Security for use in the Northern Territory for ptoje.cts to assist the disabled during 1980-81.
(2) For what specific projects has this sum been allocated.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) (a) Handicapped Persons Assistance Act-$216,500.
(b) Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act-$108,700.
(c) Children's Services Program-
$122,551 allocated to projects to-date $50,000 block grant for the International Year of Disabled Persons (IYDP).

3522 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) (a) Handicapped Persons Assistance Act. The allocation of $216,500 is being used to subsidise the operational costs of the following existing approved services for disabled people:
Handicapped Persons Association of the Northern Territory(i) Kokoda Sheltered Workshop, Winnellie (ii) Activity Therapy Centre, Cocoanut Grove
Northern Territory Spastics Association (lnc)- Training Centre, Casuarina
Uniting Church in Australia (Sommerville Homcs)- Children's Residentials (3), Darwin
Bindi Activity Therapy Centre (lnc)-Activity Therapy Centre, Alice Spring>
Anglican Diocese of the Northern Territory-St Mary's Children's Home, Alice Springs.
An additional amount of $292,000 has been allocated for expenditure on new projects for disabled people during the 1980-83 period. Approval of specific projects is being deferred until 31 December 1981 to enable suitable projects to be planned and developed in consultation with the Northern Territory Administration and the voluntary sector.
(b) Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act. The allocation of $108,700 is being used to subsidise the capital cost of constructing the following accommodation for aged or disabled persons:
Northern Territory Pensioners Association-six hostel beds, Darwin
Australian Red Cross-eight hostel beds, Katherine Australian Inland Mission-one staff unit, Alice Springs.
(c) Children's Services Program. $122,551 has been allocated to the following projects:
Darwin Toy Library Association-Mobile Toy Library Handicapped Persons' Association of the Northern Territory-Down's Syndrome Support Group Northern Territory Spastics Association(i) Adventure playground (ii) two residential and day care units to accommodate
families of children using Darwin Spastic Centre.
Of the $50,000 block grant for IYDP, $31,767 has so far been allocated to the following projects:
A new Start for Underachievers-Workshop on Learning Problems
Northern Territory Spastics Association-Video Equipment
Sommerville Homes-Video Equipment Alice Springs Spastics Council-Vehicle Down's Syndrome Association-Employment of outside school hours tutor Casuarina District Girl Guides AssociationImprovement of access for disabled children.
Perth Airport
(Question No. 1069)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) Has a leaflet entitled 'Perth Airport Western Australia' been distributed by his Department in association with its invitation for public comment on proposed changes to Perth Airport, Western Australia.
(2) If so, is there a claim on page 2 of the leaflet that the Joint Governments' Advisory Committee recommended that Perth Airport be retained and further developed as the sole primary airport for the Perth region.
(3) Did the whole recommendation of the Joint Committee deal with the period 1975-2004 and in fact recommend that Perth Airport be retained and further developed as the sole

primary airport for the Perth region and that the Perth Airport master plan be published as soon as practicable and that the master plan should be based on a detailed analysis of airport development options and their impact on the environment and land use.
(4) [f so, why was the whole recommendation and the specified time period not put before the general public.
(5) Does the Joint Government Committee's report qualify the statement "further developed" in its recommendation by reference to a master plan that has not yet been published.
(6) If so, why is the Government proceeding with a major development in advance of production of a master plan.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) Yes.
(4) The leaflet was published to inform the public of development proposals at Perth Airport and seek comments, particularly on environmental issues. Extracts of the Joint Government Committee recommendation relevant to this purpose were included in the pamphlet. The public has previously been informed of the recommendations of the Committee in a press release in August 1979 and its 'Report on the Aviation Requirements for the Perth Region' which has been made available to the public through the Australian Government Publishing Service.
(5) Not directly. However, it is appreciated that forward planning must precede major development whenever possible, and planning studies are being undertaken in order to determine appropriate sites for development projects on Perth Airport.
(6) The new international terminal project is still in the early planning stages and work cannot commence until the project first receives specific Government approval and then Parliamentary approval after examination by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works (PWC). A master plan document for Perth Airport, will be produced prior to the PWC hearing. It is not anticipated that the findings of the master plan will necessitate a reversal of the decision on the location of the new international terminal complex.
Bendigo Ordnance Factory
(Question No. 2075)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
On what grounds other than opposition to national enterprises has the Government decided to sell the Bendigo Ordnance Factory to private enterprise.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Government's decision to offer the factory for sale was based on its views that Government should not be involved in activities which are capable of being performed by the private sector and that greater reliance should be placed on private industry for production of stores for the armed Services.
Bendigo Ordnance Factory
(Question No. 2076)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Will the Government consider revising and reversing the decisions announced to date in respect of the Bendigo Ordnance Factory.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3523

Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No.
Bendigo Ordnance Factory
(Question No. 2077)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) At what minimum price does the Government intend to sell the Bendigo Ordnance Factory.
(2) Will the sale be effected by private treaty or public tender.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) and (2) The Government has sought expressions of interest from the private sector and it is expected that at a later stage suitable registrants will be invited to submit formal tenders. The Department of Administrative Services which is the Disposal Authority for the Commonwealth proposes to obtain a valuation by an independent firm of valuers for use as a basis for consideration of offers.
Bendigo Ordnance Factory
(Question No. 2079)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) Have any negotiations been held or has the Government received any approaches from any private firm in any

form during 1981 to purchase the Bendigo Ordnance Factory; if so, what are the details.
(2) Has the Government made any approaches to any firms during 1981 to buy the Factory; if so, what are the details.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) There have been no negotiations but several firms have made exploratory inquiries which have revealed a promising degree of interest in the Factory. Their inquiries are treated as confidential.
(2) No firms have been directly approached but expressions of interest have been invited from the private sector, through newspaper advertisements.
Bendigo Ordnance Factory
(Question No. 2080)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) How many employees have been engaged at the Bendigo Ordnance Factory in each year since 1972.
(2) What is the value of (a) defence and (b) outside work carried out at the Factory in each year since 1972 and what percentage did each category represent of the total work carried out.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is contained in the following table:

ORDNANCE FACTORY BENDIGO Employment Levels-Value ofProduction-Percentage Workload Hours 1972-73-1979-80

1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

Employment Levels (as at 30 June)

702

677

644

641 626

630

604

615

Value ofProduction ($m)-
Australian Defence Other Work

2.565 1.560 .848 1.242 .766* 1.049 1.239 1.208 1.740 1.997 2.423 3.420 2.938 2.689 2.286 2.700

4.305 3.557 3.271 4.662 3.704 3.738 3.525 3.908

Percentage of Workload Hours-

Australian Defence

Other Work

..

56

36

26

29

28

44

64

74

71

72

46

47

38

54

53

62

* Reduction in value attributable to a special rate being struck from 1976 for Defence work.

Bendigo Ordnance Factory
(Question No. 2081)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Did the Government request an assessment from the Commonwealth Employment Service and the Victorian Minister for State Development, or other related bodies of the effects that selling the Bendigo Ordnance Factory would have on the workforce at the factory and on the economy of Bendigo, prior to making the decision to sell.
Sir Phillip Lyncb-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
At this stage there have been no requests made for assessments from such bodies as referred to by the honourable member. If at a later stage of consideration of the question of

the future of the Factory assessments are considered relevant, they will be sought. It could be expected that a private sector owner could use the Bendigo facilities to greatly expand activity in support of large scale industrial and minerals developments, as well as continue to engage in defence work, and thereby provide continuing employment opportunities in Bendigo.
Bendigo Ordinance Factory
(Question No. 2082)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) What sections of the Bendigo Ordnance Factory's work are to be transferred to Maribyrnong, Victoria, on what date, and how many employees are to be affected by the transfers.

3524 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) Was the honourable member for Bendigo consulted in advance; if so, at what stage, and how was the member notified or consulted about moves by the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions in respect to the Ordnance Factory at Bendigo.
(3) Did the honourable member for Bendigo indicate any opposition to the proposal at any stage prior to the announcement in the House by the Prime Minister that the Factory would be sold; if so, in what form.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No decisions have yet been taken on what, if any, sections of the Factory's work may be transferred to Maribyrnang, or when they might be transferred. This will depend on assessments of Defence requirements now being undertaken and may also be influenced by the outcome of the Government's enquiries regarding the interest of the private sector in undertaking certain classes of work at Bendigo.
(2) and (3) The honourable member for Bendigo was given written notice of the decision to offer the Ordnance Factory Bendigo for sale as a going concern, shortly before the announcement in the House by the Prime Minister. Tdo not propose to make public details of my discussions with members of parliament or other persons concerning matters under consideration by the Government.

Issue of Plants to Homeowners, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2105)

Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981 :

(I) Does the proposed discontinuance of the issue of plants

to homeowners in the Australian Capital Territory (Hansard

30 April 1981, page 1842) mean that the Government has

abandoned the garden city concept for Canberra; if so, what

alternative theme will be used in promotional publicity for the

national capital.

.

(2) Is he able to provide a list of all private landscaping contractors in the Australian Capital Territory and their professional qualifications.

(3) Will steps be taken to implement a code of standards for landscaping work in order to maintain the high standards
currently observed in Canberra's parks, gardens and landscaped areas; if so, when.

Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) No.

(2) No. The Department of the Capital Territory does not
keep such a list. The Yellow Pages of the Canberra District Telephone Directory provide a comprehensive list of landscape contractors.

There are quite a number of contractors in the Australian Capital Territory with varying degrees of qualifications and the number of these varies from year to year.

(3) Landscape development of public areas in Canberra is undertaken by the National Capital Development Com-
mission. The high standards which have been achieved are due to a number of factors, which include: established design and specification guidelines; Landscape Architects engaged by the
Commission to prepare landscape designs; construction of landscape projects being closely supervised by Landscape Architects. Another factor is the level of expertise which has de-
veloped in the local landscape construction industry in recent years.

Reduction ofStaff and Functions: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 2131)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Will the Minister provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of the Department of Social Security that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 2119 provided by the Minister assisting the Prime Minister (Hansard, 5 June 1981, page 3317).
Redevelopment of Perth Airport
(Question No. 2188)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 May 1981 :
(l) Is it a fact that the Commonwealth-State Advisory Committee studying Western Australia's airport requirements considered two basic sets of options for the redevelopment of Perth Airport, on contemplating developments based on existing runway configuration and the other based on a widely spaced north/south runway development.
(2) Is it also a fact that the Committee recommended neither option but concluded that a much more detailed analysis of the airport master planning options and their environmental impact is necessary before a final decision is taken on the master plan for Perth Airport.
(3) Has that analysis been undertaken; if so, what was its result.
(4) If that analysis has not been undertaken, why has the decision been taken to locate the new terminal near the northern corner of the airport precluding a new parallel runway as an effective option.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(J) and (2) Yes.
(3) This analysis is currently being undertaken and will form part of the master plan document for Perth Airport.
(4) The siting of the new terminal will not preclude the construction of a new parallel runway.
Pollution of the Sea by Oil
(Question No. 2204)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Did the Assembly of the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation in 1971 adopt an amendment to the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by Oil, 1954, aimed at providing special protection for the Great Barrier Reef area by regarding the area as if it were a part of the land.
(2) Has this amendment been ratified by 25 IMCO Members, including Canada, France, New Zealand, The

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3525

Philippines and the USSR in the Pacific, but does it need 42 ratifications for its entry into force,
(3) Have approaches been made by Australia to (a) the United States of America, (b) Japan, (c) the People's Republic of China, (d) other members of ASEAN, (e) other members of the South Pacific Forum or (f) any South American countries to secure at least 42 ratifications; if so, on what occasions and with what responses.
(4) What steps has Australia taken to ratify the amendment.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The amendment has been ratified by 25 IMCO Members including Canada, France, New Zealand, The Philippines and the USSR as notified by IMCO at 10 March 1981. A total of 44 ratifications are required to bring the amendment into force.
(3) No approaches have been made to other countries with a view to securing at least 44 ratifications. It would be inappropriate for Australia to suggest ratification of the amendment to other countries until it has completed its own processes towards acceptance of the amendments.
(4) The Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 which received the Royal Assent on 14 April 1981 will enable Australia to ratify the Convention. Those sections of the Act relating to the Great Barrier Reef amendment will be proclaimed when the amendment comes into force.
Drug Detection
(Question No. 2245)
Mr Jull asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:
(I) Are sniffer dogs now used by Customs Officers at all international gateways into Australia for the purpose of drug detection.
(2) If so, for how long have the dogs been used.
(3) What success has been achieved by this process.
(4) Has there been an appreciable increase in the volume of narcotics detected by using these dogs.
Mr MooreThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. Narcotic drug detector dogs are located at all capital cities with the exception of Hobart. Dogs and handlers from Melbourne are used in Hobart for specific operations until dogs and handlers presently being trained for location at Hobart finish their training.
(2) Dogs were first introduced as follows: SydneySeptember' 1976; Melbourne-September 1978; BrisbaneDecember 1979; Adelaide~December 1979; Perth-March 1980;Darwin-~November 1980.
(3) Dogs have been used in exercises which have resulted in 311 separate seizures of narcotic drugs. These seizures include separate consignments of:
1,000 kg Hashish in Sydney, 10.5 kg Heroin at Sydney International Airport, 30 kg Cannabis Oil in Melbourne, 100.7 kg Marihuana at Sydney International Airport, 90 kg Hashish at Sydney International Airport, 4.5 kg Hashish in Adelaide, 68 grams Cocaine in Perth.

(4) It is not yet possible to detect any appreciable change in the pattern of drug seizures which could be solely attributed to the use of dogs. The Detector Dog Unit is an integral part of the total Customs effort and provides Customs officers with an additional effective method of detecting drugs illegally entering Australia.
Coastal Surveillance
(Question No. 2284)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(1) What specific circumstance led to the hire of light twinengined aircraft for coastal surveillance from Arnhem Air Charter Pty Ltd at a cost of $6,975.66 referred to on page 76 of Commonwealth of Australia Gazette G 18 of 5 May 1981, reference SUR 15.
(2) What sections of coastline were subject to surveillance and for what periods under the contract.
(3) Who were the unsuccessful tenderers.
(4) Who performed the surveillance duties covered by the contract (a) prior to and (b) since the period covered by the contract.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Cessation of operations by Northern Airlines.
(2) The coastlines of Bathurst/Melville Islands and from Darwin to Millingimbi on 10, 11, 12 and 13 February 1981.
(3) There were no unsuccessful tenderers. At the time Arnhem Air Charter was the only operator in Darwin with suitable aircraft available and holding appropriate operationallicences.
(4) (a) Northern Airlines.
(b) Transecutive Airlines (subcontracting to Northern Airlines) from 14 February to 10 April inclusive, Arnhem Air Charter from 11 April to 14 April inclusive, then Northern Territory Aerial Work Pty Ltd (a wholly owned subsidiary of Ansett Transport Industries) from 15 April to date.
Answer to Question No. 572
(Question No. 2293)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
When may I expect to receive an answer to my question No. 572 which first appeared on the Notice Paper on 24 February 1981.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is that Question No. 572 was answered in Hansard on 26 May 1981, page 2628.
Geelong Airport Development
(Question No. 2299)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(1) Has his Department approved the safety aspects of the proposed airport development at Gee1ong, Victoria.
(2) Has a decision yet been made with respect to the provision of Commonwealth financial assistance for the Geelong Airport development.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

3526 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) The proposed Geelong Aerodrome has been planned by local authorities in close liaison with my Department and meets all the relevant standards.
(2) Yes. The Government will provide grants for 50 per cent of the cost of approved aerodrome construction (excluding purchase of land) through the Aerodrome Local Ownership Plan.
Accounting Standards Review Board
(Question No. 2301)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(I) Did he say in answer to my question No. 418 relating to my repeated request for the setting up of an Accounting Standards Review Board, that the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities has received and is still considering a preliminary paper that was prepared for it by the National Companies and Securities Commission of the Accounting Standards Review Board.
(2) If so, in view of the urgent need for this Review Board to strengthen the efficient operations of the Commission, (a) when will a decision be made and (b) will the decision be tabled in the House.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) (a) The matter will be listed for discussion at the next Meeting of the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities.
(b) When the Ministerial Council makes a decision on this matter I would expect that it will at the same time decide how and when its decision will be communicated.
Agent Orange
(Question No. 2303)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veteran's Affairs, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the article 'Agent Orange and the Repatriation Commission' at pages 103 to 117 of Debrief, February-April 1981.
(2) If so, does the author allege suppression by the head of the Department of Veterans' Affairs of information, including a report by Dr Fleming relevant to determinations of claims on the Repatriation Commission by veterans in respect of war-caused disability associated with exposure to herbicides.
(3) Will the Minister (a) have tabled in the House documents provided to the Government by herbicide manufacturing interests and (b) direct that all relevant expert opinions in the possession of the Department of Veterans' Affairs be provided to the Commission and Boards in accordance with sections 24AB, 47 and 48 of the Repatriation Act.
(4) Will action be taken against any person who appears, prima facie, to have breached sections 34 (b), 42, 43 or 86 of the Crimes Act in relation to the judicial functions of the Commission; if not, why not.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) An unidentified author alleges in the article that the Permanent Head of the Department of Veterans' Affairs has refused to have evidence of pesticides summarised and placed

on files on pesticide claims, and that as a consequence, medical practitioners have insufficient information to give an informed and balanced opinion on the possibility of disability claims being attributed to pesticide poisoning. The author also alleges that the Department of Veterans' Affairs has refused to release a report said to have been prepared for the Department by Dr Keith Fleming.
The facts are that the Department has been gathering information on the long-term effects of herbicides on human health since well before December 1979 when the herbicides controversy arose in Australia and has been circulating this information throughout the Repatriation system.
The so called 'report' by Dr Fleming is a compilation of extracts from scientific and other articles which were obtained from Mr John Evans of Melbourne, an adviser to the Vietnam Veterans Association, and which, in his opinion, supported the Association's claims. Subsequent independent evaluation of the compilation indicated that the compilation did not present an adequate up-to-date and comprehensive coverage of the scientific literature on the subject.
However, copies of the full texts of the reports and articles quoted by Mr John Evans together with a number of other scientific reports have been distributed to Departmental Medical Officers dealing with claims of health effects from contact with toxic chemicals in Vietnam.
(3) (a) A search has revealed that the Department has received the following papers from what is referred to as herbicide manufacturing interests:
(i) A copy of a paper presented to the United Services Club in Brisbane on 19 March 1980 by the Queensland Manager of Nufarm Chemicals which is entitled 'Do You Want Three Feeds a Day?'
(ii) A copy of a paper presented to the Pesticides Science Group by the Chairman of the South Australian Division of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Association of' Australia on 16 March 1981.
(iii) A letter dated 30 April 1980, addressed to my predecessor, the Hon. A. E. Adermann, M.P., from I.e.I. Australia Limited to which was attached a one page summary concerning the toxicology of the herbicides "Gramoxone" and "Reglone".
(iv) A tetter dated 23 February 1981, addressed to me from the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Association of Australia to which was attached a booklet entitled 'Public Concerns About 2,4,5-T' by W. R. Mullison, Ph.D.
This material is available and could be tabled if required.
(d) My Department seeks to ensure that all relevant scientific evidence is taken into account by Departmental Medical Officers when giving opinions under the terms of section 48 of the Repatriation Act, by providing them With copies of published articles dealing with the possible toxic effects of herbicides and other toxic chemicals. Repatriation Boards and delegates of the Commission are well aware and have been reminded that all of this material is available to them whenever they think it could be relevant to a particular claim.
(4) No person appears to have breached the various provisions of the Crimes Act referred to.
Sale of Bendigo Ordnance Factory
(Question No. 2356)
MI' Hurford asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 28 May 198 I:
(I) How many apprentices are presently employed hy the Ordnance Factory, Bendigo, Victoria.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3527

(2) Will the Government ensure that the current level of

apprenticeship 'training at the Ordnance Factory, Bendigo,

will be maintained following -its sale to private enterprise

(Hansard, 30 April1981, page 1846); if so, how will this be

achieved.

'

Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) One hundred and four. There are also 21 other apprentices at the factory who are being sponsored by industry and are receiving their basic trade training under the Group OneYear Apprentice-Scheme.
(2) It is the Government's aim to ensure the continued operation of the factory, and the Government is of the view that in the hands of a private owner activity in the factory in support of large scale mineral and industrial developments could be expanded, so providing continuing employment and training opportunities. The Government cannot give a guarantee at.this stage as to the level of apprenticeship training which will be provided as this would be a matter for the owner. Government incentives generally available to industry to train apprenticc;s would of course be available to a private-sector owner.

Sale of Bendigo Ordnance Factory
(Question.No. 2380)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 2 June 1981:
(I) Is .the Department of Defence to be represented on the interdepartmental committee examining the sale of the Bendigo Ordnance Factory, Victoria; if so, at what level.
(2) What other departments, and at what level, are to be represented on the committee.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes, at Assistant Secretary and Chief Executive Officer levels.'
(2) Department of Industry and Commerce (Chair)- Deputy Controller level. Department of Administrative Services-Principal Executive Officer level. Attorney General's Department-Principal Legal Officer level. Department of Finance-Chief Finance Officer level. Department of Industrial Relations-Principal Executive Officer level. Department of the Treasury-Assistant Secretary Level. Office of the Public Service Board-Regional Director level.

Legal Assistance for Persons Charged with Criminal Offences
(Question No.7)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon --notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Does article 14 of the 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which Australia signed in December 1972 and ratified in August 1980, guarantee that everyone charged with a criminal offence shall be entitled to have adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his defence and to defend himself through legal assistance of his own choosing.
(2) Has the Attorney-General's attention been drawn to the judgment of Justice Murphy in Mcinnis v. The Queen on 19 December 1979 wherein the view was expressed that the laws and practices of Western Australia do not fulfil these guarantees.

(3) Did the Attorney-General, on 5 August 1980, establish within the Attorney-General's Department the Human Rights Bureau, whose functions are, at the Attorney General's request, to inquire into any federal infringements of the Covenant and, at the Attorney-General's direction, to discuss relevant human rights issues with State authorities.
(4) If so, has the Attorney-General (a) requested the Bureau to inquire into federal laws and (b) directed the Bureau to discuss with Western Australia the State laws on legal assistance for persons charged with criminal offences.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's question:
(I) Sub-Article 14(3) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights provides:
'3. In the determination of any criminal charge against him, everyone shall be entitled to the following minimum guarantees, in full equality:
(b) To have adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his defence and to communicate with counsel of his choosing;
(c) To be tried in his presence, and to defend himself in person or through legal assistance of his choosing; to be informed, if he does not have legal assistance, of this right; and to have legal assistance assigned to him, in any case where the interests of justice so require, and without payment by him in any such case if he does not have sufficient means to pay for it . . .'
(2) lam awareofthejudgmentofMr Justice Murphy.
(3) I did, on 5 August 1980, establish the Human Rights Bureau with functions, inter alia, of inquiring into and reporting to me in relation to complaints referred by me to the Bureau whether any act or practice under a law of the Commonwealth or a Territory infringes human rights as defined in the Covenant, and under my direction of continuing discussions with appropriate State authorities about co-operative arrangements and relevant issues in the human rights field.
(4) (a) and (b) No.
Australian Law Reform Commission Reports
(Question No. 20)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Further to the AttorneycGeneral's answer to Question No. 5321 (Hansard, 21 April 1980, page 2045), will legislative action be taken by the Government on the following Australian Law Reform Commission Reports: (a) Complaints Against the Police (First Report presented 7 August 1975, Supplementary Report presented 9 June 1978), (b) Criminal Investigation (8 November 1979), (c) Insolvency: The RegularPaymentofDebts (4November 1977), (d) Unfair Publication: Defamation and Privacy (29 December 1978), (e) Privacy and the Census (26 September 1979) and (f) Lands Acquisition and Compensation (12 March 1980); if so, when in each case.
(2) If no legislative action is planned, is other action planned in each case; if so, what.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has supplied the following answers to the honourable member's question:
(I) The present position in relation to each of the reports listed in the question is as follows:

3528 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(a) The Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 was assented to on 9 April 1981 but has not yet been proclaimed to Commence.
(b) As I informed the Senate on 5 Maryh 1981 (Senate Hansard, page 354), a further draft of the Criminal Investigation Bill has been prepared having regard to the comments on and criticisms of the Criminal Investigation Bill 1977. That draft Bill is now being considered.
(c) The Department of Business and Consumer Affairs has held discussions on this Report with interested parties. Consideration is now being given to what legislative, or other, action may be appropriate.
(d) This Report is still being considered within the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General.
(e) I refer the honourable member to the statement tabled in the Parliament by the Treasurer on 10 September 1980 (House of Representatives Hansard, page 1081). The Census and Statistics Amendment Bill 1981 was introduced into the Parliament on 30 April 1981. The main purpose of this Bill was to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905 to incorporate those Government decisions on the recommendations made by the Law Reform Commission in its report on 'Privacy and the Census' which require legislative action prior to the conduct of the 1981 Population Census. Legislative action to implement the other Government decisions on the Commission's recommendations requiring such action is still under consideration.
(f) This Report is still under consideration within the Government.
(2) See (1) above.
Interest Rates
(Question No. 262)
Mr Humphreys asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(1) Do the terms of reference of the Campbell Inquiry into the financial industry include rationalising the mode of expressing interest rates.
(2) Are interest rates currently expressed according to (a) a fiat rate, for simple interest, per annum, (b) a nominal rate per month and (c) an effective rate for compound interest; if so, is there a need for simplifying the mode of expression of interest from the consumer's point of view.
Mr HQward-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Its terms of reference would encompass such a matter if the Inquiry thought it an issue requiring comment.
(2) Such differences can arise between various categories of financial institutions and different types of deposit or loan. From the consumers' point of view there presumably would be advantage in having sufficient information available to enable accurate comparison between different rates of interest.
Legal Aid Commission
(Question No. 323)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) Which of the recommendations contained in the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Annual Report for 1979-80 has the Government (a) accepted and (h) rejected.

(2) What progress has been achieved in the implementation of the recommendations which were accepted.
Mr Viner The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
With regard to each of the 7 recommendations the position is as follows:
Recommendation No.1- -Statutory Interest on Solicitors' Trust Accounts In so far as the Australian Capital Territory is concerned the recommendation has not been accepted. The recommendation could not be adopted without prior consultation with banks and the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory. In so far as the recommendation concerns participating States it has been brought to their attention.
Recommendation No.2 --Estimates of ExpenditureThe recommendation as it relates to Commonwealth funding has not been accepted. The recommendation has been brought to the attention of participating States.
Recommendation No.3- --Grants to Voluntary and Community Legal Services -In accordance with the recommendation the Government has established an on-going funding program for these bodies.
Recommendation No.4-Grants for Migrant Legal Education --I brought this recommendation to the attention of the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and officers of his Department have had discussions in relation to the matter with officers of the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission. With the assistance of these officers the Department has prepared orientation information for newly arrived migrants explaining aspects of the law that are likely to be of concern to them.
Recommendation No.5-Aboriginal Legal AidThe House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs, to which this recommendation was made, did not agree that a national secretariat of Ahoriginallegal services should be establishedsee Chapter 17 of the Committee's Report tabled on 27 August 1980.
Recommendation No. 6-- -Provision of Legal Advice-In the Australian Capital Territory the recommendation as it relates to thc availability of legal advice has not been formally accepted by the Legal Aid Commission as the Commission has always acted generally in accordance with the recommendation. The Commission has not accepted the recommendation as it relates to voluntary and community based services as it considers that the only community based service in the Territory duplicates the legal advice services provided by the Commission. In so far as the recommendations concern participating States it has been brought to their attention.
Recommendation No.7-Administrative Review Council-In relation to the Australian Capital Territory similar recommendations to those contained in paragraphs (a), (b) and (e) of the recommendation have been made by the Administrative Review Council-see pages 22 and 23 of The Council's Fourth Annual Report tabled on 18 September 1980. The Government has accepted the recommendations of the Council. In so far as these recommendations concern participating States it has been brought to their attention.
Telephone Facilities for Deaf People
(Question No. 380)
Mr Adermann asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3529

(1) Has his attention been drawn to the special telephone handset available in Australia using a print out enabling totally deaf people to use the telephone.
(2) As the use of the phone necessitates a similar handset at the receiver's end, will he have his Department investigate the possibility of installing at least one receiver in the State Branch of each Commonwealth Department so that the totally deaf might have an access service previously denied to them.
(3) Would this be an appropriate Government initiative for 1981, the International Year of the Disabled Person.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) Yes. Special telephone handset equipment for the totally deaf called the Porta Printer IT has been available to the public through a private company, Intercept Communications, P:O. Box 297, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, priced in the range $800-$1,000. Telecom Australia permitted its connection to the telephone network and, I am advised, some 80 units have been sold to date.
A recent upsurge of demand for the equipment in the United States of America has exhausted supplies, including items earmarked for Australia. Alternative equipment, the Porta Printer Plus, could be available through Intercept Communications by mid 1981. One of these printers has already been leased by Telecom for evaluation and testing for compatibility with the Porta Printer II. Telecom's intention, as part of its contribution to the International Year of the Disabled Person, is to act as a distributing agent for the unit.
(2) and (3) The Government is concerned to improve the opportunities and access to services of disabled people wherever practicable. Telecom has prepared a booklet, entitled 'International Year of Disabled Persons 1981-Telecom Australia's Program of Activities', which includes information about handsets for the deaf. Several thousand copies have already been distributed, both inside and outside of Telecom, and to relevant Government Departments and Authorities.
The Government currently has under consideration the question of policy on practical steps that Departments should take to assist the disabled. [ will advise the honourable member in due course of the outcome with respect to the provision of receivers in Departments that can be accessed by the totally deaf.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs: Tmnsfer of Functions
(Question No. 581)
Mr Beazley asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(l) Is the Government planning to distribute some of the functions of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs to any other department or statutory authority.
(2) If so, (a) which functions are to be transferred and (b) to what Department and/or authorities will they be transferred.
(3) When is it intended that the process will be completed.
(4) Has the National Aboriginal Conference been consulted on this matter; if so, what opinion was expressed by it.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-- The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Responsibility for Aboriginal housing grants (other than those to the States) is to be transferred to the Aboriginal Development Commission. States Grants for Aboriginal

Housing are to be integrated in the Commonwealth/State Housing Agreement and administered by the Department of Housing and Construction. Funding of the Sacred Sites Protection Authority will be transferred to the Northern Territory Government.
(3) 1 July 1981.
(4) The National Aboriginal Conference was informed of the proposed transfer of Aboriginal housing grants (other than those to the States) to the Aboriginal Development Commission and the Chairman of the Conference indicated last November that his Executive's view was that it would be appropriate for the deadline of 1 July 1981 to be extended to allow the Aboriginal Development Commission more time to consolidate its present functions and to plan future developments. The Minister has informed the NAC that he recognised its concern, and that a joint DAA/ADC Steering Group has been established to ensure that the ADC will have adequate resources to manage the programs to be transferred. This transfer with effect from 1 July 1981 is a firm Government commitment designed to assist Aboriginal people to achieve greater management and determination of their own affairs.
United States Defense Department Personnel Based in Australia
(Question No. 587)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 15 February 198] :
(l) Has his attention been drawn to the article headed 'America has 1,000 defence personnel here' puhlished in the Australian of 22 January 1981.
(2) If so, is there any substance to the figures attributed to the United States of America Embassy in that article regarding the numbers of US Defense Department personnel hased in Australia.
(3) Is there also any substance to the estimates in that article that there are more thar200 professional staff for commercial defence contractors and the Central Intelligence Agency.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) and (3) Those figures quotcd in the article which were provided by the US Embassy in December 1980 concerning US Department of Defense personnel in Australia at that time are accurate. The press article also contains, however speculation concerning the joint defence facilities at Pine Gap and Nurrungar. In accordance with established practice I will not confirm or deny speCUlation or assertion regarding these facilities.
Expenditure on Defence Facilities
(Question No. 635)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 26 February 1981:
(1) What was the proportion of defence expenditure spent on defence facilities for each year from 1975-76 to 1979-80 and what is the estimated expenditure for 1980-81.
(2) Did the November 1976 White Paper on Defence propose an increase in defence expenditure on defence facilities from 6.2 per cent in 1975-76 to over 7 per cent in 1980-81.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

3530 REPRESENTATIVES \0 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(1) 1975-766.2 per cent; 1976-77 5.6 per cent; 1977-784.9 per cent; 1978-79 3.6 per cent; 1979-803.2 per cent; 1980-81 3.5 per cent (estimated).
(2) As I have explained to the Parliament on several occasions, the Government's overall economic objectives have required adjustments to the pace of proceeding with the objectives in the 1976 White Paper. Indeed. the 1976 White Paper emphasised that the provisional allocations for Defence Outlay in the period 1976-81 were subject to review and adjustment according to actual timing of project developments. Budget consideration and the circumstances prevailing at the time that major decisions need to be taken. The planning. in the 1976 White Paper. to increase defence expenditure on Defence facilities to over 7 per cent of total Defence expenditure in 1980-81 must be seen in this context.
In addition to the need for general restraint on public expenditure as part of the Government's overall economic strategy. factors sucr as the timing of decisions on facilities for the Australian Defence Force Academy and the New Tactical Fighter and the need to consider the recommendations of the report 'Accommodation for Married Servicemen', by the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, inevitably affected previously planned achievements.
Bankcard Interest Rates
(Question No. 8(9)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(1) Did he say in answer to my question No. 273 (Hansard, 4 March 1981, page 442) that Bankcard interest rates which. are quoted at 18 per cent per annum, are not compounded daily, and that a true rate of interest of 19.7 per cent per annum does not occur.
(2) If so, what interest would Bankcard charge on a deht of $2,000, if the principal sum to be repaid had not been reduced at the end of a 12 month period.
(3) Would this figure be identical to that which would have been the case if Bankcard had quoted an effective rate of interest on 19.7 per cent per annum.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. In answer to Question No. 273 (Hansard,4March 1981) I stated that I had been advised that Bankcard credit charges are not compounded daily, that is, interest is not charged on interest.
(2) The interest charged by Bankcard depends upon whether the debt is generated by a cash advance or a purchase of merchandise. [ am advised that if a debt of $2,000 is generated by a cash advance on 1 January and is not reduced over the ensuing twelve month period the interest charged for that period would be $358.98 which is an effective rate of 17.95 per cent per annum. If the debt is generated by a purchase of merchandise the interest charged would vary between $331.78 and $359.39. depending on the length of the interest free period; this is an effective rate varying between 16.59 per cent and 17.97 per cent per annum. It should be noted, however. that these examples assume a departure from the condition upon which a Bankcard is issued, that a card holder may make a payment of at least 5 per cent of the amount owing at the end of each settlement period. If this condition were met the amounts of interest quoted above would be reduced accordingly.
(3) No. However I am advised that if the interest charged were to be compounded daily, which as [have indicated is not the case, it would produce an effective rate of 19.7 per cent per annum. Such a compounding would result in an annual

interest charge of $394 compared with the amounts referred to in the answer to the second part of this question. For the sake of completeness let me stress that I am advised that there is no compounding effect of any kind in the computation of Bankcard interest. After an initial credit charge of 1.5 per cent for extending credit on merchandise purchases (which would normally be applied on the second monthly statement in which the balance outstanding in respect of a particular purchase appears) and for cash advances Bankcard interest is computed on reducing principal at daily rests basis. The total interest component (including the 1.5 per cent credit charge referred to above) included in amounts owing is segregated and disregarded for the purpose of interest calculations. I understand that this differs from many methods of computing interest in Australia.
Imported School Work Books
(Question No. 873)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to an article headed 'Problems with Photocopying' in the Booksellers Fair advertising Impplement in the Age, 23 March 1981, page 2.
(2) Is it a fact, as alleged in that article, that the Government has decided to charge import duty and sales tax on imported school work books.
(3) If so, would this action confiict with the Florence Agreement.
(4) What is the full title of the Florence Agreement, when was it signed and or ratified by Australia, and what is its purpose.
(5) What is the Government's attitude towards the payment of import duty and sales tax on imported school work books.
(6) Has his Department, or any statutory authority under its control, made any investigation of the claim that import duty and sales tax will probably cause the cost of imported school work books to double; if so, is there any substance to this claim.
(7) If an investigation has not been made, will he now cause it to take place.
Mr MooreThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) No. Until recently work books, which are accepted as being combined exercise and text books, were generally classified under Item 48.18 of the Customs Tariff which is the item for exercise books and were dutiable at the rate of 25 per cent.
The 25 per cent duty rate for exercise books was imposed on 28 September 1979 following the Government decision on the report by the Industries Assistance Commission on Paper Products dated 16 May 1979.
Following a legal challenge and subsequent discussion it was agreed that the tariff classification of work books should be modified as follows:
Work books designed essentially for writing in by users in which the printed text comprises a minor and clearly incidental aspect of the book will, as before, continue to fall to Tariff Item 48.18 and be dutiable at 25 per cent.
Work books designed primarily to pose question and answer exercises with provision for answers therein will be classified under Tariff Item 49.01, which is the item for textbooks, and be entered free of duty.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3531

Work books comprising text material together with question and answer exercises will also continue to be entered under Tariff Item 49.01.
In relation to the question of sales tax the following ruling currently applies:
Books either imported or locally produced, which deal with educational subjects of a kind taught in non-profit schools or universities and which contain sets of questions or problems to be answered or worked out in spaces provided have been ruled exempt from sales tax under Item 51 (I) First Schedule, Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act.
(3) No.
(4) The full title of the Florence Agreement is the UNESCO Agreement on the Importation of Educational Scientific and Cultural Materials. Its primary objective is to encourage the free flow of educational, scientific and cultural materials. Australia has not formally ratified the Florence Agreement; however it has in practice sought to give effect to the spirit of the Agreement's aims and objectives.
(5} See 2 above.
(6) No such investigation has been made.
(7) No. The Government does not make changes in rates of duty on imported goods without first seeking advice from the Industries Assistance Commission. In this case the lAC submitted its report recommending a 25 per cent ad valorem duty, and the recommendation was accepted by the Government.
Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme
(Question No. 888)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 25 March 1981.
(I) How many (a) men and (b) women, previously on unemployment benefits, have transferred to Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS) benefit during (i) 1978 and (ii) 1979.
(2) How many applications for TEAS benefits from, (a) men and (b) women previously on unemployment benefits, havebeenprocessed,asat I March 1981.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Although applicants for assistance under TEAS are required to indicate whether they have recently claimed, or are currently receiving a benefit, pension or allowance from the Department of Social Security, this information is used purely for the administrative purpose of avoiding dual payments of assistance, and is not compiled in statistical form. Statistics of unemployment beneficiaries transferring to TEAS therefore are not available.
Uranium: Westinghouse Case
(Question No. 921)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
(I) Has the Government abandoned defence of 3 Australian uranium suppliers in courts in the United States of America.
(2) If so, does this render useless legislation designed to protect Australian interest in such cases.
(3) Have the 3 companies withdrawn their defence because of commercial threats to their future trade by Westinghouse or government authorities or companies subject to

the influence of Westinghouse; if not, to what commercial pressures have the defendant companies yielded.
(4) Do these commercial pressures favour big companies in disputes with Australian companies, leading to more concentration of corporate power than the alleged cartel, on account of which Westinghouse initiated its action.
(5) What will be the prima facie Joss to the Australian companies because of the settlement accepted due to the Westinghouse action.
(6) How much of this Joss will be debited to the Australian Government shareholding in uranium mining, and what would this amount have been if the Australian Government had not sold any of its uranium mining interests.
(7) What is the (a) total value of uranium mining shares in Australia, at current market prices, (b) peak value of these shares and when was this peak reached, (c) net increases in value of (i) capital assets and (ii) ore reserves of the companies at current prices since the peak value was reached and (d) net non-capital income of the companies since their peak value was reached.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has supplied the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) No.
(2) The operation effect of the Foreign Proceedings (Prohibition of Certain Evidence) Act 1976 and the Foreign Antitrust Judgements (Restriction of Enforcement) Act 1979 remain unchanged by the settlement of the Westinghouse proceedings.
(3) and (4) Each of the companies has issued a press statement indicating its commercial reasons for having entered into settlement agreement with Westinghouse.
(5) The Australian companies have publicly disclosed their individual payments to the settlement.
Those payments were:
CRA Limited-$6,800,000; Pancontinential Mining Limited-$2,600,000; Mary Kathleen Uranium Limited -$870,000; Queensland Mines Limited-$878,000.
(6) The Commonwealth has a 41.6 per cent shareholding in Mary Kathleen Uranium (MKU). The payment made by MKU to Westinghouse will not be debited against particular shareholdings as such but, as with other items of expenditure, it will be reflected in the company's profit and loss account.
(7) The detailed commercial information sought relating to individual companies is not known to me or my Department.
Federal Engine Drivers and Firemen's Association of Australasia
(Question No. 928)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
(I) Has the Commonwealth Government caused any investigation to be made into the alleged attempted murder of the South Coast organiser of the Federated Engine Drivers' and Firemen's Association of Australasia, Mr Bill Kelly, and his wife, on Sunday, 8 March 1981; if so, will the results of this investigation be made available to the investigating New South Wales police authorities.
(2) If the results of any investigation will not be made available to the NSW police authorities, what is the reason.

3532 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr VinerThe Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's questions:
(1) No. The question of any investigation is a matterfor the State police authorities.
(2) See answer to (1).
Uranium Advisory Council
(Question No. 1004)
Mr Scott asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 1 April 1981 :
(1) Does the Uranium Advisory Council's Annual Report for 1979-80 state that he has indicated that the Council may expect its advice will be made public in due course, when referring to the Harrisburg Three Mile Island Accident Report.
(2) Has the report been stated to be confidential both by his office and by the Secretary of the Uranium Advisory Council; ifso, why.
(3) Is it his intention to release the report to the public; if so, when; if not, why not.
Mr AnthonyThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Release of the report was delayed pending the Government's consideration of the Report prepared by the National Energy Research, Development and Demonstration Council on the research and development activities of the Australian Atomic Energy Commission for which it had implications.
(3) I understand it is the Uranium Advisory Council's intention to publish its advice to the Government on this matter with its 1980-81 Annual Report.
Natural Disaster Insurance Scheme
(Question No. 1049)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
(l) What sum did the Budget estimates provide in total Commonwealth Government assistance to State Governments for disaster relief in 1980-81 and what sum has been expended as at 1 April 1981.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that Mr Fred Murdoch, Executive Director of Willis, Faber and Dumas, an international insurance company of London, United Kingdom, on a recent stopover in Brisbane, expressed surprise that Australia did not have a natural disaster insurance scheme.
(3) Is he able to say whether Britain, Switzerland and New Zealand each have disaster insurance schemes.
(4) Did the then Treasurer and Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party in 1976 pledge the Government of the day to a natural disaster insurance scheme.
(5) Has his attention been drawn to Mr Murdoch's proposal for a scheme that would include (a) agreement between Government and insurance companies on the upper limits of liability, (b) the establishment of a low premium to allow subscription by low income earners, (c) the pooling of all premiums in a central fund open to annual audit and (d) provision for re-insurance internationally against levels of liability exceeding those anticipated.
(6) Will his Government consider this proposal in view of the frequent disasters suffered in Australia.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) $12,802,000 was provided in the 1980-81 Budget for Commonwealth assistance to the States under the natural disaster relief arrangements. As at April 1981, $37,435,364 had been provided in the form of advances and payments to the States in 1980-81.
(2) I am aware of Press comments along the lines mentioned that have been attributed to Mr Murdoch.
(3) I understand that national schemes or other arrangements exist in those countries for insurance cover to be provided against certain but not necessarily all forms of natural hazard.
(4) In his Press release of 4 March 1976 the then Treasurer announced that the Government had agreed, in principle, to the introduction of a natural disaster insurance scheme, and had approved the establishment of a working party of officials to formulate a detailed scheme in consultation with the insurance industry and, as necessary, with the States. In December 1976 a discussion paper based on the working party's report was tabled in Parliament for the purpose of seeking public comment on a possible natural disaster insurance scheme. Following a detailed assessment of this matter, including comments received from the States, the insurance industry and other interested parties, the Government concluded that a natural disaster insurance scheme of the type outlined in the discussion paper would not be a cost-effective way of assisting in solutions to the problems identified and that a number of practical measures dealing more directly with the problems and involving less Government intervention would be more appropriate. Work on this matter is proceeding. Further background on the Government's decisions in this area is contained in my press release of 17 January 1979 and in a Policy Information Paper which I tabled in Parliament on 4 June 1979.
(5) Yes.
(6) No. Suggestions broadly along these lines were considered in the course of the detailed assessment which preceded the Government's decisions mentioned in (4) above.
Labelling of Cigarettes
(Question No. 1072)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 7 Aprill981:
(1) Are negotiations currently in progress between officers of his Department and the tobacco industry about compulsory labelling on packets, of tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide levels of cigarettes.
(2) Has the tobacco industry's maximum offer been only (a) minimal banding and (b) indicating low, medium or high tar content.
(3) Is his Department prepared to accept this offer as final.
Mr MacKellarThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(J) In accordance with the Government's decision to accept Recommendations 40 and 41 of the Report of the Senate Standing Committee on Social Welfare: 'Drug Problems in Australia-an Intoxicated Society?', consultations with the tobacco industry are proceeding concerning implementation of plans for the printing of tar and nicotine yields on cigarette packets; the establishment of upper limits for tar a.nd nicotine yields of cigarettes; and the progressive reduction of permitted levels of tar and nicotine in cigarettes.
Although action is presently underway to obtain agreement with industry on a uniform testing methodology for determining the carbon monoxide yields of cigarettes, proposals for implementation action are being developed only in relation to

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3533

tar and nicotine yields, at this stage, in the terms of the Government's decision referred to above.
(2) and (3) Consultations with industry, involving detailed consideration of a number of complex issues, are continuing. Following these consultations, it is envisaged that proposals as regards implementation will be submitted to me for consideration.
Under these circumstances, it is inappropriate for me to comment further.
Underspending of Estimates: Department of Industry and Commerce
(Question No. 1093)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Industry and ComIT,lerce, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(1) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for divisions (a) 380-Administrative, (b) 522Administrative and (c) 525-Maintenance of production capacity.
(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos. 1and 2) 1980-81; ifso, what are the reasons.
Sir Phillip Lynch-I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Treasurer to House of Representatives Question No. 1101 (Hansard, 13 May 1981, page 2374).
Underspending of Estimates: Department of Defence
(Question No. 1100)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(I) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 230-Australian Defence Force, (b) 233-Administrative and other expenditure, (c) 237Buildings and works, (d) 238-Natural disasters and civil defence, (e) 240-Defence co-operation, (f) 241-Defence science and technology and (g) 252-Acquisition of sites and buildings.
(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos. 1 and 2) 1980-81; ifso, what are the reasons.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) I refer the honourable member to the reply by the Minister for Finance to Question No. 1101 (Hansard, 13 May 1981, page 2374).
Underspending of Estimates: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No.11tl)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 195-Administrative, (b) 202Industries Assistance Commission and (c) 205-Trade Practices Commission.

(2) Has there been an underspending in each of these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142Appropriation Acts (Nos. 1 and 2) 1980-81; ifso, what are the reasons.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Treasurer on behalf of the Minister for Finance in response to Question No. 1101 (Hansard, I3MayI981,page2374).
Departmental Air Travel: Department of Communications
(Question No. 1129)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) How many travel warrants have been issued for his departmental officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The information requested by the honourable member is not readily available and I do not believe the cost in resources necessary to identify the information requested is justified.
Departmental Air Travel: Department of Defence
(Question No. 1135)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(1) How many travel warrants have been issued for his departmental officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2). Records maintained in my Department are not in a form which provides the particular detail sought and I am not prepared to authorise use of resources which would be required to identify that detail. Department records however show that expenditure on air fares for travel within Australia incurred by my Department from 1 June 1976 to 31 March 1981 amounted to $48,738m.
Edenhope Hospital, Victoria
(Question No. 1158)
Dr Blewett asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 8 Apri11981:
(1) Has he ever intervened in matters affecting staffing and administration at the Edenhope Hospital, Victoria.
(2) Did he approach State or Federal (a) Members of Parliament or (b) departments in connection wfth a proposed hostel-nursing home complex in Edenhope.
(3) If so, what was the result of his representations.
Mr Malcom Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

3534 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(1) No.
(2) Yes. As local member, I have made representations to the Minister for Social Security, on behalf of the Management Committee of the Edenhope and District Memorial Hospital, concerning Commonwealth financial assistance under the Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act for a project to provide accommodation for the aged and disabled on the hospital site at Edenhope.
(3) As yet the Edenhope project has not been selected for funding under the Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act.
Tax Avoidance
(Question No. 1197)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 8 April 1981 :
(1) Is it a fact that on the issue of tax avoidance, whatever amendments are proposed to strengthen sections 136 and 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act the High Court and its interpretation of the taxation laws will be of crucial importance.
(2) Has the Attorney-General's attention been drawn to the recent decision of the House of Lords in W.T. Ramsay Limited v Inland Revenue Commissioner, in which the House of Lords specifIcally rejected the judgment in particular of the former Chief Justice of the High Court of Australia in the Westraders Case.
(3) Is it a fact that the House of Lords were able to arrive at this decision, despite the absence of a blanket provision such as section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
(4) Will the Attorney-General now consider the enactment of an appropriate amendment to oblige Australian Courts to alter their canons of construction of taxatiorllaws so that such laws are applied in accordance with the intent of Parliament.
(5) Is such an amendment necessary to strengthen any redrafted section 260 or 136 of the Act.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has supplied the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) to (5) My attention has been drawn to the decision. The honourable member will be aware that amendments to the Income Tax Assessment Act have been introduced this session. In addition the Statute Law Revision Act, which I introduced into Parliament on 27 May 1981, amends, amongst other things, the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 so as to require a court, when interpreting a provision of an Act, to have regard to the generallegisIative pUrpose or object underlyingthe Act (see Hansard page 2166).
Annual Reports and Other Publications: Attorney-General
(Question No. 1244)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What annual reports are produced by the Attorney General's Department and authorities under the Attorney General's aegis?
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
(3) Are other regular publications issued by the Attorney General's Department and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.

Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's questions:
(1) The following Annual Reports are produced by the Attorney-General's Department and authorities under the Attorney-General's aegis:
Attorney-General's Department ACT Legal Aid Commission Administrative Review Council Commissioner for Community Relations Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Criminology Research Council Family Law Council High Court of Australia Institute of Criminology Law Reform Commission Legislative Drafting Institute Parole Board of the ACT Security Appeals Tribunal.
(2) The cost of printing these publications for 1979-80 was $27,686.03; other related production costs cannot be identified.
(3) Criminology Quarterly-$3,736.00, printing costs only-8,000 copies.
International Trade LawSummary (Annual)-$3,077.48, printing costs only-
700 copies.
Annual Reports and Other Publications: Minister for Housing and Construction
(Question No. 1256)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
(3) Arc other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I) and (2) Annual reports produced by the Department of Housing and Construction and authorities under my aegis, and the production cost for each report for 1979-80 are listed below.

Cost of production
1979-80

Departmental Annual ReportsDepartment of Housing and Construc-
tion . . . . . . . Home Savings Grant
Housing Assistance Act . Indicative Planning Council Statutory Authorities Annual ReportsSnowy Mountains Engineering Corpo-
ration . . . . . . . . . . Housing Loans Insurance Corporation

$
4,896 950
2,300 2,737
17,966 16,478

(3) Other regular publications issued by the Department of Housing and Construction and authorities under my aegis,

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3535

and the production and distribution costs of each publication are listed below.

Publication

Production Distribution

cost

cost

$

$

Technical Bulletin

5,425

670

Techtopics

1,977

nil

Notes for the 1979-80 Budget D-

ebate

376

nil

Explanations of Estimates of

Expenditure 1979-80

1.759

nil

1979-80 Budget Information

718

nil

(1) How many female officers and employees are employed in his Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Divison are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) See the answer provided by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister to Question No. 1336 which appeared in Hansard of 5 June 1981, page 3314.

Female Officers and Employees: Department of Finance
(Question No. 1346)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many female officers and employees are employed in the Department of Finance, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in the Department of Finance during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1336 (Hansard, 5 June 1981, page 3314).
Female Officers and Employees: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1348)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many female officers and employees arc employed in the Attorney-Genera!'s Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisons.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in the Attorney-General's Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has supplied the following answer to the honourable member's questions:
(1). (2) and (3) I refer the honourable member to an answer provided by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister to Question No. 1336 on5 June, 1981( Hansard, page 3314).
Female Officers and Employees: Department of Housing and Construction
(Question No. 1360)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

Industrial Action: Department of Finance
(Question No. 1372)
!VIr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, lJpon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) How many officers or employees in the Department of Finance have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last 2 years.
(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.
(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.
(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) (a) (I) 1 April 1979-31 March 1980-82; (ii) I April 1980-31 March 1981-131
(b) (i) 1 April 1979-31 March 1980-8; (ii) 1 April 1980---31 March 1981-36
(2) (a) (i) 546.8manhours; (ii) 1007.4manhours
(b) (i) 752 manhours; (ii) 23178 manhours
(3) and (4) No.
The above figures include information for the Royal Australian Mint up to and including 2.9.80 after which date the Mint became the responsibility of the Treasury.
Industrial Action: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1374)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(l) How many officers or employees in the Attorney General's Department have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last 2 years.
(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.
(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasion.
(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.

3536 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's questions:
(1) (a) 1979-80-38; 1980-81-470.
(b) 1979-80-nil; 1980-81-9.
(2) (a) 1979-80-279 manhours; 1980-81-2,761 manhours.
(b) 1979-80-ni1; 1980-81-nilmanhours.
(3) No.
(4) Pay was forfeited for the absences mentioned in (l) (a) and (2) (a) above. No pay reductions were made or disciplinary actions take in respect of the work restrictions mentioned in (l) (b) above because the restrictions were not serious enough to warrant such action.
Overseas Travel: Department of Defence
(Question No. 1449)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, etc.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) A total of 224 officers and employees travelled overseas on official business for the Department of Defence during 1979-80.
(2) The total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation and allowances, etc. for which the Department of Defence accepted responsibility was $1 ,528,729.
Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Defence
(Question No. 1527)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many officers and employees of the Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully (b) partially paid for by his Department.
(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Ca) Nil.
(b) Departmental-195; Defence Force-486.
(2) Departmental-$29,28I; Defence Force-$62,I83.
Home Telephone Rentals: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1530)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of the Attorney General's Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by the Department.
(2) What was the cost to the Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.

Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) (a) Nil; (b) 77 as at 20 May 1981.
(2) $12,348.07.
Recycling of Paper: Department of Finance
(Question No. 1580)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Has any action been taken by the Department of Finance to re-cycle paper; if so, what action.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The Department of Finance has not taken action to recycle paper because the Department of Administrative Services arranges contracts for removal of waste paper from Commonwealth owned and leased buildings which are occupied by the Department of Finance in Canberra, Darwin and the State capitals. I am advised that that Department has arranged for clean waste to be re-cycled wherever practicable.
Tea Services: Department of Defence
(Question No. 1605)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many (a) full time and (b) part time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his Department in 1979-80.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) (i) 20; (a) (ii) I; (b) (i) ; (b) (ii) 16.
(2) (a)-$344,I94; (b)-$135,744.
Tea Services: Department of Finance
(Question No. 1606)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many (a) full time and (b) part time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of the Department of Finance.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in the Department in 1979-80.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) (a) (i)-Four; (a) (ii)-nil; (b) (i)-nil; (b) (H)-two.
(2) (a) $50,118. This includes $7,730 charged by the Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Service for tea services provided in buildings shared with other departments.
(b) $35.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3537

Tea Services: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 1616)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many (a) full time and (b) part time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his Department in 1979-80.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) (i) 9; (a) (ii) 3; (b) (i) 1; (b) (ii) 2.
(2) (a) $108,105.98; (b) nil.
The Melbourne and Brisbane offices are serviced by the Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Ltd. Please refer to the answer provided by the Minister for Administrative Services to Question No. 1615 regarding these offices.
Patrol Boat Base in North-western Australia
(Question No. 1654)
Mr .Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Has a decision yet been made on the location of a patrol boat base in north-western Australia; if not, when is a decision expected.
Mr KiIlen-The answer to the. honourable member's question is as follows:
No decision has yet been taken to acquire a particular site for a possible future patrol boat base in the north west of Australia.
If it is necessary to acquire the preferred site, to secure the future option of constructing facilities there for the support of patrol boat operations, provision will be made in the 1981-82 Acquisition Program.
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Health
(Question No-. 1882)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in .the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985 000, or about 20 per cent by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of his Department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone cal1s iIi his Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr MaeKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Yes. Departmental instructions to staff advise that private calls are to be kept to a minimum and only made with prior approval of an authorised officer. Private trunk cal1s

must be booked through the switchboard operator and the cost reimbursed to the Department.
Metering devices, where installed, are read on a regular basis and unusual levels of telephone usage are investigated. Selective STD barring is used where technical1y feasible, and inVestigations are proceeding as to the possibility of introducing selective barring on equipment at other locations.
(3) Yes. Metering equipment is extensively used and a device which analyses calls is in use at one regional office. Having regard to other control measures in use such as metering and STD access barring, and plans to extend barring where technically feasible and funds are available, it is not considered that further use of call analysers with their need for additional resources to examine monitored data, would be cost effective in my Department at this stage.
Energy Conservation
(Question No. 1903)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the various recommendations of the Royal Australian Institute of Architects in regard to energy conservation.
(2) If so, have steps taken toward implementing the Institute's recommendation that the Commonwealth Government establish an Energy in Buildings Advisory Panel to advice on (a) energy conservation and (b) the research and educational aspects of energy conservation; if steps have been taken, what are the details.
Mr MeVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Various recommendations of the Royal Australian Institute of Architects in regard to energy conservation have been brought to my attention. I have exchanged correspondence with the Institute on a number of occasions, outlining the Government's position and the role of the Department of Housing and Construction.
(2) No steps have been taken to establish an Energy in Buildings Advisory Panel, as a number of Commonwealth bodies are already active in this area.
An Interdepartmetal Committee on 'Energy Conservation in Commonwealth Buildings Throughout Australia and Other Buildings in the ACT' was established in February 1981. It is required to recommend a co-ordinated program to conserve energy in existing and future buildings throughout Australia owned or occupied by the Commonwealth, and to encourage, or, if necessary, recommend legislation for the adoption of energy conservation matters in private sector buildings in the ACT.
An Energy Secretariat has been estalished within the Department of Housing and Construction to examine ways to conserve energy in Commonwealth Government buildings, and the Department is co-operating with the Department of National Development and Energy to develop cost effective energy policies for the built environment.
In addition, organisations such as the National Energy Advisory Committ~e (NEAC) and the National Energy Research Development and Demonstration Council (NERDDC), provide advice on priorities and policies in energy conservation, research development and demonstration and a proportion of NERDDC funds has been allocated to this work in fields related to energy in the built environment.

3538 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Minister for Trade and Resources and the Minister for National Development and Energy:
Division of Responsibilities
(Question No. 1940)
Mr Hurford asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 28 Apri11981 :
(1) Has his attention been drawn to reports of power struggles and demarcation disputes between the Minister for Trade and Resources and the Minister for National Development and Energy.
(2) Is there a clumsy division ofresponsibilities between the 2 portfolios.
(3) If so, will he correct this serious fault.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (3) No sensible structure of Government could be devised whereby portfolios did not have interests extending beyond their own boundaries. Where interests do extend beyond a portfolio boundary, the Ministers and departments concerned, consult and co-operate wherever necessary to ensure that government business is conducted efficiently. Details of the arrangements between the specific portfolios referred to were given by Senator Carrick on 10 March 1981 (Senate Hansard, page 409).
Rent Resource Tax
(Question No. 1942)
Mr Hurford asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 28 Apri11981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to reports that he has rejected the views of the Department of the Treasury, the Treasurer and other Ministers, that the imposition of a rent resource tax, or a resource super profits tax, is not only the principal means of spreading the benefits of the expected resources boom to the community but also one of the best ways of managing that boom; if so, is there any substance to the reports.
(2) Does he maintain his opposition to such a super profits tax from large companies in favour of hundreds of thousands of ordinary Australians; if so, what is the reason.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is a follows:
I refer the honourable member to the comments made by the Treasurer on this matter in his Ministerial Statement to the House on 13 March 1981 (Hansard page 769).
Commonwealth Acts, Regulations, Ordinances and Orders
(Question No. 1978)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:
(1) How many new Acts (including amending Acts) have been enacted (a) by the Commonwealth and (b) in each State and Territory in each year since 1976?
(2) How many (a) regulations, (b) ordinances and (c) orders, have been presented by the Commonwealth in each of the same years?
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's questions:

(1) The numbers of Acts and Ordinances of the Commonwealth and Territories are shown in the following table:

1976

1977

197&

1979

1980

Commonwealth Acts

209

161

211

191

177

New South Wales Acts

101

137

175

210

197

Victorian Acts

133

115

167

115

149

Queensland Acts

95

60

90

79

61

South Australian Acts

117

56

120

73

115

Western Australian Acts

147

74

117

119

97

Tasmanian Acts

117

124

79

88

106

Australian Capital Territory Ordinances

73

66

50

43

54

Norfolk Island Ordinances and Acts

13

10

\0

22

30

Christmas Island Ordinances

4

7

12

7

9

Cocos (Keeling) Islands Ordinances

3

2

3

6

4

Ashmore and Cartier Islands Ordinances

Australian Antarctic Territory Ordinances 2
Heard Island and McDonald Islands Ordinances 2
Coral Sea Islands Ordinances 2

(2) Commonwealth regulations are published in the Statutory Rules series which, in the relevant years, includes a small number of other items (for example, rules of court and interim determinations under the Defence Amendment Act 1979). Numbers of Statutory Rules for the years concerned are as follows:
1976 -305 1977-282 1978-291 1979-313 1980-407.
The numbers of Territory regulations are as follows:

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

Australian Capital Territory

33

30

20

28

17

Norfolk Island

9

1

1

6

Christmas Island

1

3

Cocos (Keeling) Islands

1

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3539

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

Ashmore and Cartier Islands

Australian Antarctic Territory
2 Heard Island and McDonald Islands
2 Coral Sea Islands
2
The Commonwealth does not promulgate ordinances except in the Territories (see answer to (1. It is not practicable to obtain statistics in relation to all Commonwealth legislative or administrative measures that could be described as orders.
Encephalitis
(Question No.1984)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 29 April 1981 :
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the recent occurrence of the disease encephalitis in the north of Western Australia.
(2) How many cases of this disease have been identified in this area during the last 12 months.
(3) How many of these cases were amongst Aboriginal people in this period.
(4) What steps will the Government take in response to the occurrence of this disease.
(5) Have the populations of these remote areas been adequately warned of the current danger associated with mosquito bites in the transmission of this disease.
(6) What special efforts have been made to advise the remote Aboriginal communities of the current dangers of this disease.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1 ) Yes. My Department has been in contact with Western Australia State Public Health Department concerning this outbreak.
(2) There have been seven serologically confirmed clinical cases.
(3) Five. (4) The Western Australia State health authorities have implemented mosquito vector control measures to minimize the further spread of the disease. This is the only method available. The Federal Government allocated, in addition to the normal funds for encephalitis research and control to the State, a special allowance of$10,000 to combat this outbreak. (5) and (6) Yes. The State Public Health Department with technical and monetary support from the Commonwealth promoted a health education program in the affected area including remote Aboriginal communities.
Maryvale Forest Pty Ltd
(Question No. 2028)
Mr Humphreys asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:

(1) Did he say in answer to my question No. 745 (Hansard, 26 March 1981, pages 1075-6) that he had received written advice that the land purchased in the name of the Maryvale Forest Pty Ltd, and in relation to which orders were issued under the Foreign Takeovers Act 1975 prohibiting its purchase by Iwasaki Sangyo, was not in any way associatedwith Iwasaki Sangyo.
(2) Is he able to say whether, despite such written assurances from Maryvale Forest Pty Ltd, (a) employees of Iwasaki Sangyo are currently carrying out repairs to the boundary and internal fencing of the Maryvale Forest Pty Ltd and (b) 200 bullocks mustered on the Iwasaki property have been fattened on the Maryvale Forest Pty Ltd property and were offered for sale at the Rockhampton saleyards, Queensland, on 22 April 1981.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's questions is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) (a) Both Maryvale Forest Pty Ltd and the Iwasaki company have provided written advice that employees of Iwasaki Sangyo are not currently undertaking fencing repairs on or within Maryvale Forest Pty Ltd's property. The Iwasaki company is currently undertaking fencing of its own property, which has a common boundary with one of the Maryvale Forest Pty Ltd properties.
(b) These companies have also advised that the only cattle grazed on Maryvale Forest Pty Ltd's property in recent times were those owned by Setu Nominees Pty Ltd. These cattle were transferred to one of the Maryvale Forest Pty Ltd properties from the Iwasaki company's property, where they had been agisted during drought, about 12 months ago at about the time MaryvaIe Forest Pty Ltd acquired the property from Setu Nominees Pty Ltd, the previous owner. Under the provisions of the sale agreement, Setu Nominees Pty Ltd retained the right to graze cattle on the property for up to 12 months. In September last year, 10 Iwasaki bullocks which were inadvertently included in the above muster were returned to the Iwasaki company's property. Setu Nominees Pty Ltd has vacated the Maryvale Forest Pty Ltd property in accordance with the provisions of the sale agreement.
Interest Rates
(Question No. 2029)
Mr Humphreys asked the Treasurer, upon notice, 0115 May 1981:
(1) Is the base interest rate on trading bank advances of over $100 000 currently 15 per cent.
(2) Is he considering a Reserve Bank recommendation that interest rates on housing loans should be increased to 12.5 per cent.
(3) If so, would this increase on advances under $100 000 be necessary if the Reserve Bank released 1 per cent of Statutory Reserve Deposit funds to ease present bank liquidity problems during the tax rundown period.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I understand that most major trading banks currently have a 'prime' rate of 15 per cent per annum for advances drawn under limits of $100,000 and above. This is in the nature of a reference rate. The precise rate charged to a particular customer is a matter for negotiation between the bank and the customer.
(2) There is no such recommendation currently before me.
(3) See answer to (2). However, the release of Statutory Reserve Deposit Funds to trading banks would not in itself

3540 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

affect the interest rate at which trading banks or, more importanlty, savings banks can lend for housing.
Marrickville Neighbourhood Legal Centre, New South Wales
(Question No. 2042)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:
(1) Is the Attorney-General able to state what funding provisions are paid to the Marrickville Neighbourhood Legal Centre, NSWby (a) the Commonwealth (b) the State of New South Wales and (c) any other organisation.
(2) Is the Attorney-General also able to state what are the names of the staff employed at the centre by (a) the Commonwealth Government, (b) the State Government of New South Wales and (c) any other organisation.
(3) What are the duties of the staff members at the Centre and how many hours per week is each person required to work.
(4) Are these people employed as public servants by either the State or the Commonwealth.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) I am informed by the Marrickville Legal Centre that the following funds have been received in 1980-81:
(a) $20,000 from the Commonwealth; (b) $4,000 from the Ethnic Affairs Commission of New
South Wales; in addition the Legal Services Commission of New South Wales provided furniture, equipment and stationery; (c) $1,000 from the Marrickville Municipal Council, and $5,175 from the Law Foundation of New South Wales.
(2) The Marrickville Legal Centre is an independent organisation and consequently staff employed at the Centre are not in the employ of either the Commonwealth or State Government of any other organisation.
(3) I am informed by the Marrickville Legal Centre that the duties and the hours worked by staff members at the Centre are as follows:
Solicitors-40 hours per week Community Worker-40 hours per week
SLeecgraeltWaryoJrAkderm-4in0ishtoruartsorp-e2r5wheoeukrs per week
BookkeeperJSecretary-20 hours per week Social Worker-16 hours per week
In addition the following volunteer services are provided to the Centre:
25 Solicitors-3 hours per fortnight 17 Law Students-4 hours per week 15 Law Students-4 hours per fortnight 1 Social Work Student-16 hours per week.
(4) No.
National Servicemen: Discharge on Grounds of Exceptional Hardship
(Question No. 2044)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:
(1) How many national servicemen serving in the Defence Force on 7 December 1972 left the service prior to the date on which they would normally have been discharged.

(2) How many of those referred to in part (1) were discharged on the grounds of exceptional hardship.
(3) What grounds constitute exceptional hardship.
(4) Is it possible for a member of the Service to be discharged on the grounds of exceptional hardship without his or her knowledge that this was the reason for their discharge.
Mr Killen-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(1) and (2) Data is not readily available to provide the statistics requested. A lengthy manual search of many thousands of personal files would be necessary.
(3) The term 'exceptional hardship' appeared within the provisions of the National Service Act, 1951 but was not legally defined. Discharge on this ground depended on the circumstances of each case in accordance with the provisions of the Act, specifically, Sub-section 35B (5A).
(4) No. Exceptional hardship is not a current prescribed reason for discharge from any element of the Australian Defence Force. Discharge on compassionate grounds may be approved following application by a member.
Reserve Forces Use of Facility at Studley Park, Narellan
(Question No. 2067)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) Does a unit of the Reserve Forces use a facility at Studley Park, Narellan, New South Wales.
(2) If so, what is the cost of maintaining the unit, with respect to (a) personnel, (b) equipment and (c) maintenance each year.
(3) What sum has been allocated for repairs in each of the last 3 years and what proportion of this sum has been spent.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes. 2 Ordinance Platoon a Reserve Unit of 2 Divisional Field Force Group.
(2) (a) Approximately $64,000.
(b) Specific costs for maintaining equipment are not readily assessable at minor unit level.
(c) Approximately $4,500 for other running costs which include electricity, garbage, cleaning and urgent minor repairs.
(3) No spe~ific allocations were budgeted for depot maintenance over the last 3 years. An amount of $300 for urgent minor repairs has been included in (2) (c).
Reduction of Staff and Functions: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 2130)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Will the Attorney-General provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of the Attorney-General's Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has supplied the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3541

I refer the honourable member to an answer provided by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister to Question No. 2119 on 5 June, 1981 (Hansard, page 3317).
Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of Housing and Construction
(Question No. 2143)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 6 May 1981 :
Will he provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of stafT and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonweal th Functions is implemented.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourahle member's question is as follows:
See the answer provided by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister to Question No. 2119 which appeared in Hansard of 5 June 1981, page 3317
Integration of Defence Departments
(Question No. 2149)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(1) When will he announce details of the inquiry into his Department.
(2) Will the terms of reference enable a full examination of the effectiveness of the integration of the formerly separate departments within the Defence group.
(3) Will areas of friction between service and civilian personnel, referred to in the report of the committee on naval technical services, be open for examination.
(4) Will the Committee be specifically requested to examine the size and activities of the Defence establishment in Washington, D.C., USA.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Details of the inquiry were announced by the Prime Minister and me in a joint statement issued on 7 May 1981.
(2) Yes.
(3) There is no specific term of reference dealing with civilmilitary relationships. However, if the Review memhers were to find this relevant to their general terms of reference such matters could be examined.
(4) No. The Defence presence in Washington D.C. was the subject of recommendations in the recent Review of Commonwealth Functions.
Mandata System: Attorney-General's Department
(Que.tion No. 2220)
!VIr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Has the Mandata System been introduced in the Attorney-Genera!'s Department and Government instrumentalities under the Attorney-General's control; if so, what was the (a) cost of (i) the equipment, (ii) installation, (iii) site preparation, (iv) acquiring or renting sites and (v) other additional factors associated with the introduction of the system and (b) total cost of introducing the system.

(2) Were any reductions in the staff of personnel/establishment units achieved as a result of introducing this system; if so, what (a) reductions in staff and (b) cost savings were achieved in each year since its introduction.
(3) What staff (a) saving or (b) increase is expected with the termination of the Mandata System.
(4) What is the anticipated (a) extra cost or (b) saving resulling from the termination of the Mandata System.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's questions:
(I) No.
(2), (3) and (4) Not applicable.
Defence Base Establishments: Printing
(Question No. 2238)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Have directions been given that base establishments are no longer to utilise internal printing facilities but must contract out all printing requirements.
(2) What is the estimated value of machinery which will be rendered surplus by this decision.
(3) What is the estimate of delays on the availability of rrinted material and has any estimate been made of the additional cost of required printing; if so, what is the estimate.
(4) Are additional funds allocated for the substantial increase in photocopying which will result from this decision.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable m::mber's question is as follows:
(I) No. We are looking at ways of implementing the recommendations of reports by the Printing Resources Rationalisation Group of the Department of Administrative Services which may have some effect on the amount of offset printing now being done in various establishments.
(2) Nil. No decision has yet been made that would render any machinery surplus.
(3) The Department of Defence will not let out to private contract any printing which cannot be completed in time.
(4) No. The Department of Defence limits the number of copies of any particular document reproduced to ensure that photocopying remains cost effective.
Mulloka Sonar
(Question No. 2241)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) What is the current position with regard to production and sales of the Mulloka Sonar and have funds been allocated to provide a sales effort for this project.
(2) Is it intended that the Mulloka be fitted in the Australian-built follow-on destroyers.
(3) To which vessels is it now intended that Mulloka will be fitted.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Mulloka is in the pre-production phase, in which one complete system is being manufactured. Full production is planned to commence in late 1981. No funds have heen allocated for sales purposes, but a sales agreement with an Australian firm is under consideration by my Department.

3542 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) Mulloka is being considered as the sonar fit for the Australian-built follow-on destroyers. A decision on the sensor and weapons fit for the ships will be made later this year.
(3) t is currently intended to fit production Mulloka systems in 5 RAN River Class Destroyer Escorts, HMA Ships Swall, TorrellS, Derwellt. Stuart and Parramatta. The prototype system is fitted in the sixth River Class ship, HMAS Yarra.
War Veterans: Preference in Employment
(Question No. 2255)
Mr Uren asked the Prime Minister, upon notice,on 13 May 1981:
(I) Is preference in Australian Government employment granted to war veterans; if so, under what circumstances.
(2) If preference is granted, does it apply equally to Vietnam veterans and veterans of World War II.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. Under section 47A of the Public Service Act and Regulation 130 of the Public Service Regulations, where an applicant who is a returned soldier and an applicant who is not a returned soldier are placed equal in the order in which offers of appointment or temporary employment are to be made, the applicant who is a returned soldier is offered appointment or employment before the other applicant.
(2) Yes.
United States Anti-trust Case Policy
(Question No. 2258)
Mr Uren asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:
(I) How many officers of the Attorney-General's Department have been fully, or to a significant extent, occupied by the Westinghouse uranium cartel litigation and United States of America antitrust policy as it relates to uranium during each year since 1977.
(2) What has been the cost to the Australian Government of these activities in (a) salaries, (b) travel and administrative costs and (c) legal fees.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has supplied the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) No officers of the Attorney-General's Department have been fully occupied by the uranium cartel litigation. The number of legal officers involved in work connected with these proceedings or general antitrust policy as it relates to uranium has varied as the need has arisen. As many as 5 officers have been engaged at a particular time.
(2) (a) The cost of officers' work on antitrust matters has not been separated from the cost of performance of their other functions.
(b) Antitrust issues were amongst the matters dealt with on visits I made to Ottawa and Washington in September 1978 and April 1980. In April 1980 I also attended the Commonwealth Law Ministers Meeting in Barbados where I delivered a paper on some aspects of antitrust enforcement. Officers of my Department accompanied me on those visits.
[n addition, one officer returned to Australia via America after a visit to the OECD on other matters. He spent two days in Washington on antitrust matters. Domestically officers have made two trips to Sydney and three trips to Melbourne

in connection with the administration of the Foreign Proceedings (Prohibition of Certain Evidence) Act 1976 as it applied to these foreign proceedings.
(c) The details of legal fees paid in this matter were contained in an answer on 29 April 1981 to Senate Question 454--see Senate HallSard, page 1524.
Commonwealth Public Servants: Study Leave
(Question No. 2262)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:
(I) Will he elaborate on the circumstances in which paid study leave is to be denied to Commonwealth Public Servants (Hallsard, 30 April 1981, page 1850).
(2) Will he agree to extended leave without pay to enable public servants who have already embarked on courses of study, to complete their course requirements.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The intention behind the Government's announcement is to ensure that study leave is granted only when there is direct benefit to the Service through the acquistion of specific identified skills and increase in staff efficiency. The Public Service Board is actively promoting this policy.
(2) It is nol intended that officers already committed to courses of study should be precluded from completing their courses and transitional arrangements are available. Procedures exist for public servants to take extended leave without pay for study or private purposes. Each application is considered on its merits.
Breast Feeding
(Question No. 2280)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 14 May 1981 :
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a claim by James Grant, Executive Director of UNICEF, that breast feeding promotion can save a million infants a year in the 1980s.
(2) Is the International Baby Food Action Network (IBFAN) with the World Health Organisation (WHO) and other authorities preparing a code of marketing for breast milk substitutes to be presented to the World Health Assembly in May 1981.
(3) Has the code been opposed by the International Council of Infant Food Industries (ICIFI) whose 15 companies produce 85 per cent of the $US2 billion baby milk market.
(4) Is he able to say whether the Washingtoll Post, in January 1981, exposed industry links with publications and research foundations seeking third party support and smearing critics as Marxists and Reds.
(5) Is he also able to say whether consumer and health professional groups in India foiled moves for bilateral weak codes of ethics after financial inducements were offered to medical officials who then supported an ICIFI-drafted code.
(6) Will the Government support an international code and expose publicly irresponsible companies and their promotion.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am aware of recent reports in the Australian press that UNICEF officials have stated it is likely that at least a million

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3543

children in the developing world die each year from inadequate artificial feeding. A successful breast feeding promotion would certainly prevent some of these deaths.
(2) During the last two years, a draft International Code of Marketing of Breastmilk Substitutes has been developed by WHO and UNICEF, in co-operation with member countries of the World Health Assembly and with industry and consumer bodies. The fourth draft of this Code was presented to the Thirty-fourth World Health Assembly in May 1981.
(3) to (5) 1 am aware that there has been considerable opposition from a number of sources to the development and acceptance of the draft Code, some reports of which have been published in the Australian press. However, in the absence of detailed information concerning the specific instances referred to by the honourable member, I am unable to comment further.
(6) Australia supported the draft International Code of Marketing of Breastmilk Substitutes that was adopted by the World Health Assembly on 22 May 1981. No further action is proposed at this stage in relation to the honourable member's suggestion.
Glebe Estate, New South Wales
(Question No. 2281)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 14 M2_Y 1981:
(I) What is the current estimated value of all land and premises in the Glebe Estate, NSW.
(2) What has been the total Commonwealth Government outlay on the Estate in each year since its purchase.
(3) How many dwellings (a) have been rehabilitated in each year since the inception of the Estate project, (b) are now in the process of rehabilitation and (c) have yet to be rehahilitated.
(4) What is the estimated cost of rehabilitating the dwellings that remain in their condition.at the date of purchase by the Commonwealth.
(5) How many dwellings in the Estate are currently (a) occupied, and what is the total number of tenants and (b) vacant.
(6) What is the annual value of total rental payments to the Commonwealth for the occupied dwellings in the Estate.
(7) How many tenants in the Estate are in receipt of rental rebates.
(8) What is the annual cost of the rental rebates provided.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1 ) The Glebe Estate was valued at $23m by the Australian Taxation Office in November 1978.
Since the valuation will be a key factor in negotiations with the NSW Government on the transfer of the Glebe Estate it would not be appropriate for the Commonwealth to release the current valuation.
(2) Total outlays include expenditure on rehabilitation, repairs and maintenance, ex gratia payments for rates and administration costs, but no Project Office staff salaries.

Year
1974-1975 1975-1976 1976-1977 1977-1978 1978-1979

Total outlay
$m I.l76
1.995
2.073
1.672
1.714

Year
1979-1980 19801981

Total outlay $m 1.874
1.797 (est)

(3) (a)-

1974-1975 1975-1976 1976-1977 1977-1978 1978-1979 1979-1980 19801981

Commencements
7 21 75 19 48
40

Completions
12 10 60 32 57 17 (est)

(b) 40 dwelling units are currently with contractors for major rehabilitation works and about 20 dwellings for minor rehabilitation works.
(c) At the end of June 1981, approximately 370 dwellings will still require rehabilitation.
(4) The cost of completing rehabilitation of the Estate would vary depending on the standard of finish and the extent of work done. In view of the negotiations with the NSW Government on transfer of the Estate it would not be appropriate for the Commonwealth to release an estimate of the cost of completing rehabilitation.
(5) (a) At 1 May 1981,539 dwellings were occupied, providing accommodation for approximately 2,500 people.
(b) At 1 May 1981, 157 dwellings were vacant.
(6) Rent revenue from the Estate for 1979-1980 was $841,000. Estimated revenue for 1980-1981 is $890,000.
(7) At 1 May 1981, 331 tenants (61 per cent of all tenants on the Estate) received rental rebates.
(8) The annual cost of the rental rebate scheme is approximately $300,000. This represents the dilTerence between the rent received and revenue that would he received if all tenants paid the assessed rental.
HMAS 'Melbourne': Catapult Mechanism
(Question No. 2297)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(I) Were 2 Skyhawk aircraft lo~t during exercises by HMAS Melbourne whilst en route to a goodwill mission in India; if so, what was the cause of each loss.
(2) Did one or both aircraft go into the sea during take-off because of inadequate take-olT speed, due to the unreliable operation of the carrier's catapult mechanism.
Mr KilIen---It>e answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. Two Skyhawks were lost from HMAS Melbourne while the aircraft carrier was carrying out routine exercises during the Indian Ocean deployment in October 1980.
(2) No. The first aircraft was lost due to engine failure. The second aircraft was lost due to a Support Services fault (Catapult drill error).

3544 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Washington Accommodation: Forthcoming Visit by Prime Minister
(Question No. 2316)
Mr Scholes asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 2 June 1981:
(1) Have Australian officials in Washington, DC, USA, been directed to seek from the President of the United States an invitation for the Prime Minister to stay at Blair House, the US official Guest House.
(2) If so, is the obtaining of this invitation to be treated as a top priority by senior officials of the Australian Embassy.
(3) Have Australian officials in Washington been authorised to indicate that the Australian Prime Minister will offer a positive response to an invitation for Australia to participate in a US rapid deployment force to facilitate the Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai if an invitation to use Blair House is made by or on behalf of President Reagan.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1), (2) and (3) No.
Payroll Deductions for Health Fund Payments
(Question No. 2350)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 28 May 1981:
Will he ensure that payroll deductions for health fund payments will be made available to recipients of Commonwealth superannuation payments; if not, what is the reason?
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Superannuation pensions are paid in each State by the Depattment of Social Security and in the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory by the Department of Finance, acting as paying agents for the Commissioner for Superannuation. Because of the systems presently in use in the Department of Social Security it is not practicable for that Department to -make deductions from superannuation pensions other than deductions for income tax instalments, and movements of pensioners between the States and the Territories would give rise to problems if the Department of Finance were to act alone.
Labour Market Statistics
(Question No. 2371)
Mr Humphreys asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 2 June 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that the universal occupational code, the Australian Standard Classification of Occupation (ASCO), is currently being prepared to rationalise labour market statistics.
(2) Will ASCO be used by the Australian Bureau of Statistics in the future production of unemployment statistics; if so, will they be available on a regional basis.
Mr HowardThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Australian Standard Classification of Occupations (ASCO) is being developed jointly by the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs and the Australian Bureau of

Statistics (ABS) to replace the current occupation classifications which suffer from a number of serious deficiencies.
(2) The Statistician has advised that in the labour force survey, unemployed persons who had worked for two weeks or more in a full-time job in the previous two years are classified according to the occupation of their last full-time job. The ASCO will be used for these unemployment statistics as soon as practicable, but is not expected to be available for some considerable time.
Following the next reselection of the labour force survey sample, to be based on results of the 198 I Census of Population and Housing, it may be feasible to provide some statistics of unemployment on a regional basis, but any occupational classification would not be very detailed.
Prices of Petroleum Products
(Question No. 2436)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
(1) Did the Prices Justification Tribunal say in its report published on 31 March 1981 entitled, 'Inquiry into Prices of Petroleum Products', at page 101, that the Tribunal could also examine the suggestion of the New South Wales Government that the boundaries of metropolitan free delivery areas be reviewed to take account of shifting population centres and geographical proximities to bulk terminals; if so, will he ensure that a review of this nature is conducted.
(2) How, by whom and when will this review be conducted.
Mr Moore- -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) The review will be conducted by the Petrnleum Product Pricing Authority. I introduced the legislation to establish the Authority on 27 May 1981.
Prices of Petroleum Products
(Question No. 2437)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
(1) Did the Prices Justification Trihunal say in its report published on 31 March 1981 entitled 'Inquiry into Prices of Petroleum Products', at page 89, that the existence of a return on investment component (ie in service station sites) in the maximum justified wholesale price is undesirable and that in order to determine the appropriate adjustment component while also giving the companies tirre to negotiate new [ease contracts, the Tribunal proposes to remove the return of investment component from the maximum justified wholesale price of motor spirit in January 1982; if so, will he ensure that this proposal is implemented.
(2) How and when will he ensure that it is implemented.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) The proposal will be implemented by the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority. I introduced the legislation to establish the authority on 27 May 1981.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3545

Rental Rebates
(Question No. 2479)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
(1) How many public housing tenants have been in receipt of rental rebates in each State since 1977-78.

(2) What proportion of public housing tenants receiving rental rebates in each State have been in rental arrears since 1977-78.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The following table shows the number of State Housing Authority tenants in receipt of rebates at the end of each financial year.

1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

NSW 20,315 27,675 34,131

Vic. 9,136 13,311 15,278

Qld 6,117 6,821 8,419

SA 9,339 12,012 13,939

WA 10,832 12,173 13,171

Tas. 3,140 4,399 4,984

Total 58,879 76,391 89,922

(2) This information is not available.
Nitinol Mr Malcolm Fraser-On 5 March 1981 (Hansard, page 460) the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) asked me a question, without notice, concerning the potential economic significance of Nitinol to Australia.
The following is in answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the detailed reply concerning Nitinol provided on 26 May 1981 by my colleague, the Minister for Science and Technology, to his question upon notice No. 649 (Hansard. page 2583).
Defoliants and Pesticides Effect on Vietnam Veterans
Mr Malcolm Fraser-On 30 April 1981 (Hansard, page 1807) the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) asked me a question, without notice, concerning any discussions and exchanges of information between the Australian and United States Governments on the impact of agent orange and other chemicals on servicemen in Vietnam.
I undertook to provide more detailed information to the honourable member. The following is in answer to his question:
I am advised that arrangements have been made between the Department of Veterans' Affairs and relevant United States agencies to exchange unclassified information on the progress of studies in Australia and the United States, as well as new scientific data having a bearing on the issue. In view of recent Swedish studies that suggest a correlation between exposure to phenoxyacid herbicides and increased risk of lymphoma, the United States Veterans' Administration has asked to be kept informed of any decisions which may be made in Australia in respect of Vietnam veterans' claims in relation to malignant lymphoma. I am advised that there has been no expression of concern by the United States Government to the Australian Government in respect of any precedent that Australian investigations into the alleged effects of agent orange on Vietnam veterans may have in establishing any liability by the United States Government.
There have been high level discussions between Australian and US officials, and the Minister for Veterans' Affairs will be visiting the United States in June this year to discuss issues of concern to Vietnam veterans with officials of the United

States Veterans' Administration, veterans organisations, and other organisations involved in this area. These issues include the epidemiological study which will be investigating whether there were any effects on Australian servicemen of agent orange and other chemicals used in Vietnam, and similar studies underway in the United States.
International Labour Organisation Convention: Aboriginal Employment
.(Question No.6)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
On what occasions, at, what level and with what results has there been Federal-State (a) consultation and (b) correspondence on the possibility of providing a legislative basis for National and State Employment Discrimination Committees established to give the provisions of International Labour Organisation Convention No. Ill-Discrimination (Employment and Occupation), 1958, which was ratified by Australia on 15 June 1974 and which entered into force for Australia a yearlater. (Hansard, 20 October 1977, page 2289).
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The possibility of the establishment of the National and State Employment Discrimination Committees on a statutory basis was raised at the Ministers for Labour Meeting in September 1980. At that meeting Ministers were advised that, following receipt of advice from the National Labour Consultative Council on the Council's views on the desirable form of such legislation, the Commonwealth would seek consultations with the States.
While there has been some correspondence which referred, in passing, to the Government's consideration of this matter it has not been raised in correspondence with the States in a substantive way.
Trade Commissioner Service
(Question No. 255)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(I) Is it a fact that his Department is increasingly ignoring the recommendations of the Senate Standing Committee on Trade and Commerce on the Australian Trade Commissioner Service, by recruiting persons from within the Australian Public Service rather than from the private sector.
(2) Is the current salary structure for Trade Commissioners appropriate compared with the salaries of business executives of equivalent position in the private sector.

3546 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) Is he able to say whether morale within the Australian Trade Commissioner Service is at an all time low; if so, has this contributed to recent resignations by experienced members of the Service.
(4) Is it a fact that the Lynch Committee has frozen a number of Trade Commissioner vacancies at overseas posts; if so, will cutbacks of this kind benefit Australian exporters when commercial intelligence on world opportunities is badly needed and vital to export performance.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Not in my judgment. The honourable member might wish to refer to the Senate Hansard of 27 September 1979, at pages 1032 and 1033, where the recommendations contained in the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Trade and Commerce on the Australian Trade Commissioner Service, and the Government's responses thereto, are recorded.
(2) The salary structure for Trade Commissioners is directly related to the rates of pay for Second and Third Divison positions in the Public Service which cover a wide spectrum of executive positions within the public sector. The rates of pay for Second and Third Divison positions are presently under review by a Full Bench of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and any increase forthcoming from that review will also be applied to Trade Commissioners.
(3) No.
(4) In his statement to Parliament on 30 April 1981 on the outcome of the Review of Commonwealth Functions, the Prime Minister said, inter alia, that, 'significant room for staffing reductions exists in our diplomatic missions overseas. The staffing of the London and Washington posts overseas will be cut by 232 and by 75 staff respectively . . . '. The way in which this decision is to be implemented, insofar as the Trade Commissioner Service is concerned, is presently being investigated but it can be assumed that the intent will be to minimise the effect on Australian exporters. In addition to the number of staff serving under the Trade Commissioner Act has been reduced by just over 2 per cent as a result of decisions flowing from the Review of Commonwealth Functions. This may require a re-distribution of staffing resources but such redistribution would be directed towards maximising overall efficiency including the provision of commercial intelligence to the Australian business community.
School to Work Transition Program
(Question No. 285)
Mr Hawke asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(I) How many new courses commenced in the Commonwealth school to work transition program in 1980.
(2) How many additional places did the additional courses provide.
(3) What was the average cost to the Commonwealth per place.
(4) What proportion of those additional places was taken up by unemployed young persons.
(5) How many additional places are expected to be provided in 1981.
(6) How many young persons experiencing transition problems are expected to be found places in next year's courses.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) Preliminary data available from the States concerning new courses commenced tinder the Transition Program in 1980 indicate that 247 courses began in the TAFE sector.

A major purpose of the Program in schools is to assis,t development of appropriate changes in curriculum, including the development of alternative courses for young people whose
needs are not adequately met by traditional courses. While these measures are expected to encourage more, st~dents to continue longer in secondary education, the major effect so far has been to improve the capacity of schools to deal adequately with the needs of students already in the schools. It i~ not possible to specify a particular number of courses or places provided in schools from Commonwealth funds. However, it is estimated that at least 4,000 students in secondary schools were undertaking courses receiving significant financial sup-
port under the Program.

Funding for the Program is approximately equally divided

between school based and TAFE programs.

'

(2) Courses in TAFE institutions provided for about 4,400

students. Many thousands of students in schools. benefited

from developments supported under the Program in 1980.

These include development and extension of'alternative

course offerings and work experience programs, improvement

of career guidance and education, programs of city visits for

country children, provision of vocational course equipment

and facilities, teacher development and transition, curriculum

development.

',

(3) The average cost to the Commonwealth' of providing
these courses in TAFE in 1980 (excluding Commonwealth
benefits and allowances paid to students and trainees) was of the order of $1,500 per student. It should be noted that courses varied in length from twelve weeks tq forty weeks,
depending on arrangements in individual, ,States and institutions.

(4) Sample data suggests that about three-quarters of trainees in TAFE courses under the Program were receiving Unemployment Benefit before commencing c,?urses.

(5) It is expected that about 6,000 places wi11'be provided in courses in the TAFE sector under the Program in 1981. This is 1,600 more than in 1980. The range of activitieS established in schools will continue and develop. At least 8,000 students in secondary schools are undertaking courses receiving financial support under the Program.

(6) See reply to (5) above. Most participants in courses funded under the Program either have experienced or are regarded as likely to experience transition problems. Activities in the school sector will significantly affect many thousands of students, although few will be enrolled in new places which can be specifically identified as being fully funded by the Commonwealth.

A good part of activities funded by the Commonwealth under the Transition Program supplements similar activities funded by the States.

Building and Construction Industries: Recruitment of Tradesmen Overseas
(Question No. 404)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) How many (a) skilled and (b) semi-skilled tradesmen for the building and construction industries were (i) in private

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3547

sector employment, (ii) in government sector employment, (iii) registered with the Commonwealth Employment Service as unemployed and awaiting placement at the end of June and (iv) undergoing apprentice training and newly indentured in each State and Territory and for the Commonwealth as a whole in each of the years 1969-70 to 1979-80.
(2) How many (a) skilled and (b) semi-skilled tradesmen for the building and construction industries were recruited from overseas in each of those years.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (i) and (ii) Only a limited amount of the information requested by the honourable member is available.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics does not collect, on a regular basis, statistics of tradesmen. It did carry out a sample survey of private and government employers in September 1977 to obtain information on the numbers of apprentices and employees working as tradesmen, but it was subject to certain significant limitations. For further information refer to ABS

publication 'Apprentices and Employees Working as Tradesmen, September 1977', Catalogue No. 6233.0.
In addition, in a survey of the construction industry in respect of the year 1978-79 the ABS collected details of on-site employment by private sector construction establishments at 30 June 1979. While this information does not differentiate between skilled and semi-skilled tradesmen it incorporates a classification of 21 occupations. For further information refer to ABS publications 'Private Sector Construction Establishment, Details of Operation by Industry Class, 1978-79', Catalogue No. 8714.0-822.0. Corresponding figures for the public sector are not available.
(1) (iii) The table below sets out statistics of the numbers of persons registered with the Commonwealth Employment Servie as unemployed and awaiting placement and seeking full time work as (a) skilled and (b) semi-skilled building and construction tradesmen at the end of May (collection of this data was reduced in frequency to February, May, August and November each year as from October 1978) in each State and Territory and for the Commonwealth as a whole in each year from 1970 to 1980 inclusive.

PERSONS REGISTERED AS UNEMPLOYED WITH THE COMMONWEALTH EMPLOYMENT SERVICE IN THE SKILLED AND SEMI-SKILLED BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION TRADES BY STATE, TERRITORY
AND AUSTRALIA, END-MAY 1970 to 1980 (1)

End-May

State/Territory

1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 19761977(2) 1978 1979 1980

New South Wales (3)- Skilled Semi-skilled
VictoriaSkilled Semi-skilled
QueenslandSkilled Semi-skilled
South Austrillia (4)- Skilled Semi-skilled
Western AustraliaSkilled Semi-skilled
TasmaniaSkilled Semi-skilled
Northern TerritorySkilled Semi-skilled
AustraliaSkilled Semi-skilled

591 692 850 669 515 4,282 5,328 5,490 5,173 5,288 3,861 305 388 461 593 388 1,833 2,087 2,703 2,779 3,097 2,996

378 506 581 478 383 1,825 1,563 2,197 3,925 3,923 3,508 95 183 177 176 234 718 663 930 1,179 1,216 1,089

203 213 269 194 172 1,706 1,370 1,451 3,397 2,314 2,209 145 198 273 235 214 1,116 1,264 1,562 2,301 2,237 2,678

221 189 189 161 140 326 290 665 1,861 1,909 1,515

101 134 141

95 110 253 277 353 563 565 496

162 238 473 212 109 328 387 650 1,524 1,731 1,323

122 129 236 134

63 176 288 415 769 1,008 925

26

60

49

45

42 100 164 113 525 388 316

14

30

36

28

28

70 155 101 264 279 356

144 214 238 219 187 280 282 288

1,581 1,898 2,411 1,759 1,361 8,567 9,102 10,710 16,619 15,791 12,951 782 1,062 1,324 1,261 1,037 4,166 4,734 6,255 8,135 8,684 8,821

Source: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs. Notes: (1) Includes adults and juniors.
(2) In May 1977, a trial statistical system was being conducted in several Employment Offices of all States except Victoria, South Australia and the Northern Territory. While the major statistical series were still being collected, detailed information concerning occupational groups was not available from these Offices.
(3) Includes figures for the Australian Capital Territory. .(4) Includes figures for the Northern Territory up to 1976.

(1) (iv) The available statistics of new apprentices indentured in each year from 1969-70 to 1978-79 and the numbers undergoing apprenticeship training at the end of each of those years are contained in the publication 'Apprenticeship Statistics 1969-70-1978-79-Prepared by the Department of

Employment and Youth Affairs for the Commonwealth-State Apprenticeship Committee, Canberra, AGPS, 1980. Details for the year 1979-80 are as follows:

3548 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

BUILDING INDUSTRY
New Apprentices Indentured 1979-80 and Total Number of Apprentices in Training as at 30 June 1980

State

New indentures registered
1979-80

Total number of apprentices in training
as at 30 June 1980

New South Wales Victoria
Queensland South Australia
Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory Australia

3,455 2,124 1,385
267 612 352 45
76 8,316

7,549 7,406 4,653 1,501 2,019 1,316
107
293 24,844

(2) Statistics on the number of migrant arrivals classified by occupations and skill are available from the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs in its publication 'Australian Immigration-Consolidated Statistics' and 'Australian Immigration-Quarterly Statistical Summary'. It should be noted that statistics on migrant arrivals by occupation are based on the recognised qualifications of some migrants and the stated occupations of others. In addition statistics on migrant arrivals in the building and construction occupations do not indicate that all these workers are employed in the construction industry, as some workers in the building trades are employed in other industries. Similarly not all workers in the construction industry are employed in the building and construction trades, e.g. electrical tradesmen, metal workers.

Savings Bonds

(Questions No. 455)

Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24Pebruary 1981:

(1) What was the total cost of Commonwealth spending on advertising for Australian Savings Bonds during each month since January 1979.

(2) What were net sales or redemptions of these bonds during the same months.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) Advertising expenditure (including production costs) for Australian Savings Bonds each month from January 1979 was as follows:

1979January February March April May June July August
September October November
December 1980-
January

$
126,550.33 207,539.08 301,281.22 320,299.52 383,132.21 246,103.77 151,183.02 157,975.00 158,485.28 170,760.87 252390.19 164,965.47
174,037.23

February
March April
May
June July August
September October November December
1981January

$ 252,315.62 247,925.01 263,452.01 189,146.44 115,389.10 141,401.90
99,060.57 137,704.21 236,271.15 318,624.22 146,016.38
293,469.32

(2) The statement of Commonwealth Government Financial Transactions published by the Minister for Finance shows net proceeds from Australian Savings Bonds and Special Bonds each month since January 1979 as follows:

1979January February
March April May
June July August September October November
December 1980-
January February March April May June July August September
October November December
1981January

$m
8.3 17.1 25.6 14.4 72.8 77.2 77.3 47.8 39.9 37.7 20.7 3.6
21.0 17.8 17.8 32.SDR 28:SDR 43.3DR 7.IDR 44.8DR 40.4DR 74.1 DR 23.0DR 4.3
79.3DR

(DR indicates net redemptions)

Government Departments: Staff Recruitment
(Question No. 723)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 5 March 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that a number of Government departments and statutory bodies, including (a) Treasury, (b) Finance, (c) Industrial Relations and (d) the Industries Assistance Commission, are having difficulty in recruiting suitably qualified staff.
(2) Is this fact borne out by the amount ofre-advertisingof certain Government positions being arranged by his Department.
(3) Is this problem particularly acute in the field of quantitative economic analysis.
(4) Is this seeming lack of expertise available for the public sector within Australia caused by a brain drain to overseas countries and a loss of trained personnel to the private sector; if so, is he concerned by this trend.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3549

(5) How does this loss from the public sector reconcile with the view of the Prime Minister expressed in the House during the question period on 26 February 1981 when he referred to the privileged position of the Public Service in comparison with other employees around this country (Hansard, page 232).
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Public Service employs specialist staff in a wide range of fields. From time to time departments experience difficulty in recruiting suitably qualified staff in particular specialist fields.
(2) At the time the question was asked the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs was experiencing difficulty in recruiting staff to its Bureau of Labour Market Research and to steno-secretarial positions.
(3) The economics area generally is one in which recruitment difficulties are being experienced at the moment.
(4) There is currently a shortfall in the supply of qualified personnel graduating from tertiary institutions in some specialised categories, such as economics. Private sector employers, competing for the same scarce resources, are also experiencing recruitment difficulties in these fields. While a proportion of resignations from the Service represents trained personnel transferring to the private sector there is no evidence to suggest that this trend is on the increase. There is also no indication of a significant "brain drain" overseas from the Public Service.
(5) The present situation is primarily tbe result of an overall shortage of specialised staff and not the conditions of employment of Commonwealth public servants.
Occupational Safety and Health
(Question No. 742)
Mr Humphreys asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:
(1) Did he announce on 15 May 1978 that the Code of General Principle concerning Occupational Safety and Health in Commonwealth Government employment would be implemented in Commonwealth departments and factories and would thereby give a lead to both private industries and State Government industries.
(2) If so, is he able to say to what extent the Code has been adopted in private industry.
(3) Into what number of foreign languages has the Code been translated.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes. The Government has also approved 37 Codes of Practice as recommendations to be read in suppnrt of the Code of General Principles.
(2) The States have the conatitutional responsibility in respect of occupational health and safety in private industry. Four State Governments have adopted the Code of General Principles with minor revisions in respect of their own employees. The Commonwealth has no detailed knowledge of the extent of adoption of the code by private industry. It is believed, however, that there is an increasing awareness both in the State Governments and private industry of the financial and humanitarian benefits to be gained from the implementation of properly structured and implemented occupational safety and health programs.
(3) There has been no co-ordinated action to prepare translations of the Code of General Principles which is basically a management guide. However, the Commonwealth is aware of

the language problems facing some migrants which could contribute to accidents at the workplace and funds have been provided in the past to combat this problem. Audiovisual aids and handbooks have been produced in up to nine languages.
Bliss Symbols System
(Question No. 872)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
Has he or his Department made any examination of the Bliss Symbols system for intellectually handicapped children; if so, what was the result of that examination and when was it carried out.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Neither I nor my Department have made an examination of the Bliss Symbols system. However, the Department and the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority are aware that evaluation studies carried out overseas have shown that a modified version of Bliss Symbols is effective in the teaching of children with particular intellectual and physical handicaps. I am advised that Bliss Symbols in modified form are being used in some schools in Australia.
Concessional Fringe Benefits for Pensioners
(Question No. 922)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
(I) Has the Minister investigated the possibility of placing Vital call, Visec-Alert, or any other telephone system to assist the elderly and infirm on the list of free or concessional fringe benefits for eligible pensioners.
(2) If so, what is the estimated number of services required, and their cost.
(3) If such an investigation has not been carried out, will the Minister undertake to do so, and provide an estimate of the cost of providing the system outlined in part (1).
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) No. The Commonwealth currently provides telephone rental concessions to certain pensioners and beneficiaries but does not intend to extend those concessions to cover associated services marketed by private companies.
(2) See answer to (1).
(3) For the reason outlined in (1) it is not appropriate to attempt to estimate the cost involved.
TelegJ'ams
(Question No. 1048)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 2 April 1981 :
(1) Does the management of Telecom Australia maintain a policy of scaling down its telegram service; if so, does it do so (a) by increasing costs vis-a-vis costs for telex and telephone services, and decreasing services and (b) with the Government's support.
(2) Is it a fact that some areas of the Brisbane Metropolitan area are not serviced by telegrams in that telegrams cannot be messenger delivered to those areas; if so which areas, and for what reason.

3550 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) Was the minimum charge for a telegram of 12 words in (a) 1976, $1.44, (b) in 1977, $1.80 and (c) in 1978, $3.30.
(4) What is the current charge for a 12 word telegram.
(5) During this period, by how much has the total number of telegrams handled nationally diminished.
(6) Has a cost increase of more than 300 per cent over 4 years occurred while telegram handling has fallen by approximately 60 per cent during the same years; if so, are these factors related.
(7) Is it a fact that prior to July 1979, telegrams had to be issued for delivery within one hour of lodgement, but since July 1979, telegrams must be issued for delivery in (a) metropolitan and larger country areas, within 4 hours, (b) smaller country centres where messenger delivery is available, as early as practicable on the day of lodgement, and (c) other places, as soon as possible depending on local arrangements.
(8) Have telegram services to the public deteriorated; if so, does he propose to recommend changes to the service.
(9) If he will not recommend changes to this service, why not.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No. Tariffs and standards provided on all Telecom's services, including the public telegram service, are designed to reflect as far as practicable the cost of providing, and the demand for, each of those services.
(2) Yes. There are nine localities in the Brisbane metropolitan area where no messenger delivery is available, namelyBrookfield, Upper Brookfield, Bellbowrie, Anstead, Pullenvale, Moggill, Pinjarca Hills, Belmont and Chandler. These are lightly populated fringe areas with very little demand for telegram services. Other offices in Brisbane provide either a four hour or same day messenger delivery service.
(3) (a) and (b) Yes. (c) In 1978 the minimum rate was $1.80 for telegrams addressed to a telex number or for delivery by mail. The charge of $3.30 was for a 12 word telegram requiring messenger delivery.
(4) Addressed to a residential or business address-$4.30; addressed to a telegraphic code address-$3.30; addressed to a telephone number--$3.00; addressed to a postal address for delivery by mail-$2.50; addressed to a telex number-$2.00.
(5) The number of telegrams handled in 1979-80 was 5.4 million-a decline of 7.5 million since 1975-76.
(6) The charge for a 12 word messenger delivery telegram has risen from $1.84 in 1976 to $4.30 in 1980-an increase of 133.7 per cent. The current minimum charge for a telegram addressed to a telex number, however, is only $2.00-an increase of 38.8 per cent. Although increased charges have undoubtedly had an effect on the demand for the public telegraph service, the effect of the increased use and availability of high quality telephone, telex, data, facsimile and other communications services has been of equal significance. This reflects a world wide trend.
(7) (a) Prior to 1979 the service standard for ordinary rate telegrams was 30 minutes from time of lodgement to issue for delivery. Since 1979, the standard at most metropolitan and large country offices is 4 hours from time of lodgement to the actual delivery time. These standards are the maximum, rather than minimum, delivery times to be met in 90 per cent of cases. (b) and (c) Yes. In all cases, delivery times for telegrams which are telephoned or telexed to addressees are very much lower.
(8) and (9) The level of service has changed very little in recent years except for the general unavailability of a weekend delivery service outside metropolitan areas. Telegrams may still be lodged across a telegraph or post office counter

during business hours and by telephone or telex on a 24 hour basis from virtually anywhere in Australia. Messenger delivery is limited to business hours outside the metropolitan areas where porterage fees apply after hours, but telegrams can be delivered over a 24 hour period anywhere in Australia by telephone or telex_ Higher standards of service would need to take account of the demand for and cost of providing the service.
Integration of Handicapped Children into Regular Schools
(Question No. 1122)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) When were copies of the Schools Commission's notes on Commonwealth programs for schools, 1981, sent to Members' and Senators' offices.
(2) Does an attachment to that circular 1/81 contain guidelines for the administration of funds ava:Iable for the integration of handicapped children into regular schools in 1981.
(3) Does the attachment state that applications for grants under that special education program for the integration of handicapped children into regular schools must be lodged with State offices of the Schools Commission, or the Northern Territory Department of Education, by Tuesday, 21 April 1981.
(4) Is it usual procedure for the Schools Commission to inform directly individual schools of the existence and conditions of these programs.
(5) Has the Commission directly contacted individual schools to inform them of the details of this program; if not, why not; if so, when.
(6) If notification of schools of this program has been left to the State Government Departments of Education, what action has the Queensland Department of Education taken in this regard.
(7) What recommendation has the Commission made in respect of funding this aspect of the special education program.
(8) Is it a fact that the Commonwealth Government has no commitment to continuation of this aspect of the program, at least at the present level of funding.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(2) Yes.
(3) Yes.
(4) and (5) It is usual procedure for the Schools Commission to set out the existence and conditions of programs concerning special education in the publication, 'Notes on Commonwealth Programs for Schools.' These guidelines are circulated to State and Northern Territory Education Departments, non-government school systems and all nongovernment schools. In the case of government schools, it is left to the initiative of the State or Territory Education Department concerned to decide the extent to which any particular school is informed of the contents of the Program Notes.
The publication, 'Notes on Commonwealth Programs for Schools', was circulated to all non-government schools and their system authorities on 10 March 1981. The publication was also forwarded on the same date to the Education Departments of the States and the Northern Territory.
(6) As indicated in (4) and (5) above, it is a matter for State or Northern Territory Education Departments to determine the extent to which any government special school is involved in this program.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3551

(7) In its Report for the Triennium 1982-84 the Schools Commission has recommended that support for integration programs in 1981 be continued through the 1982-84 triennium to assist the integration of handicapped students into regular schools, and to enable isolated handicapped students to attend their neighbourhood schools where living at home is an alternative to a residential school. It is intended that the funds be administered through a joint program approach and on a project basis, in consultation with government and nongovernment education authorities in the States and the Northern Territory.
(8) For 1982 the Government has maintained expenditure, in real terms, on the integration of handicapped children into regular schools. This expenditure will be more closely related to the special education programs for government and nongover..ment schools by being incorporated as an element of these programs in 1982.
Departmental Air Travel: Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 1133)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(I) How many travel warrants have been issued for his Departmental officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) The information is not readily available in departmental records and I am not prepared to authorise the use of resources that would be required to obtain it.
Expenditure Commitments: Department of Finance
(Question No. 1216)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What specific commitments for expenditure, excluding normal recurring costs of running the Department such as salaries and administrative costs, does the Department of Finance have for (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
(3) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the fact that when a similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining the information would involve collection of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.
(3) Has the development of forward estimates in the Department of Finance now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer valid.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) to (4) I am aware that a similar question was asked by the honourable member of a number of Ministers in 1976, and that the honourable member was informed that the information requested could not be supplied because the task would have required a major commitment of staff resources

,which could not be justified in terms of the time and expense involved.
The development of the Forward Estimates has advanced since 1976 but these estimates are not designed to provide information of the nature requested by the honourable member. I advise that extraction of that detailed information from a diversity of records and sources would still involve substantial and unjustifiable expense in time and resources.
Employment of Private Consultants: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 1258)
Mr Bungey asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80; if so, (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a), (b), (c) and (d) Six.

Name
Mr F. R. Gullick Mr E. K. Sinclair MrW. G. Smith Sir John Bunting MrP.Morgan Mr C. Rubenstein

Payments Purpose 1979-80

Clearing of Cabinet papers to Archives
Presentation of public information
Project for CHOGM, Australia, 1981
Assignment for CHOGM, Australia, 1981
Assignment on Youth Unemployment
Assignment on Energy

$ 9,121 11,024 7,269
780 129 430

Female Officers and Employees: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 1342)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) How many female officers and employees are employed in his Department in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Division.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1), (2) and (3) I refer the honourable member to the answer given to question No. 1336 by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister. (Hansard, 5 June 1981, page 3314).

3552 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Female Officers and Employees: Department of Education
(Question No. 1352)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many female officers and employees are employed in his Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
MI' Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Trefer the honourable member to the answer to question No. 1336 (Hansard. 5 June 1981, page 3314) by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister.
Industrial Action: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 1362)
Mr Bungey asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many officers or employees in his Department have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last two years.
(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.
(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by
the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.
(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) 1979:3; 1980: 8, (b) nil.
(2) 73 manhours.
(3) No.
(4) Not applicable, see answer to 1 (b).
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 1420)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Departmentin 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by his Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.

(4) Did expendit!lre on entertainment and hospitality by his Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (4) !refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Prime Minister on page 3315 of the Hansard of 5 Junel981.
No expenditure on official entertainment at Commonwealth sponsored international conferences in Australia was incurred by my Department in 1979-80.
Expenditure on official entertainment outside Australia incurred by my Department amounted to $1,809.41 in 1979-80.
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Education
(Question No. 1430)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Department in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by his Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by his Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to answer to question No. 1414 (Hansard 5 June 1981, page 3315) by the Prime Minister.
My Department did not sponsor any international conferences in Australia in 1979-80, nor were funds expended for official entertainment outside Australia during that time.
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 1437)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by the Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in the Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by the Department occur outside Australia during this period; jf so, what sum was expended.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3553

Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1414 given by the Prime Minister on 5 June 1981 (Hansard, page 3315).
Head Office, Department of Education
(Question No. 1508)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The entire Central Office of the Department of Education is located in Canberra. The Department's Internal Audit Section is managed from Canberra on a decentralised basis and ten positions are outposted to the various States to provide internal audit services to State Offices.
(2) Not applicable.
Recycling of Paper: Department ofIndustrial Relations
(Question No. 1578)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Has any action been taken by his Department to recycle paper; if so, what action.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No action has been taken by my Department to recycle waste paper.

(Ii) No part-time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in any of this Department's other offices.
(2) (a) Costs incurred in the nature of salary for the provision of tea services in 1979-80 was approximately $1794.91 (i.e. 20 per cent of the salary of one audit Clerical Assistant Grade 1).
(b) No other charges were incurred by the Department for the provision of tea services in 1979-80.
Fishing Industry Research
(Question No. 1648)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What Commonwealth funds have been spent on research into the fishing industry in Western Australia in each financial year since 1975-76.
(2) To whom were the funds allocated and what was the nature and cost of each research project.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) See table attached.
In addition to the attached projects carried out under the auspices of my department, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation has considerable involvement with fishing industry related research in Western Australia. Details are set out below:
Invertebrate Resources Program
Program included research relevant to the rock lobster industry and involved expenditure of $3,557,620 in the period 1976-77 to 1977-78.
Coastal Ecology Program
Research was related to the future of the rock lobster industry. Expenditure in the period 1978-79 to 1979-80 was $992,226. Support from the Rural Credits Development Fund for this program amounted to $27,988 in 1979-80 and $18,839 in 1980-81.

Tea Services: Department ofIndustrial Relations
(Question No. 1604)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many (a) full time and (b) part time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his Department in 1979-80.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) (i) No full time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in this Department's Head Office.
(ii) No part time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in this Department's Head Office.
(b) (i) A portion of the duties of one full-time Clerical Assistant Grade 1 is allocated for tea making and distribution in the Office of the Industrial Registrar in Melbourne. There is no such service in any other office.

Living Resources Program
Program involved operation of research vessels on the North West Shelf and also investigation of the relationship between South Australian and Western Australian stocks of salmon. It is not possible to separate the Western Australian component of this program from overall expenditure which amounted to $3,780,708 in the period 1978-79 to 1979-80.
Oceanographic Research Program
The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation oceanographic research vessel Sprightly undertook research off Western Australia for approximately five months each year from 1975-76 to 1977-78. The overall cost of this vessel in this period was $806,700 in 1975-76, $758,700 in 1976-77 and $468,500 in 1977-78. It is not possible to identify the Western Australian component of these costs.
The Department of Science and Technology is also involved, through the public interest provisions of the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act, with a three year research and development project grant amounting to $225,000 for the production of freshwater crayfish in Western Australia. The grant was announced in February 1981.

3554 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Recipient and nature of research project

1975-76 1976-77

WA Marine Research Laboratories-

Evaluation of management measures in the Western

Australian Rock Lobster Fishery

Study of Octopus predation on Rock Lobsters

Further development of Aquaculture of Marron by

testing a specially designed pond site in the most

climatically favourable location in Western Australia

Study of the Fishery induced mortality of under-sized

Rock Lobster . .

..

.

A study into the cause of mortality of the Cultured

Pearl Oyster in Western Australia

Western Australia Department of Fisheries and Wildlife-
Development of farm dam culture of Marron Western Australia
Study of Amateur fishery for the Western Rock Lobster Study of the developing Trawl fishery of the Great Aus-
tralian Bight

Western Australia Department of Fisheries and Wildlife and Australian Fishing Industry Council, Western Australia-
Assistance for the technical education of personnel to be engaged in the Fishing Industry of Western Australia
Western Australia Institute of TechnologyTo improve echo sounder performance in Australian Prawn fisheries
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation-
Study of the ecology of coastal reefs, the nurseries of juvenile Rock Lobsters
International fisheries survey off Australia's north-west coast
University ofWestern AustraliaAn investigation of the Trace elements present in Bronze Whaler Sharks and Rock Lobsters Alternative management strategies for Western Rock Lobster
Batavia Fishing Co.Feasibility study of Deep Water Fishery
Western Australia MuseumSperm whale research
Levato Pty UdExploratory gill-netting for Spanish mackerel

21,000 20,000 12,800
21,000 22,900
21,000 12,700
7,425

11,678
27,209 7,000 39,788 15,900

Totals

126,025 114,375

1977-78 1078-79 1979-80 1980-81

26,260

31,244

41,011

38,518

38,740

9,878

56,323

40,000 41,400

2,750

21,800

23,600

10,700 100,000

2,400

28,822

43,444 5,700

34,921

20,000

9,384 9,382

96,184

105,676

277,178

32,250 189,489

Training and Use of Dogs by Commonwealth Departments
(Question No. 1665)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many dogs, and of what breeds, were being trained or used, apart from research purposes, in Commonwealth Government departments, as at 30 June 19807
(2) For what duties were they being used7
(3) What salary and special allowances are paid to dog handlers7
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question iS,as follows:

(1) The breakdown of dogs used in Commonwealth departmentsis:
Department of Administrative Services 15 German Shepherds.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs In training-a total of 11 dogs. These were 7 German
Shepherds; 2 Dobermans; 1 Retriever; 1 Cross Breed.
In use-a total of 22 dogs. These were 21 German Shepherds; I Cross Breed.
Department ofIndustry and Commerce A total of 5. These were 4 border collies and 1 kelpie.
Department ofScience and Technology 24 Huskies.
(2)-Department of Administrative Services

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3555

Guarding; explosives detection and general police work, for the Australian Federal Police.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs Detection of narcotics (all cannabis range, heroin and co-
caine) at various Customs control barriers, and, upon request, in Australian Federal and State Police operations.
Department ofIndustry and Commerce Herding sheep used for keeping grass down around
factories.
Department of Science and Technology Duties are normally sledge pulling on expeditions as a basic
means of haulage for field parties.
(3)-Department of Administrative Services Salaries applicable to members concerned (in the Australian Federal Police) plus a dog handler's allowance of 43c per shift.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs Instructors: $14,421 -$14,772 per annum plus Specialist AI-
lowance of $249 per annum.
Handlers and Trainees: $10,824-$11,837 per annum plus a Specialists Allowance of $249 per annum upon completion of training and commencement of duty.
Department ofIndustry and Commerce No allowances are paid; handling is carried out by a variety
of staff on an ad hoc basis.
Department of Science and Technology No allowances are paid as handling is carried out by expedi.,
tioners, usually the radio operator or meteorology officer, within the scope of their other duties.
Education: Northern Territory
(Question No. 1731)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
How many students were at each Government school in Katherine, Northern Territory, at the date of handover of the education function to the Northern Territory Government.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
On 1 July 1979, the date of handover of the education function to the Northern Territory, the number of students attending Government schools in Katherine was:

School
Katherine High School Clyde Fenton Primary School Katherine South Primary School Katherine School of the Air
Total .

No. of students
258 445 334 187
1,224

Counterfeiting: Prosecutions
(Question No. 1759)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
How many prosecutions were launched in each of the last 3 years for counterfeiting (a) Australian banknotes, (b) Australian coins, (c) Australian stamps and (d) foreign banknotes, coins or stamps.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

The Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police has advised:
(a) 1977-78-23 1978-79-4 1979-80-nil
(b) I977-78-nil 1978-79-nil 1979-80-'5
(c) nil
(d) 1977-78-3 1978-79-11 1979-80-3.
Charter of Racing Yacht 'Anaconda II'
(Question No. 1994)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on29 April 1981:
(1) Have arrangements been made by the Commonwealth Government to charter the ocean racing yacht Anaconda 1I for use by South Australian fishing inspectors.
(2) If so, is the charterrate $1,250 per day.
(3) If the charter rate is not $1,250 per day, what is the daily charter rate.
(4) What are the terms of the charter and, in particular, can the Commonwealth Government become liable to the yacht's owner for any sum additional to the basic charter rate as aresuit of its use of the yacht.
(5) How many crew are required to operate the yacht, what are their qualifications and is the cost of their wages and personal insurances included in the charter rate.
(6) How many fishing inspectors and other officials are carried on the yacht.
(7) Are any persons carried when the yacht is on Government service other than paid crew and public servants on duty; if so, who and for what reason are they carried.
(8) What durations of voyage are (a) undertaken or (b) contemplated in the use of the yacht.
(9) Are all Department of Transport, public service and other regulations complied with in this use of the yacht.
(10) What are the (a) maximum and (b) most economical speeds under power of Anaconda II.
(11) Is he able to say what is the maximum speed of a typical Japanese tuna fishing vessel.
(12) What is the approximate value of Anaconda II as is, complete with all equipment.
(13) What is the rationale for the use of Anaconda II for this purpose and, in particular, why is use being made of a (a) sailing vessel rather than a motor vessel and (b) very large ocean racer rather than a smaller vessel designed for seagoing work with a small crew but which still has ample accommodation and endurance.
(14) Were tenders called for this charter; if not, why not.
(15) If tenders were called for this charter, was that involving Anaconda II the lowest; if not, why was the lowest tender not accepted.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Anaconda II was the vessel selected by the South Australian Government in consultation with the Commonwealth Government for the deployment of Australian fishing zone observers aboard Japanese vessels operating off South Australia.

3556 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) Yes.
(3) See (2).
(4) The vessel is required to carry four observers to locate and board licensed Japanese tuna longliners operating off the South Australian coast in order to obtain information on the size composition and biology of the Japanese catch and technical information on their fishing operations. Under the terms of the contract, the Commonwealth is not liable to the yacht's owner for sums additional to the basic daily rate.
(5) Eight crew consisting of experienced local seamen were on board for the first voyage lasting 13 days. The charter rate was all inclusive. Wages and personal insurance are matters for the crew and vessel owner.
(6) Three observers and one Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation biologist.
(7) The only personnel carried on the vessel for the two voyages were Commonwealth and State officers together with the crew.
(8) (a) Voyage I undertaken from 23.4.81 to 5.5.81. (b) Voyage 2 undertaken from 21 .5.81 to 28.5.81. No further voyages are contemplated.
(9) All Commonwealth requirements were complied with in the use of the vessel.
(10) (a) Six knots. (b) Approximately 4-5 knots.
(11) Speeds vary according to the operation being undertaken, e.g. 9-10 knots for speed setting line, 3-5 knots for speed retrieving line. Tuna longline vessels are normally stationary (adrift) for approximately 4 hours daily. In the observer operation the question of pursuit does not arise. Boardings of vessels by observers are facilitated by the master of the foreign vessel.
(12) It is understood that the initial construction cost was $100,000; but replacement value is now conservatively estimated at $500,000.
(13) It was the cheapest arrangement. Few suitable vessels were available for charter in South Australia with sufficient range, size and deep seagoing capabilities for operations in the Great Australian Bight. The tuna season was at its height and local fishermen were unwilling to make their vessels available for a charter fee that would be well below the returns they could obtain from fishing.
Of the three vessels available for the charter, two w~re motor vessels priced at $2,000 per day. The Anaconda II although a sailing vessel, met the requirements for the charter, especially for deep seagoing work and its capacity to accommodate crew and observers at least cost. There were no reports of the Anaconda II having difficulty in satisfactorily completing all the necessary manoeuvres to enable observers to perform their tasks amongst the Japanese vessels.
(14) Following consultation with the South Australian Tender Board, it was decided not to call tenders because of the time that would be lost in arranging chatters to meet the deadline for the commencement of the exercise.
(15) See (13) and (14).
Northern Territory Disabled Persons: Education Projects
(Question No. 2052)
Mr Tambling asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:

(I) What financial appropriations have been allocated by his Department for use in the Northern Territory for projects to assist the disabled during 1980-81.
(2) For what specific projects has this sUm been allocated.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) During 1980 and 1981 funds are being made available for disabled young people in the Northern Territory under programs administered by the Commonwealth Schools Commission and under the Transition from School to Work Program.
Under the Commonwealth Schools Commission's programs, allocations to the Northern Territory for 1980 included $119,000 for government special schools, and $13,500 for residential institutions. Allocations for 1981 include $123,500 for government special schools, $14,500 for residential institutions and $10,500 for the program for the integration of handicapped children into regular schools. In addition, in 1981, the Northern Territory will share in a new program of assistance for the severely handicapped but individual State and Territory allocations are not yet available.
Under the Transition from School to Work Program, projects to attract funding are initiated by the Northern Territory authorities and are submitted to the Commonwealth for approval. In 1981 $3,200 has been earmarked to help improve the prospects of handicapped students by giving increased attention to literacy and numeracy skills in school and by offering work experience placements. However it is expected that disabled young people would also benefit from projects of a more general nature. Under the Transition Program the Northern Territory received a totaf of$95,599 in 1980and has received $112,860 so farin 1981.
Primary Industry Advisory Panels
(Question No. 2068)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) How many advisory panels or similar committees, such as the Federal Potato Co-ordinating Committee, are there in his Department.
(2) In each case, (a) what is the name and purpose of the panel or committee, (b) when was it established, (c) who are the members, what are their qualifications and what areas do they represent, (d) how many meetings have been held in each of the last 5 years and where was each meeting held, (e) what was the cost of these meetings and (f) what was the duration of each meeting.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Federal Potato Co-ordinating Committee is an industry body representing potato merchants. Its only connection with my Department is to provide nominations of potato merchants to the membership of the National Potato Panel. However, there are a number of advisory panels and committees of a non-statutory nature with which my Department has an involvement. These include the National Potato Panel, National Vegetable Panel, Cherry Panel, Raw Cotton Marketing Advisory Committee, Brucellosis and Tuberculosis Eradication Campaign Committee, and the Meat Industry Advisory Committee.
(2) The attached schedule sets out details on the information sought for each of these bodies.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3557

Date estab-
_N_'a_m_e_a_n~d.:..p_urp..:....o_se_ _ _ _ _ _listed

(a)

(b)

National Potato Panel-

to provide a forum for dis-

1975

cussion of industry prob-

lems and requirements, to

make industry submissions

and to act as a focal point

for intra-industry co-

operation and liaison with

Government

National Vegetable Panel-

to provide a forum for

1975

problems of processing

vegetables (particularly

peas and beans) and to act

as a foca~ point for intra-

industry co-operation and

liaison with Government

Membership (c)

Meetings over
l+asLt o5cyaetaiorsn
(d)

Commonwealth Departments R. D. Coutts-Chairman, Commonwealth Dept of Primary Industry N. J. Baley-Dept of Industry and Commerce
State Departments M. KinseHa-"OVic. Dept of Agriculture 1. Sullivan-Tas. Dept of Agriculture
Growers L. G. Wilson-Qld A. HarrisNSW L. G. MayVic, C. Dakin-Tas. M. M. Nicol--SA M.E.Rice-WA
Processors
A. W. Watmore-Edgell (Div. of Petersville Ltd)
P. D. Winfield-A.P.O. Snack Food Pty
Ltd K. J. Houston-Amott's Snack Products
Pty Ltd (observer) N. P. Kennedy-Rosella Foods Pty Ltd
(observer)
J, Clements-McCain Australia Pty Ltd (observer)
R. p, Bakcr--Westernport Canneries Pty
Ltd (observer) J. Petersen-General Jones Pty Ltd (ob-
server)
Merchants V. Laidlaw-All States Produce Services
PtyLtd D. E. Montgomery-Southern Tablelands
Produce

1976-77, 2 meetings
1977-78, 2 meetings
1978-79, 2 meetings
1979-80 2 meetings
1980-81, 2 meetings
All meetings are in Canberra

Commonwealth Departments R. D, Coutts---Chairmanl Dept of Primary Industry V. Sticka-Department of Industry and Commerce
State Departments E, C. Darley-Department of Agriculture NSW ], \Voods-Department of Primary Indus~
tries Qld J, Sullivan-Department of Agriculture
Tas. Growers
J. Bishop-Qld
B. Delaney-NSW H. Brien-Vic,
D. Grivell-SA L. Richardson-Tas. R. De Pledgc--Ta<. J. D. Clifford---AVGF Processors J. F. S. Brown-Golden Circle Cannery J. Petersen-General Jones Pty Ltd A. W. Whatmore-Edgell (Div of Peters-
villePtyLtd) R. Hunt-Hunts Foods Pty Ltd Consumers (observer) Mrs W. Garran-Aust Federation of
Consumer Organisations

1976-77, 2 meetings
1977-78, 2 meetings
1978-79, 2 meetings
1979-80, 2 meetings
1980-81, 2 meetings
All meetings
are in Canberra

Duration

of

Cost

meetings

(e)

(f)

1976-77
- $6,723 1977-78,
,3,298 1978-79
$2,660 1979-80
$6,816 1980-81
$5,576
- A breakup of the $6,723 in 1976-77 is not available, This figure therefore
represents the total expenditure for meetings held for the Cherry, Vegetable and Po-
tatoPanels

Panel meetings are on a daily basis

1976-77 - $6,723
1977-78 $3,112
1978-79 $2,254
1979-80
$6,453 1980-81
$11,003

Panel meetings are on a daily basis

3558 REPRESENTATIVES IO June 1981

Answers to Questions

Name and purpose (a) Cherry Panel-
monitors the import situation ofcherries, promotes continued CO~ operation to improve efficiency in the production and processing of cherries in Australia and provides a forum for the consideration of any matters of significance to the cherry industry
Raw Cotton Marketing Advisory Committee-
to oversight and monitor the domestic and export marketing of the Australian cotton crop and import operations to provide a liaison point between industry and government agencies
Brucellosis and Tuberculosis Eradication Campaign Consultative Committee-
to enable consultation between the Department and the Australian cattle industry on the National Brucellosis and Tuberculosis Eradication Campaign

Date establisted
(b)

Membership (c)

Meetings over last 5 years
+ Location
(d)

1974 Department

1976-77

A. W. Lloyd (Chairman)-Dept of Pri2meetings

mary Industry

1977-78

N.T. Scriven~r-Dept of Commerce and

I meeting

Industry

1978-79

Growers

I meeting

M. W. O'Connell-Former President, 1979-80

Aust Cherry Growers Federation NSW

I meeting

E. L. Burgi-Former President, Vic. 1980-81

Cherry Assoc. Secretary, Ausl Cherry I meeting

Growers' Federation Vic.

All meetings

W. R. Miller-Secretary, Cherry Section, are held in

SA Frllitgrowers' and Market Gar-

Canberra

deners' Assoc Inc.

Processors

C. E. Neil-Chairman, Cherry Processors

Co-Operative Ltd

H. J. Henderson-Secretary Silvan Fruit

Processors Ltd

M. Pattrick-Purchasing Director, Col-

man Division Colman Foods Pty Ltd

N. Zusman-Former Manager, Wino

Food Products Consultant, Winn Food

Products

L. E. Plumridge-Former Factory Man-

ager, SPC Ltd, Manufacturing Man-

ager, SPC Ltd

Cost
(e)
1976-77 *$6,723
1977-78 $989
1978-79 $1,167
1979-80 $755
1980-81 $1,634

Duration of meetings (t) Panel meetings are
on a half day basis

1963 Departments

1976,

1976

Of the meetings

A. J. Bennet-Chairman, Commonwealth Sydney 3

$964

listed-12 occu-

Department of Primary Industry

Warren, NSW 1

pied 1 day while

D. T. Dwyer-Department of Primary InTotal 4

the remaining 6

dustry (Secretary)

1977,

1977

were 2 days

Processor or Grower Representatives

Sydney 3

$865

D. Hughes-Sales Manager Auscott Pty Adelaide 1

Ltd

Total 4

J. Howes-General Manager Namoi Cot1978,

1978

ton Co-Operative

Sydney 3

$441

P. Harris-General Manager Queensland Geelong, Vic. I

Cotton Marketing Board

Total 4

Spinner Representatives

1979,

1979

H. Catlow-General Manager Bonds Canberra 2

$1,194

Spinning Mills (a Div. of Bonds Coats Melbourne 1

PatonsLtd)

Total 3

T. Holohan-Administrator Raw 1980,

1980

Materials, Fibres & Yarns Division, Melbourne 1

$724

BradmillLtd

Moree,NSW1

Newcastle 1

No payments are

Total 3

made in respect

of industry

members

1979 Department

16 April 1980

R. W. Gee-Director Aus!. Bureau of Barton,ACT

Animal Health Chairman

9 Oct. 1980

J. G. Digby-Assistant Director Disease Rockhampton

Control Branch

Qld

Australian Bureau of Animal Health

21 April 1981

Cattle Council of Australia

Barton,ACT

M. G. BinsteadCattlemens Union,

QId-grazier

V. G. Collins-United Graziers Assoc.

Qld-grazier

G. F. Heaslip-Northern Territory Cattle

Council-grazier

E. Ashby-United Farms & Stock

Owners ofSA-grazier

B. Chisolm-Victorian Farmers & Graz-

iers Assoc.-grazier

Australian Dairy Farmers Federation

A. J. Tracy-United Dairy Farmers of

Victoria, dairy farmer

Meetings in Can~ berra did not require expenditure additional to officers' time
The Rockhampton meeting cost approximately $900 in airfares and travel allowance for officers

Meetings lasted from 1~ to 3 hours

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3559

Name and purpose
(a)
Meat Industry Advisory Committee-
to enable consultation between the Department and the Australian meat export industry on meat.. works standards, meat in.. spection procedures and the requirements of importing countries

Date establisted
(b)

Membership (c)

Meetings over

l+..Lt oScyaetaiorsn

Cost

(d)

(e)

Duration of meetings
(f)

1966 J. A. Hart Aust. Bureau of Animal Health 1976-77.

Cost to the DeMeetings have

(Chairman)

4 meetings

partment has lasted from 3+ to

R. S. Jordan, D.F.M., General Manager, 1977-78.

been in the pro7 hours

AustralianMeat & Livestock Corp.

4 meetings

vision of the

R. G. Jones Chairman of Meat Research Ad1978-79,

meeting venue

visory Panel

4 meetings

and secretariat

D. J. Walker CSIRO Meat Research Lab1979-80.

oratory Representative

4 meetings

3 Members representing

198()"81,

Australian Meat Exporters Federal

5 meetings

Counci1-currently

All have

Sir Frederick Somerset K.stJ.

been in

Mr K. J. Smeltzer

Canberra

MrJ. DralLSfield

3 Members representing

Australian Meatworks Federal Council-

currently

Mr K. F. Gooley

Mr B. L. Kassulke

MrA.White

3 Members representing

Council of Australian Public Abattoir

Authorities-currently

Mr J. Tidawell

Mr D. MarshaJI

MrI.F\ack

Bendigo Ordnance Factory
(Question No. 2074)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Industry and -Commerce, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) Does the Government intend to close down the Bendigo Ordnance Factory if no private enterprise buyer can be found.
(2) Will potential purchasers be offered special incentives such as subsidised or guaranteed workloads. etc., to purchase the factory.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) In the event that acceptable offers for the Factory are not forthcoming, it is not the intention of the Government to close the Factory.
(2) No special incentives of the types described are to be offered when seeking expressions of interest or when inviting tenders. Any requests or proposals by prospective purchasers will be considered.
Bendigo Ordnance Factory
(Question No. 2078)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
What is the estimated value of the Bendigo Ordnance Factory and its fixed assets.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
See my answer to Question No. 2077.
Reduction ofStaff and Functions: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 2125)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:

Will he provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory. when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister to Question Number 2119 which appeared in Hansard on 5 June 1981, page 3317.
Reduction ofStaff and Functions: Department of Finance
(Question No. 2128)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Will the Minister provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of the Department of Finance that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented?
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 2119 (Hansard, 5 June 1981. page 3317) provided by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, the Honourable Ian Viner.

3560 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Commonwealth Public Service: Reduction in Staffing
(Question No. 2158)
Mr Lloyd asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(1) Has the Government required reduction of the Commonwealth Public Service on several occasions since November 1975.
(2) If so, how many public servants, and at what level, (a) have been affected on each occasion during this period and (b) will be affected following the implementation of the Review of Commonwealth Functions.

(3) Is it a fact that there has been a disproportionate reduction in the lower levels of the Public Service, and that one of the unforeseen results of the reductions has been an increase in the percentage ratio of 2nd Division Officers.
(4) What will happen to 2nd Division Officers in those areas where their function has been abolished or transferred to private enterprise or to a State Government.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) (a) The table below shows the number of full time Public Service Act staff at 30 June from 1975 to date, by Division:

DIVISIONAL GROUP

Year at June

Second

Third

Fourth

Total

No.

%

No.

%

No.

%

No.

1975

1149

0.7

61115

39.4

92818

59.8

155082

1976

1232

0.8

60015

40.3

87713

58.8

148960

1977

1205

0.8

60033

40.8

85783

58.3

147021

1978

1242

0.8

61654

41.4

85955

57.7

148851

1979

1302

0.9

63504

42.3

85267

56.8

150073

1980

1344

0.9

65069

43.2

84299

55.9

150712

(These figures have been corrected retrospectively for transfer into and out of Public Service Act coverage that occurred prior to 30 June 1980 e.g. for transfers to the Northern Territory Public Service.)

(2) (b) Implemention of the Government's decisions announced in the Prime Minister's statement of 30 April 1981 is expected to result in reductions in the order of 16,000 to 17,000 in the number of Commonwealth Government employees. It is estimated that some 7,000 to 8,000 of the reduction will be Public Service Act employees. Details of savings at the various levels are not available at this stage.
(3) The table illustrates changes within the Second, Third and Fourth Divisions for the period 30 June 1975 to 30 June 1980. The changes in the relevant proportions of the Second, Third and Fourth Divisions of the Service can be attributed to a number of factors such as different work arrangements, the nature of the work done, the impact of technological change, as well as staffing reductions.
(4) Those Second Division staff identified as excess to their department's requirements as a result of decisions of the Review of Commonwealth Functions to abolish the functions for which they are responsible are covered by the provisions and associated procedures of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act and the Public Service Arbitrator's Determination No 509 of 1977. It is expected that any excess Second Division staff will be redeployed in the Service.
In regard to those staff employed on functions to be transferred to a State Government, it is envisaged that that State Government would make offers of employment to all such staff and that they would transfer to State employment in accordance with provisions of Part IV of the Public Service Act. Finalisation of terms and conditions of transfer and employment with the State Government will be subject to negotiations with State authorities.
For those staff in areas which are to be transferred to the private sector, it is envisaged that those organisations will be sold as going concerns and that offers of employment by the relevant private employers will be made to the Commonwealth staff undertaking the functions to be transferred. The terms and conditions of transfer and subsequent employment of these staff will be negotiated with the individual private employers.

Participation in Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting: Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet
(QuestlonNo.2162)
Mr Hayden asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(1) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division and (c) 4th Division officers of his Department are engaged (i) full time or (ii) part-time in administrative, policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.
(2) How many officers of his Department are expected to attend the Meeting.
(3) What is the expected cost of their attendance at the Meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel and other expenses.
(4) What other expenses does he expect his Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the Meeting.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (4) This will be the largest meeting of Commonwealth Heads of Government yet held and will be by far the largest meeting at this level ever to take place in Australia. At least 41 countries, represented for the most part by Head of State or Head of Government with accompanying delegations of Ministers and officials, are expected to attend.
Over the last decade the practice has developed of holding the Meeting in different member countries of the Commonwealth. Recent Meetings have been held in Singapore, Ottawa, Kingston, London and Lusaka. If smaller countries such as Singapore, Jamaica and Zambia can fulfil their obligations as Members of the Commonwealth of Nations, it is right that Australia should, too.
Much needs to be available in the way of facilities and equipment for a meeting of this level and size. Much of the

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3561

equipment being provided, whether for example in the security area or for Conference Centre furnishings, will have a future government use. Decisions on the acquisition of equipment are made with future use in mind.
There are currently 4 Second Division, 27 Third Division and 13 Fourth Division personnel engaged full-time in my Department on preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. Some of these are seconded from other departments.
Some additional staff will be taken on full time in preparation for the Meeting but the exact numbers will be determined as needs are identified.
A number of officers have as required been employed part time on preparations of an administrative and policy kind for the Meeting. Their numbers have varied and will continue to do so in accordance with need.
My Department's current estimate of expenditure on CHOGM is $12m. The greatest individual expenditure, about $6m, relates to security in Victoria. A substantial portion of this $6m will comprise transfer of funds from the Commonwealth to the State of Victoria to offset increased operating costs of the Victoria Police Force in providing the required security during CHOGM. Also included in the $6m for security is expenditure on security communications equipment such as portable radio transceivers and television surveillance equipment. Much of this equipment will have a Commonwealth use after the Meeting. Other major items of expenditure include residential accommodation, transport, fitting out of the Meeting venue, furniture, and the operating costs of the Task Force which has been established to handle the arrangements for the Meeting.
Australian Wheat Board: Borrowings
(Question No. 2275)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(1) What is the current rate of interest at which funds are made available by the Rural Credits Department of the Reserve Bank of Australia to the Australian Wheat Board.
(2) What is the equivalent commercial rate.
(3) What proportion of its total borrowings is the Australian Wheat Board likely to draw from the Rural Credits Department of the Reserve Bank of Australia in 1981-82.
(4) What would be the cost of wheat growers if the subsidised rate of interest was withdrawn.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) On 14 May 1981 the rate of interest at which funds would have been made available by the Rural Credits Department of the Reserve Bank of Australia to the Australian Wheat Board was 11.5 per cent per annum.
(2) The Australian Wheat Board did not draw borrowings from commercial sources on 14 May 1981. However the AWB has heen provided with a representative sample of rates of interest for 14 May at which it could borrow by the issue of bank bills and promissory notes. These rates for different maturity periods would have varied from 16.2% per annum to 17.0% per annum.
(3) The borrowing arrangements for the AWB for 1981-82 cannot be determined until the Board's financing needs are established having regard to the size of the crop, the level of the guaranteed minimum delivery price and the Board's expenses for 1981-82.

(4) The estimate provided in 1980-81 Budget Paper No.4, Estimates of Receipts and Summary of Estimated Expenditure for the Year Ended 30 June 1981, for payments to the AWB for the reimbursement of additional commercial borrowing costs was $28.7m. The estimate of this cost has since heen revised to $24m.
Employment of Handicapped Persons
(Question No. 2321)
Mr Dawkins asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(I) Are schools involved in the education of handicapped persons eligihle for funds under the school to work transition program.
(2) If so, what funds have been made available in each State for these schools during (a) 1980 and (b) the period! January to 26 May 1981.
(3) If these schools are not eligible to receive funds under the program are there any other programs under which the Commonwealth provides assistance for the employment of handicapped persons.
MI' Fife--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) As a general program of assistance for the development of transition education programs for young people, Transition Program funding is provided to the States following Commonwealth approval of broad State 'package' proposals for schools and TAFE institutions rather than for specific areas of disadvantage such as handicapped persons. Under the Program guidelines the Commonwealth seeks to encourage education authorities in the States to take account of the needs of particular disadvantaged students, but it is for these authorities to determine priorities amongst individual proposals within the broad 'package' proposals approved by the Commonwealth. While it is not possible to identify all school projects specifically concerned with the handicapped, there have been a number of such projects funded and it is evident that the needs of the handicapped are being recognised by the responsible authorities.
(3) In addition to Transition Program funding, it is possible for handicapped persons attending special schools and classes to benefit from an employment point of view through the Commonwealth's Special Education Program administered by the Commonwealth Schools Commission. This program aims to improve the quality and coverage of educational services for handicapped children by supplementing the funding of special schools and classes. While these funds are not specifically directed to assistance for the employment of handicapped persons, they may bc used for work experience and vocational training programs conducted by special schools and regular schools in which there are special classes. Within the Commonwealth's Special Education Program there is a Children in Residential Institutions element which funds projects designed to improve the educational prospects and to broaden the general experience of children living in institutions. It is possible for such projects to be concerned with transition, work experience and vocational training.
As far as programs outside the education area are concerned, the Departments of Social Security and of Employment and Youth Affairs administer programs and services designed to assist the employment of handicapped persons. Subsidies under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act and rehabilitation assistance through the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service are administered by the Department of Social Security. Through the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs disabled persons registered for employment

3562 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

may receive assistance under the National Employment and Training System to gain the skills necessary to obtain employment. Employment subsidies are provided for on-the-job training. A number of work preparation/training programs are funded and assistance for individuals to undertake formal training is available.
Tuition Fees in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education
(Question No. 2322)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(1) Further to the Government's decision to introduce tuition fees in universities and colleges of advanced education for students undertaking degrees and diplomas subsequent to an initial tertiary qualification, which double degrees and diploma combinations permitted by tertiary institutions are not exempt from fees under the definition of recognised double degree or diploma combinations referred to in the statement on the Review of Commonwealth Functions (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1843).
(2) Are students to be considered as new enrolments for the purpose of being obliged to pay fees in 1982 if (a) they enrol prior to 1 January 1982, (b) they are registered as postgraduate students before 1 January 1982, (c) they had previously commenced post-graduate studies, discontinued them, and subsequently recommenced them after 1 January 1982 or (d) the tertiary institution obliges all post-graduate students who have commenced courses prior to 1 January 1982 to re-enrol.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) A full list of recognised combined courses, for which tuition fees will not be payable, will be announced later in the year.
(2) The new arrangements for the payment of tuition fees will apply to students enrolling to commence second or higher qualifications in 1982.
Adult Secondary Assistance Scheme
(Question No. 2439)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
Will he explain what is meant by the Government's announcement that eligibility for the Adult Secondary Assistance Scheme will be restricted to those needing qualifications for employment (Hansard, 30 April 1981,page 1843).
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Government's decision, following the Review of Commonwealth Functions, that eligibility under the Adult Secondary Education Assistance Scheme will be restricted to those needing qualifications for employment will mean that as from 1 January 1982, only applicants who have indicated an employment objective for which completion of matriculation level studies is considered to be essential or highly desirable will be eligible for consideration under the scheme. Acceptable employment objectives will include those requiring completion of a tertiary qualification for which matriculation is a pre-requisite. It will be necessary in future for the employment objective to be stated on the application form.

Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme
(Question No. 2443)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
(I) Have changes been proposed to the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme eligibility rules; if so, will students who previously have been granted independent status on the grounds of having lived in a de facto relationship for 2 years, or 1 year if there was a child involved, continue to be granted independent status.
(2) Will students who have previously claimed a dependent spouse allowance on the grounds of a de facto relationship continue to be able to claim that allowance.
(3) Will students who have previously been granted a living away from home allowance on the grounds of being over 21 years continue to be eligible for that allowance.
(4) Will students be able to claim dependants' allowances for a defactospouse in 1982.
(5) Are parents in receipt of a supporting parents benefit, who qualify for independent status on the grounds of having lived in a de facto relationship, able to earn $5,100 before the means test is applied; if so, with the abolition of a de facto relationship as grounds for independent status, will adjustments be made to ensure this higher non-means tested income will still apply to supporting parents.
(6) Has the Government any intention of changing the regulations that allow students to claim independent status by totalling their workforce participation over the previous five years.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes, following the Review of Commonwealth Functions there has been some modification of the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS) eligibility rules which generally will take effect as from I January 1982. The general intention is also that students who have already qualified under the rules which have now been modified will continue to do so. Consequently, the decision, that participation in a de facto relationship will no longer qualify an applicant for independent status, wi1l not affect those students who have already qualified for independent status in this way. Those granted independent status on this basis prior to 1982 will retain that status.
(2) Yes, subject to their continuing to comply with the normal conditions of eligibility.
(3) The decision that students will no longer be able to qualify for the living away-from-home rate if, being 21 years of age or more, they choose to live away from home will also take effect as from 1January 1982. Students who have already qualified under the age 21 provision will continue to qualify on the same grounds after 1981 subject to their continuing to comply with other normal requirements.
(4) Yes.
(5) The provision whereby a sole parent, with a dependent child (or children) and who has independent status under TEAS, may be in receipt of $5,100 before the means test on personal income is applied is subject only to whether or not the child is wholly or substantially dependent on the applicant. It does not necessarily require that the applicant should be in receipt of supporting parent's benefit nor to have been involved in a de facto relationship. Students who have already qualified for this provision will continue to do so after 1981, while new applicants as from I January 1982 wi\l be assessed against the ongoing requirements for independent status.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3563

(6) No. Students will continue to be eligible to apply for independent status if they have been employed full-time in the workforce for periods totalling two years out of the previous five. However, one of tbe decisions following the Review of Commonwealth Functions was that periods of registration for employment which do not involve the receipt of unemployment benefits may now be taken into account in determining the two year qualifying period for independent status, provided the student was unemployed and in Australia and available for full-time work. This relaxation of the rules will take effect as from 1 January 1982.
Homeless Persons Advisory Committees
(Question No. 114)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
What recommendations made since December 1977 by the Homeless Persons Advisory Committees (a) have been accepted, (b) have been rejected or (c) are still under consideration by the Government.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Since 1977, the State Homeless Persons Advisory Committees, which have now been abolished, commented on a wide range of issues and on various Commonwealth Government programs. It is not appropriate to respond to the question in terms of recommendations accepted, rejected or under consideration, because: (i) in addition to the 77 recorded separate recommendations from the various State Committees, some of which have been provided by more than one State Committee, an unknown number of recommendations were made orally in discussions with the former Minister and officers of the Department; (ii) in the nature of Advisory Committees, the expression of views and discussion of issues is as important as (was) the submission of formal recommendations.
Important issues raised by the Advisory Committees include:
amendment of the Homeless Persons Assistance Act to broaden the range of services provided to homeless people;
facilities and services to be provided to categories of homeless people other than the chronically homeless;
an expansion and increase in recurrent subsidies provided under the Homeless Persons Assistance Act; and
an expansion in the allocation of capital funds to the Homeless Persons Assistance Program.

The major initiatives in services for homeless people which reliect the recommendations of the Advisory Committees are:
the Homeless Persons Assistance Act was amended in 1979 to remove all references to a prescribed period, which previously limited the operation of the Act;
the Youth Services Scheme for homeless youth, whiGh is funded jointly by the Commonwealth and State Governments, provides emergency accommodation as well as counselling and referral services to homeless young people up to the age of 18 years;
the regulations of the Homeless Persons Assistance Act have been amended to increase the level of food and accommodation, and meal subsidies paid to voluntary organisations providing these services to homeless people;
the Government's allocation of $10m to a three year capital funding program for homeless persons, with special provisions for homeless young people. I have already announced the first stage of this program and will make a further announcement of projects approved for funding in the near future,
Lost or Damaged Defence Equipment
(Question No. 205)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
(1) What items of defence equipment with ,an initial cost exceeding $50,000 have been lost or damaged through accident or misadventure in each of the last 5 years.
(2) What was the estimated cost of replacement in each case at the time of the loss or damage.
(3) Were official inquiries conducted into each accident; if not, why not.
(4) Where inquiries were conducted. what were the findings with regard to (a) the cause and (b) actions that should be taken with respect of the losses.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The span of the question as put could include a large number of very small damage incidents to weapons systems and equipment used by the three Services. The manpower hours that would be needed to extract details o{each accident and incident is prohibitive.
The information provided below is restricted to weapons systems, the initial cost of which exceeds $50.000, and which have been lost or damaged beyond repair.

Weapons System
Mirage Mirage Mirage BellLOH Mirage . Mirage collision (2
aircraft lost) Mirage . . Sea King Tracker (9 aircraft
lost)

Inquiry Findings
1976 Pilot error-No action recommended Fire while airborne in engine combustion chamber-No action recommended Engine failure during landing,-Inquiry recommended review of service manuals Pilot error-Disciplinary action taken against pilot Pilot error-Inquiry recommended a review of night departures MisadventureNo further action recommended by Court of Inquiry
Undercarriage failureInquiry recommended a review of servicing manuals Failure of engine component-Sea Kings were modified Fire caused by deliberate action. Security and firefighting measures revised. Policy re storage of aircraft
in hangars revised

3564 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Weapons System
Mirage
Pilatus Porter FIIIC Sea King Wessex BellLOH Iroquois FlllC Mirage

Inquiry Findings

----~-----

-~-

1977

Unknown-No further action recommended by Court of Inquiry in view of death of pilot and uncer-
tainty re cause of accident Pilot error--No action recommended Engine failure-Inquiry recommended amendments to servicing manuals Pilot error-No action recommended
Engine Failure-Other aircraft inspected Pilot error-No action recommended Pilot error-- No action recommended Birdstrike-No further action recommended by Court of Inquiry Bearing failure in aircraft engine. Review of servicing manuals recommended

FlllC Iroquois

1978
Cause unknown-United States Air Force/RAAF Amendment channels reviewed Pilot error. Inquiry recommended amendments to procedures

CT4 Trainer Sinking of
LARC-V amphibian at Davis, Antarctica Mirage . . .

Pilot error. Pilot reprimanded Operator error in overloading. No action recommended
Tyre deflation on take-off. Inquiry recommended review of maintenance procedures

Skyhawk Skyhawk
Sea King Macchi Mirage . CT4Trainer Fllle
Skyhawk

1979
Engine failure. No action recommended Equipment failure in HMAS MELBOURNE-revised procedures introduced in both Garden Island
Dockyard and HMAS MELBOURNE Not yet determined-technical investigations are yet to be completed Pilot error (trainee). Inquiry recommended amendment to training program Landing gear failure. Inquiry recommended review of service manuals Pilot error (Deceased). Review of procedures recommended Engine blowout (ingestion of water on take-off)-Inquiry recommended amendments to emergency pro-
cedures Aircraft lost overboard in heavy seas. Flight deck handling procedures reviewed

1980

Macchi

Mechanical failure (canopy opened). Inquiry recommended revision of maintenance manuals

Mirage.

. Airborne foreign object damage (suspected bomb fragment )-Bombing regulations were reviewed

Light Observation Unknown-probably atmospheric conditions. No further action recommended

Helicopter

Skyhawk

Engine failure

Mirage . . . . Undercarriage failure. Inquiry recommended review of service manual

Light Observation Power Loss. No further action recommended

Helicopter

Skyhawk Skyhawk

Engine failure Support services error-catapult drill error

Pilatus Porter

Result oflnquiry not yet available

-----,,-~~ ~----~~

(2) There is no policy requiring the replacement of a lost aircraft or other major equipment. Therefore, no calculation is made or needed to consider individual attrition replacements.

(2) Do any special arrangements made include (a) increased employment of disabled persons and (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building or other facility occupied by his Department; if so, what are the details.

(3) Yes. (4) See (I) above.

(3) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to facilitate any special arrangements for disabled persons in his Department.

Department of the Prime Minister: Special Arrangements fol' Disabled Persons
(Question No 458)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) In view of the fact that 1981 is designated as the International Year of Disabled Persons, what special arrangements has his Department made to assist disabled persons.

Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Government has given its full support to the International Year of Disabled Persons. The situation with the Public Service Board and departments generally is as follows:
(1) The Government and the Public Service Board have a policy of equal employment opportunity in the Australian Public Service. That policy is in keeping with the Government's endorsement of 'access to all aspects of community

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3565

life' as one of the themes of IYDP. The policy of equal employment opportunity applies to disabled people seeking employment, or already employed, in the Australian Public Service.
Disabled people employed in the Public Service receive the same rates of pay, have the same job classifications, have the same terms and conditions of employment and have the same promotion opportunities as their non-disabled peers in comparable jobs.
1981 marks the end of a decade of active involvement by the Public Service Board to ensure that disabled people have equality of opportunity in the Australian Public Service. The full list of steps taken by the Board is quite extensive. I will forward to the Honourable Member a resume of these initiatives, together with other material produced by the Public Service Board on the employment of disabled people in the Australian Public Service.
As part of its commitment to the IYDP the Public Service Board is consolidating and extending its recruitment-based activities to ensure that people with disabilities continue to achieve. equal access to the Service. The Board has produced special recruitment literature and posters which aim to imform disabled people that they can apply for jobs in the Public Service and expect to get 'a fair go'. Special recruitment activities, using this new literature, have been planned for 1981. The Public Service will also continue to provide work therapy opportunities for up to 200 rehabilitees in 1981 under the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service's work therapy scheme. The Board's activities to promote equal access to the Public Service and the recruitment of disabled people is an integral part of its equal employment opportunity program, a program which will continue well beyond 1981.
The Public Service Board is concerned that equality of employment not be viewed solely as a matter involving recruitment and placement of disabled people. Other important facets of equal employment opportunity, in which departments have an important role to play, include induction and orientation, access and job site modification, personnel development and training and rehabilitation of disabled staff. Permanent Heads of all departments have given the Board their full and active support for the implementation ofEEO for disabled staff in this and future years.
To assist departments to focus on the needs of their disabled staff the Board is also conducting a series of seminars for senior managers on the employment of people with disabilities. The seminar series commenced in May and will continue on a monthly basis during 1981 and into early 1982.
Departments have already taken steps to improve the employment position of their disabled staff. For example, the Department of Industrial Relations is consulting with its disabled employees concerning access, modification of amenities, training and career opportunities. It is also fostering a greater consciousness amongst its staff of the problems faced by disabled people, modifying amenities to reduce difficulties for disabled employees and training stafr in the supervision of disabled employees.
The Department of Employment and Youth Affairs, which is heavily involved in IYDP through the Government's programs for the employment of disabled people in the broader community has been expending considerable effort to modify the working environment, to obtain aids and provide induction, training and developmental programs for its disabled employees.
In the Department of Defence a special video program has been produced showing disabled staff at work in the Department. The video promotes positive attitudes towards the employment of disabled people. The Department of Transport is also planning an education program to inform staff about the

disabled, their rights as individuals and citizens and the causes and prevention of disablement.
The Department of Housing and Construction, as part of its commitment to IYDP, has undertaken a survey of staff to determine the number of disabled people employed, the nature of the disability and the difficulties they face in the work environment. This survey indicated that 6.4 percent of its staff were disabled. The Department of Capital Territory is also undertaking a survey of its staff.
2(a) The Public Service Board, the employing authority in the Australian Public Service, has Special Placement Officers in each of its Regional Offices to assist in the recruitment and placement of disabled people. Special Placement Officers are able to arrange modified selection tests which take into account the applicant's disability e.g. for blind applicants tests can be administered in braille or on tape, for deaf applicants an interpreter can be provided.
In 1980 the Special Placement Officers assisted 802 disabled applicants, of whom 251 were placed in employment. 20 percent of disabled applicants gained permanent jobs in the Public Service. This compares favourably with non-disabled applicants where only 15 percent were permanently appointed to comparable positions. Departments which took a substantial number of special placements during 1980 included Defence, Education, Employment and Youth Affairs, Home Affairs and Environment, Social Security and Veterans' Affairs, together with the Australian Bureau of Statistics and the Australian Taxation Office. All departments accept, wherever possible, disabled new entrants referred to them by the Special Placement Officers.
The steps being taken by the Board to further increase the numbers of disabled people employed in the Public Service are detailed in (1) above.
2(b) There is a long-standing policy of ensuring that public buildings constructed by the Commonwealth permit reasonable access by disabled people and comply with the Australian Standards relating to Design Rules for Access by the Disabled. Access for disabled people has been provided in such buildings as the FamilyjChildren's Court building and the Public Service Board's McLachlan Offices in Canberra. The Australian Defence Force Academy will include in certain areas special facilities for the disabled. The provision of facilities for disabled people is included in the refurbishment program for the Administrative Building, occupied by the Departments of Foreign Affairs and Attorney-General's.
In its capacity as the central property authority, the Department of Administrative Services, in conjunction with the Department of Housing and Construction, is implementing a strategy for access modifications to Commonwealth-owned buildings. This involves a survey of over 500 buildings to identify any necessary modification work. Details on the Government's activities were provided by my colleague Mr McVeigh in answer to question 483 on 26 March 1981 (Hansard Page 1062).
(3) Departmental IYDP programs are being funded within their overall 1980-81 budget allocations. The Commonwealth however has provided substantial funds as part of its commitment to IYDP. They include provision of:
$lm (over two financial years) for a national publicity and community information campaign.
$500,000 to the Australian Council for the Rehabilitation of the Disabled (ACROD) for the establishment of a national headquarters in Australia.
$400,000 in the Children's Services Program for innovative projects for disabled children and their families.
$250,000 in 1980-81 to the Department of Housing and Construction to commence access modification works in 27 Commonwealth-owned buildings.

3566 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

S700,ooO in 1980-81 towards the provision of a range of aids to daily Jiving under the new program of aids for disabled people.
International Year of Disabled Persons: Federal Public Service
(Question No. 484)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
What provision has the Public Service Board made in standards of pay, job classification, organisation, recruitment, staffing and terms and conditions of employment for Federal public servants in preparation for the International Year of Disabled Persons.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
See the answer to Question No. 458.
Vietnam: Use of Herbicides and Pesticides
(Question No. 493)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Has the Attorney-Genera!'s attention been drawn to the article headed 'KRIEGSRAISON GEHT VOR KRIEGSRECHT-The cause of War goes before the Law of War' (Pacific Defence Reporter, November 1980, pages S9 to 68).
(2) If so, has the Attorney-General or the AttorneryGenera!'s Department or any of the Attorney-General's predecessors provided any Australian Government with a legal opinion since January 1965 on whether herbicides and pesticides used in Vietnam during the war there were or were not covered by the 1925 Geneva Convention on chemical and bacteriological warfare.
(3) If an opinion was provided, will the Attorney-General present it to the Parliament.
(4) If the Attorney-General does not propose to present the opinion will he give the substance of it; if not, why not.
(5) If no opinion has been provided before 24 February 1981, has one been requested by the Governments since January 1980.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.
(2) The Attorney-General has not provided any such opinion. There is no record of any such written opinion by a former Attorney-General or by the Department.
(3) See (2).
(4) Does not apply. The honourable member's attention is drawn to the usual practice under which the Government does not reveal the content oflegal advice.
(5) No.
Coastal Surveillance: Expenditure by Department ofDefence
(Question No. 565)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:

(1) What sum was (a) appropriated and (b) actually spent by his Department on coastal surveillance for (i) 1977-78, (ii) 1978-79 and (iii) 1979-80.
(2) What were the main items of expenditure and cost attributed to each item.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a), (b) and (2) No amounts are specifically appropriated to the Department of Defence for expenditure on coastal surveillance. Expenditure on coastal surveillance activities is funded from the appropriations covering all activities of the Defence Force. It is not practicable, other than by apportioning on an arbitrary basis or by historical costing, to separate expenditure on each activity such as surveillance.
Estimates of the direct costs of coastal surveillance are made, based on records of Coastal Surveillance activities undertaken by the Defence Force. The estimated direct costs in 1977-78, 1978-79 and 1979-80 at historical prices, are as follows:

Patrol Boats Aircraft
Total

1977-78
Sm 3.2 7.5
10.7

1978-79
$m 4.4 7.0
11.4

1979-80
$m 6.4 7.0
13.4

The estimates exclude Army Nomad aircraft activity in 1978-79 and 1979-80 for which costs were recovered from the relevant department.
Vietnam: Use of Herbicides and Pesticides
(Question No. 586)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
Further to his answer to a question without notice from the honourable member for Capricornia on the subject of herbicides and pesticides used in Vietnam, (Hansard, 18 September 1980, pages 1472 and 1473), can he now state (a) was he referring to the group of Ministers, or the Inter-Departmental Committee, or both, when speaking of all the Defence Department documents relating to chemicals sprayed in Vietnam during hostilities there, having been referred to the group which is considering all the ramifications of the issue, (b) what aspects of the question were referred, to which offices were they referred, and when were they referred, (c) have the relevant officers now provided him with the answers sought in whole or in part; if so, what are the details and (d) if the answers sought have not yet been provided to him, will he (i) undertake to obtain those answers as a matter of urgency and (ii) make an undertaking to supply those answers to the honourable member for Capricornia and myself; if not, why not.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Department of Defence has contributed to a comprehensive report, co-ordinated by the Department of Health, on the use and Effects ofpesticides.
A copy of the Report, entitled: 'Pesticides Used in Vietnam Hostilities and their Use in Australian Agriculture: A Comparative Study', is being placed in the Parliamentary Library.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3567

Defence Service Home Loans
(Question No. 631)
Mr Humphl-eys asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(1,) Is it a fact that members of the Australian defence forces with entitlement to a defence service home loan, have on occasion, had to forgo the opportunity to finalise purchase of a house, and, in addition, have incurred considerable expense, due to delays in obtaining evidence of service from the Central Army Records Office.
:.
. (2) If so, what action will he take to expedite the loan authorisation process.
MrKillen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) While I understand that some delays in providing evidence of service to support applications for Defence Service Homeslqans occasionally occur, the Defence Service Homes Corporation has confirmed that the service provided by the Central Army Records Office is most satisfactory. I am aware of only one recent instance where a Serviceman was unable to finalise the purchase of a house because of a delay in the provision of evidence of service. In this instance the delay was caused by a telephoned request for details being inadvertently not actioned.
(2) The'Central Army Records Office and the Defence Service Homes Corporation have now instituted a procedure whereby all requests for information are to be in writing, although urgent requests may be preceded by a telephone call.
Invalid Pensions: Electoral Division ofPerth
(Question No. 707)
Mr McLean asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 4 March 1981:
(1) How many persons in the electoral division of Perth were granted an invalid pension in (a) 1978-79 and (b) 1979-80.
(2) Have-there been any changes since 1 January 1980 in the interpretation of Section 23 of the Social Services Act regarding the assessment of eligibility for an invalid pension; if so,
(a) what changes have taken place and
(b) from what date did the changes become operative.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) The Department of Social Security does not maintain as part of its regular statistical collections statistics of grants of invalid pension by electoral division. The number of invalid pensions granted in Western Australia was 3399 during 1978-79 and 2991 during 1979-80. The number of persons in the electoral division of Perth in receipt of an invalid pension was 2380 at 30 June 1979 and 2440 at 30 June 1980.
(2) There has been no change in the eligibility criteria for invalid pension since 1 January 1980. In order to qualify for an invalid pension a claimant must be permanently incapacitated for work to the extent of at least 85 percent or be permanently blind. Determination of whether this qualification is met is made in conformity with established medical criteria which take into account the degree of the claimant's impair. ment together with relevant facts about the applicant such as age, sex, education, lack of skills and personal disabilities. In

reaching its decision, my Department is guided by the opinion of the Department of Health.
However, during the period in question there have been changes in the procedures for processing invalid pension applications.
New claim forms and associated documents have been introduced (the former Minister for Social Security advised the Senate of the introduction of the new claim form on 20 February 1980).
Additionally, on a State by State basis, a system was progressively implemented over the period January to September 1980 under which medical reports prepared by Commonwealth Medical Officers are reviewed by senior medical officers in the Department of Health. This procedure was designed to ensure consistency in the application of the criteria throughout Australia.
Further, on 7 May 198] the Minister for Health and I issued revised guidelines for use in the assessment of eligibility for invalid pension. These clarify the eligibility criteria stated above and are publicly available.
Vietnam: Use of Herbicides and Pesticides
(Question No. 719)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 5 March 1981:
(I) What (a) Australian and (b) foreign companies, operating in Australia between 1960 and 1972, supplied chemicals to Australian defence forces for use as herbicides and pesticides in Vietnam during hostilities there.
(2) For each of those companies, what was the (a) generic name and trade name of each of the chemicals supplied, (b) quantity of each chemical supplied, (c) cost of each supply contract, and (d) period during which chemicals were supplied.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Information about the sources, types and quantities of herbicides purchased for use in Vietnam is contained in a report co-ordinated by the Department of Health, entitled: 'Pesl :cides Used in Vietnam Hostilities and their Use in Australian Agriculture: A Comparative Study.' A copy of the report is being placed in the parliamentary Library. Information on the use of chemicals in Vietnam is being sought by the Commonwealth Institute of Health from participants in its pilot epidemiological study.
The Department of Defence has provided information on the use of herbicides in Vietnam to the Institute. It will continue to co-operate in providing whatever other available information is sought by the Institute.
Service Pensions
(Question No. 766)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice on 11 March 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the long delays of up to 3 months suffered by pension applicants as a result of the inability of his Department to make available the necessary Service documents.
(2) What are the reasons for these delays and will action be taken to rectify this situation.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

3568 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

There are three classes of pension applicants necessitating provision of documentation by the Department of Defence in support of their applications. These classes are:
(a) Service personnel applying for retirement benefits, on other than invalidity grounds, to the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits (DFRDB) Authority;
(b) Service personnel applying for retirement benefits, on invalidity grounds, to the DFRDB Authority; and
(c) Ex-Service personnel applying for repatriation benefits to the Department of Veterans' Affairs.
The majority of such pension applications are those to the DFRDB Authority relating to retirements on other than invalidity grounds. During the period from 1 January 1981 to 12 May 1981 the average time between date of discharge and receipt of the necessary documents by the DFRDB Authority was:
Navy-5days Army-2days Air Force-3 days
In cases of retirement on invalidity grounds, more detailed documentation is required before the DFRDB Authority can commence its consideration of the applications. This documentation includes Service Medical Board reports and details of the Service member's skills, qualifications and experience.
Generally, a longer time is required than that taken to provide documentation for retirements on other than invalidity grounds, and Some delays occasionally occur due to the complexity of individual cases.
For the small number of repatriation benefit applications which require documentation from the Department of Defence, the details are usually forwarded to the Department of Veterans' Affairs within two weeks. Again, where files have to be retrieved from archives or where subsequent investigations of circumstances surrounding the application are required to be carried out, the provision of all documentation may be delayed.
The Department of Defence treats all requests for such supporting documentation as expeditiously as possible
Public Trustee, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 774)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that there is no Public Trustee in the Australian Capital Territory; if so, what action has been taken to provide alternative facilities for Australian Capital Territory residents who wish to make their wills naming the Public Trustee as executor.
(2) When will the (a) Public Trustee Ordinance and (b) Mental Health Ordinance be completed.
(3) What fees structure applies in the matters handled by the Australian Capital Territory Curator of Deceased Estates.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes; Where the Curator of Estates of Deceased Persons, a statutory officer under the Administration and Probate Ordinance 1929, is appointed by will to act the Supreme Court may grant him an order to collect and administer the estate of any deceased person leaving property within the Australian Capital Territory.
(2) (a) 1 expect that the Public Trustee Ordinance will be available for submission to the House of Assembly before the end of this year.

(b) Administrative responsibility for the proposed Mental Health Ordinance rests with the Minister for Health. I am informed that the Minister intends that a draft Ordinance will be ready for referral to the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly later this year, the International Year of Disabled Persons, with every effort being made to have the Ordinance in operation before the end of the year.
(3) Under section 87 of the Administration and Probate Ordinance 1929, the Curator is required to charge an estate, which he is administering, commission at the rate of 5 per cent on:
(a) all moneys in the estate which he collects, including money received as income or from the realization of assets; and
(b) the value, fixed by the Curator, of property transferred to a beneficiary where the property is not converted into money.
The requirement to charge commission does not apply to an estate the value of which does not exceed $30,000.
Australian National University: Student Fees
(Question No. 804)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
Does the statute adopted by the Australian National University pursuant to the Australian National University Amend ment Act 1979 reflect the policy and intentions of the Government in seeking a reduction of services and amenities fees for students who do not wish to have part of the fees they have paid appropriated for socio-political purposes; if not, will the Government frame further legislative amendments to ensure that its requirements are met.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The purpose of the Student Organisations (Amenities and Services) Statute is to prescribe the amenities and services on which fees monies compulsorily collected from all students may be spent. Where the Council of the University makes compulsory fees monies available to a student organisation for the provision by that organisation of amenities or services, then it is the duty of the Council to ensure that the monies are applied only in respect of amenities and services that are not of an academic nature, that are of direct benefit to the University, and that have been declared in a University statute to be amenities or services in respect of that organisation.
The current provisions of the Australian National University Act enable the University to charge lower fees to students who indicate their wish not to join particular student associations, but do not require the University to do so. It has been the Government's wish for the University to act to see that students who join a particular student organisation pay a separate membership fee, the proceeds of which are to be directed towards supporting voluntary activities which are not eligible for support from the proceeds of the compulsory fee for amenities and services payable by all students. Such an arrangement would present a clear distinction between the students who choose to join an organisation and those who do not.
The Government, after reviewing the operation of the 1979 amendments at the Australian National University during 1980, decided to introduce further amending legislation which has now passed both Houses of Parliament. The purpose of this legislation is threefold. First, it makes income derived from the application of compulsory student fees moneys subject to the same conditions as the fees themselves. Second, where both compulsory fees moneys and other moneys are applied with the effect of producing income, that income must

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3569

be apportioned according to the applications. Third, the administrative expenses of student organisations must also be apportioned, so that only activities devoted to the provision of student amenities and services can be a charge on compulsory fees moneys. With the enactment of this legislation, the Government is confident that compulsory fees moneys cannot be used by student organisations directly or indirectly for the funding of socio.political activities.
North West Cape Communications System
(Question No. 975)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the testimony before the United States of America House of Representatives Subcommittee on Military Construction Appropriations in 1979 to the effect that the US Navy has requested $2.5m to construct at North West Cape a ground terminal for the Fleet Satellite Communications (FLTSATCOM) System and the Defence Satellite Communications System (DSCS).
(2) Is it a fact that an agreement has been made between the Australian and US Governments that North West Cape is to be a ground terminal for the FLTSATCOM system.
(3) If so, is the ground station to be constructed at North West Cape for the FLTSATCOM system the same terminal as that previously announced for the DSCS at North West Cape.
(4) If it is not the same terminal what is the formal desig. nation of the new FLTSATCOM terminal and when is it to become operational.
(5) Has a contract been let for the supply of AN WSC-3 UHF radio equipment to the Royal Australian Navy and are WSC-3 radio sets to be installed on all units of the Fleet and most RAN shore establishments.
(6) Is he able to say whether the AN WSC-3 UHF satellite communications equipment produced by E-Systems Inc. (ECI Division) of St Petersburg, Florida, USA, was devel. oped specifically as part of the US Navy's Fleet Satellite Communications System.
(7) Are the RAN'S new AN WSC-3 radio sets to operate through the US Navy's FLTSATCOM satellites; if so, will FLTSATCOM ground terminals other than that at North West Cape be used for controlling satellites used by the WSC-3 radio equipment installed on RAN vessels.
(8) If other FLTSATCOM ground terminals are to be used, where are they located.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. The appropriation request for $2.5m relates to the construction associated with the installation of the GSC-39 V(I) satellite communications ground terminal (formerly designated MSC-61), at North West Cape. I informed Parliament in March 1979 that installation of this terminal had the Government's support. The terminal will be part of the Defence Satellite Communications System (DSCS III), not the Fleet Satellite Communications System (FLTSATCOM).
(2), (3) and (4) There are no plans for an additional FLTSATCOM terminal to be installed at North West Cape. The station has had a FLTSATCOM receive-only terminal in operation for several years.
(5) A contract was placed with E-System Inc. (ECI Division) of St Petersburg, Florida, USA in April 1980 for the provision of AN/WSC-3 (RAN VI) UHF transceivers and ancillary equipment. These radios will be fitted in most RAN ships and shore establishments. It should be noted that the

UN's AN/WSC-3 equipment and the RAN's AN/WSC.3 (RAN VI) equipment are similar but not identical radios.
(6) Both the ANjWSC.3and AN/WSC.3 (RAN VI) radios arc intended for use on normal line of sight tactical radio circuits. It would not be correct to say that they were developed specifically as part of the FLTSATCOM system.
(7) Some ancillary equipments have b~en ordered for the AN /WSC-3 (RAN VI) equipment to permit access to FLTSA TCOM satellites to provide communications interoperability at sea with ships of our allies. The. ground stations which control access to the com111unications channels on the FLTSATCOM sateliites are lo-cated at Norfolk Virginia, Honolulu, Guam, Stockton California: and Naples Italy. The ground terminal at North West Cape can only receive messages from FLTSATCOM satellites, not transmit them. Nor can it control them.
(8) The FLTSATeOM system is a US system and the US places its ground stations (and mobile stations) according to its own needs. With regard to the Australian equipment, there are no plans for accessing the F.LTSATCOM system other than those referred to in the answer to part 7.
Royal Australian Air Force Drivers: Exposure to Malathion Vapour
(Question No. 992)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 1 April 1981 :
(I) Was there an incident involving 2 Royal Australian Air Force drivers in Mt Isa, Queensland, on 7 November 1980 which necessitated their hospitalisation following their exposure to Malathion vapour from.corroded drums; if so will he now table in the House the following documents: (a) BSDAR 2126j133EQ Ptl (8) of 19 November 1980, (b) DI(AF)SUP lOA Report AMSDAR Ij80 of 19 November 1980, (c) BSFBN SIG MOP H470 of 4 August 1980, (d) BSFBN 2119jl1l/EQ Ptl (51) of 5 January 1981, 2SD 704/3jPl Ptl (9) of 27 January 1981 and (f) DEFAIR QM767 jDMOVT-AF of24 January 1981.
(2) If he will not table these documents, what is the reason.
(3) What was the reason for the transfer of the Maldis'on (Malathion) from Sydney to Darwin.
(4) Has any further action been taken, other than that outlined by Group Captain L. D. Wilkinson in his report dated 4 March 1981, Ref. 2122/1/2493 Ptl (B), to ensure proper precautions to safeguard service personnel against the hazards of toxic chemicals.
Mr KiIlen--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Yes. Two RAAF drivers were held overnight at Mt Isa hospital on 7 November 1980 for observation after exposure to Malathion. They were subsequently treated as out-patients at the Base Medical Flight, RAAF Base Darwin between 13 and 16 November 1980, during which time, blood specimens were taken for analysis. When last seen by the Senior Medical Officer RAAF Darwin on 16 November 1980, the drivers were free from any symptoms of effects from the exposure. The documents requested can be tabled and I will arrange for this to be done as soon as possible. However, the names of two non-commissioned officers involved in this incident have been blanked out of these documents because a formal inquiry into this matter was not convened and the individuals were not given the protection of the Air Force Rule of Procedures 125A (B).
(3) The Malathion was required by RAAF Darwin for use by the Hygiene Section for insect control.
(4) All drums of Malathion held are being inspected for possible corrosion. The general matter of pesticide use in the

3570 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Defence Force is monitored by the Pesticides Sub-Committee of the Medical Services Advisory Committee. A comprehensive Joint Service Manual on the handling and use of pesticides is being produced by this Sub-Committee.

(the Department was formed in December 1976), (b) 619,

(c) 704, (d) 830 and (e) 657.

.

(2) The total cost of this air travel was $596,730.

Movement of Freight and Personnel between Australia and Butterworth Air Base
(Question No. 1090)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 7 Apri11981:
What was the cost of chartering aircraft for the movement of freight and personnel between Australia and Butterworth Air Base, Malaysia, during (a) 1977-78, (b) 1978-79, (c) 1979-80 and (d) the period lJuly-31 December 1980.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
All aircraft chartered during the specified periods were used for the movement of personnel between Australia and Butterworth Air Base, Malaysia. No aircraft were chartered for the movement of freight. The hire charges for the aircraft chartered were as follows:
(a) 1977-78; $1,098,350 (b) 1978-79; $673,800 (e) 1979-80; $101,000 (d) 1 July 1980 to 31 December 1980; Nil
Underspending of Estimates: Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 1114)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division 120-Administrative.
(2) Has there been an underspending in this division by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, 'Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos. 1 and 2) 1980-81'; ifso, what is the reason.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
1 refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1101 given by the Treasurer on behalf of the Minister for Finance on 13 May 1981 (Hansard, page 2374).
Departmental Air Travel: Department of Finance
(Question No. 1136)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(1) How many travel warrants have been issued for Department of Finance officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the cost of this travel.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) The number of travel warrants issued by the Department for officers' air travel to and from Canberra was (a) 303,

Departmental Air Travel: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 1146)
Mrs. Darling asked the Minister for Business and C~)!1sumer Affairs,. upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) How many travel warrants have been issued for his Departmental officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
.Mr Moore-The information concerning parts (1) (a), (b) and (c) of the question is not readily available and would require a commitment of considerable resources that I would not be prepared to authorise. The answers for parts (I) (d) and (e), and (2) are as follows:
(I) (d) 1749; (e) 1363.
(2) $597,140.55 (period 1 July 1979-31 March 1981).

Defence Services: Resignations
(Question No. 1162)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:

(1) How many (a) officers, (b) non-commissioned officers and (c) other ranks (i) resigned and (ii) failed to re-engage in each Service for each quarter of each year since 1976.

(2) How many of these personnel were (a) technicaily skilled and (b) non-technically skilled (i) males and (ii) females.

(3) What proportion of the existing current strength of each service do the (a) males and (b) females who (i) resigned and (ii) failed to re-engage constitute.

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Table I presents the data for officers and other ranks who resigned and failed to re-engage, by service for each quarter of each year since 1976. The table does not differentiate between non-commissioned officers and other ranks as this information is not held by the Services in a readily accessible formal.

The division of technically and non-technically skilled per-

sonnel who have left the Services is shown at Table 2. Navy

figures incorporate 990 personnel, who over the period,

elected to leave the Service on free discharge. Because of

Navy personnel statistical limitations these sailors cannot be

readily classified into technical and non-technical categories.

Army does not hold the req uired information in a readily

available formal. However, figures were for the calendar year 1980. These figures

einxctlruadceteadllmfoarnmusalolyf

discharge but are considered by Army Office as being rep-

resentative of the previous four years in indicating the relative

loss rate of technical personnel.

Table 3 shows the specific wastage rates requested expressed as a percentage of December 1980 strengths.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3571

Table 1
QUARTERLY SUMMARIES OF SERVICES RESIGNATIONS AND FAILURES TO
RE-ENGAGE-MARCH 1976 TO MARCH 1981
Officers

Quarter Ending

Air Navy Army Force Total

March 1976 June 1976 September 1976 December 1976 March 1977 June 1977 September 1977 December 1977 March 1978 June 1978

40

68

98 206

17

64

80 161

23

44

61 128

20

35

40

95

20

67

60 147

15

45

47 107

12

52

59 123

20

36

59 115

51

75

81 207

22

40

51 113

Quarter Ending
September 1978 December 1978 March 1979 June 1979 September 1979 December 1979 March 1980 June 80 September 1980 December 1980 March 1981
Total

OTHER RANKS

Navy 20 15 36 33 21 14 28 20 47 16 22
512

Army 47 46 85 60 66 42 101 54 63 48 89
1,227

Air Force
62 47 101
72
81 39 97 54 56 53 91
1,389

Total
129 108
222
165 168 95 226 128 166 117 202
3,128

Failed to re-engage

Left at own request

QUARTER ENDING

Navy

Army

Air Force

Total

Navy

Army

Air Force

Total

Overall Total

March 1976 June 1976 September 1976 December 1976 March 1977 June 1977 September 1977 December 1977 March 1978 June 1978 September 1978 December 1978 March 1979 June 79 September 1979 December 1979 March 1980 June 1980 September 1980 December 1980 March 1981

120

451

251

822

187

230

193

610

1,432

93

379

138

610

153

278

245

676

1,286

114

319

133

566

159

258

211

528

l,l94

61

184

90

335

132

215

154

501

836

100

394

275

769

192

167

177

536

1,305

88

346

231

665

123

179

178

480

1,145

113

342

179

634

123

225

228

576

1,210

94

296

104

494

117

178

160

455

949

195

532

287 1,014

140

195

213

548

1,562

121

383

278

782

120

188

193

501

1,283

162

367

151

680

132

209

209

550

1,230

75

192

72

339

109

213

164

486

825

127

480

206

813

138

232

226

596

1,409

100

454

159

713

134

240

241

615

1,328

110

383

III

604

170

260

204

634

1,238

62

231

68

361

90

219

148

457

818

92

423

283

798

148

182

209

539

1,337

80

416

152

648

119

158

149

426

1,074

116

306

167

589

165

263

192

620

1,209

59

236

103

398

167

218

148

533

931

61

398

352

811

102

202

197

501

1,312

Total

2,143 7,512 3,790 13,445 2,920 4,509 4,039 11,468

24,913

Table 2 LOSS OF TECHNICALLY AND NON-TECHNICALLY SKILLED SERVICE
PERSONNEL Officers

Technical

Nontechnical

Navy 1976-1980 Male Female
Air Force 1976-1980 Male
Female Army 1980 (Only)
Male Female

110

339

63

302

985

102

68

220

102

NON-COMMISSIONED OFFICERS AND OTHER RANKS

Technical

Non-

Not

tecnical classified

Navy 1967-1980 Male

1,658

1,776

990

Female

639

Air Force 1976-1980

Male

2,926

3,519

Female

3

1,381

Army 1980 (Only) Male

252

3,146

Female

163

3572 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Table 3
SPECIFIC WASTAGE RATES FOR 1980 EXPRESSED AS A PERCENTAGE OF DECEMBER 1980 STRENGTHS

are received regarding difficulties in cashing cheques. Arrangements have been made to telegraph money to claimants
who live in remote areas where a need for urgent assistance has been indicated.

Officers

Other ranks

Resigned

At own Failed to Request Re-engage

Navy Male
Female Army
Male
Female Air force Male
Female

%

%

%

4.6

3.7

2.1

20.8

8.5

5.6

6.1

2.6

5.1

7.0

9.4

2.2

7.3

2.8

3.4

8.1

14.3

8.4

Family Assistance Payments
(Question No. 1187)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(1) Has the Minister or the Department of Social Security received representations from certain organisations expressing concern over some aspects of the discontinuance of family assistance payments through the Queensland Department of Children's services and the transfer of this responsibility to the Department of Social Security.
(2) Have additional counter or clerical staff been appointed to the Department to deal with extra clients.
(3) Is it anticipated that up to 12,000 extra clients will be dealt with by the Department as a result of the transfer.
(4) Has any provision been made for extra social work staff for women in crisis.
(5) What provisions have been made for immediate cash payments for women in desperate circumstances who may have difficulty in cashing a cheque.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(l) About ten representations concerning this transfer of responsibility have been received.
(2) Some additional clerical staff have been allocated where necessary to ensure that undue delays do not occur.
(3) It is estimated that an additional 7,600 claims for supporting parent's benefit were received in Queensland during the period to 8 May 1981, and that some 6,800 sole parents were granted supporting parent's benefit during the same period solely as a result of the reduction in 'waiting period' for supporting parent's benefit as from I November 1980. It is not known what proportion of these people would have previously been eligible for Family Assistance Payments.
(4) Although no additional social work staff have been appointed, the Department is providing a service to those in urgent need of assistance. In addition, the Department of Children's Services in Queensland is continuing to provide the family counselling services which have traditionally been the responsibility of the State Government.
(5) No provisions have been made for immediate cash payments of benefits; however it is extremely rare that complaints

Expenditure Commitments: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 1212)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What specific commitments for expenditure, excluding normal recurring costs of running the Department such as salaries and administrative costs, does his Department have for (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that when a similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining the information would involve collection of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.
(4) Has the development of forward estimates in his Department now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer valid.
Mr Nixon-In answer to the honourable member's question I would refer him to the reply provided to Question No. 1216 by the Minister for Finance which appears in the weekly Hansard of 10 June 1981.
Expenditure Commitments: Department of Education
(Question No. 1222)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) What specific commitments for expenditure, excluding normal recurring costs of running the Department such as salaries and administrative costs, does his Department have for (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that when a similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining the information would involve collection of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.
(4) Has the development of forward estimates to his Department now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer valid.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1216 (Hansard, 10 June 1981) provided by the Minister for Finance.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3573

Expenditure Commitments: Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1228)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What specific commitments for expenditure, excluding normal recurring costs of running the Department such as salaries and administrative costs, does the Department of Veterans' Affairs havefor (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
(3) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the fact that when a similar question was answered hy a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining the information would involve collection of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.
(4) Has the development of forward estimates in the Department of Veterans' Affairs now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer valid.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Minister representing the Minister for Finance to QuestionNo.1216.

Annual Reports and Other Publications: Minister for Foreign Affairs
(Question No. 1237)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) Department of Foreign Affairs Annual Report
(b) Australia-Japan Foundation Annual Report
(c) Australian Development Assistance Bureau Annual Review
(d) Australia-China Council Annual Report.
(2) (a) Department of Foreign Affairs Annual Reporl-$5,830
(b) Australia-Japan Foundation Annual Report-$2,500
(c) Australian Development Assistance Bureau Annual Review (2 editions)-$7,359
(d) Australia-China Council Annual Report- --5850
(3) Yes.
(a) Department of Foreign Affairs

Expenditure 1979-80

1. Historical Documents
2. Australian Foreign Affairs Record (AFAR)

$A 16,167 78,938

Number Printed
Typesetting only 8,240 per edition

3. (a) Treaty Series (b) Select Documents on I nternational Affairs
4. UN Publications (a) Law of the Sea Conference

15,482 480 per edition 4,458 600 per edition 7,308 800 per edition

(b) Antarctic Treaty meetings (c) UNGAReport

357 450 per edition 3,911 550

5. Booklets (a) Hints for Australian Travellers
(b) Statements on Foreign Policy
(c) Minor publications 6. (a) Diplomatic List
(b) Consular List
7. Backgrounder

40,794 750,000

3,132 1,000 per edition

2,200
7,781 4,675
In-house costs only

4,250 per edition 3,000 per edition
approx 1,400 per edition

Distribution
MPs, educational establishments, libraries, media, business organisations, universities and overseas recipients
MPs, some educational establishments, libraries, business organisations and the public
Ministers, MPs, Government officials, overseas posts, tertiary institutions, libraries and the publie
As for Law of the Sea Conference MPs, Australian posts, Government
officials, tertiary institutions and the public
One issue free with each passport
Target groups as for AFAR
MPs, overseas missions in Canberra, Govt. officials, business organisations, etc.
MPs, Parliamentary libraries, public libraries, State & Commonwealth Departments, universities, business orgs., trade unions, Australian posts overseas, mediaelc.

3574 REPRESENTATIVES to June 1981

Answers to Questions

Expenditure 1979-80

9. Outline Series (on various countries)

$A
[n-house costs only

Number Printed
400 per edition

(3) (b) Australian Development Assistance Bureau

1. Budget Paper No.8 2. Bilateral aid program 3. DAC memorandum 4. Key statements on development
assistance

1,891
4,006 187 n.a.

5,730 2,530 500 n.a.

Distribution
Australian posts overseas, Government. Departments, travellers, business organisations1 etc.
For all ADAB pUblications: MPs, Parliamentary libraries, non-government orgs., State & Commonwealth Departments, media orgs., diplomatic missions in Australia

Annual Reports and Other Publications: Minister for Defence
(Question No. 1241)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) and (2) Excluding reports forinternal distribution only, the following annual reports are produced by the Department of Defence and associated bodies:

(3) Excluding publications produced for internal use such as Service Lists and Functional Directories, the following regular publications are produced by the Department of Defence
and associated bodies.

Costs

Other regular publications

Production Distribution

Defence Force Journal Triad Defence Supplement in "Australian Social Studies"
Service newspapers Royal Military College Handbook

$ 35,340 22,750
3,195
*18,343 4,396

$ 4,200
Distribution was made through internal channels
*4,445
Distributed externally by
AGPS

84,024

8,645

Annual Reports 1979-80

Production cost

Defence . . . . . .
Royal Military College .
Service Canteens Trust Fund
'RAN Relief Trust Fund *AMF Relief Trust Fund *RAAF Welfare Trust Fund
RAAF Veterans' Residences T rust Fund
Australian Service Council for Canteens and ASCO Board of Management (combined report)
tDSTO Laboratories Advanced Engineering Laboratory
Electronics Research Laboratory Weapons Systems Research Laboratory
Aeronautical Research Laboratories Materials Research Laboratories
Engineering Development Establishment

$ 4,510 2,977 1,000
328 420 442 140
110
8,534 8,050 8,126 5,778 6,700 1,350

48,465

*The production of these reports is paid for by Defence but they are presented to Parliament by the Minister for Finance.
tThese annual reports are no longer produced. They will be replaced, with substantial savings, by reference documents which will be updated only as required.

*Cost to Defence; remainder from Service amenities and canteens funds.
Annual Reports and Other Publications: Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 1252)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What annual reports arc produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Department of Business and Consumer Affairs Annual Report. Bankruptcy Annual Report. National Companies and Securities Commission Annual Report. Industries Assistance Commission Annual Report. Temporary Assistance Authority Annual Report. Trade Practices Commission Annual Report. Prices Justification Tribunal Annual Report.
(2) $22,572.
(3) Yes.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3575

(3) (a)-

Industries Assistance Commission Inquiry

Reports . . . . . . . . . . .

Temporary Assistance Authority Inquiry

Reports . . . . . . . . . . .

Industries Assistance Commission Circulars

and Information Papers

Trade Practices Commission Bulletin

Annotated Customs Tariff

Australian Customs Information (for passen-

gers) . . . . . .

..

Bureau of Customs Notices . . . . .

COMPILE User Manual . . . . .

Consolidated Customs By-Law References

David and the Helping Hand Book of Child

Safety . . . . . . . . . . . .

Export Procedures and Documentation

General Orders/ Administrative Procedures

Quota Information Brochure . . . . .

Facts about Preferences for Export to

Australia from Canada

A guide for Australian Exports

Facts about Preference for Exports to

Australia from UK

Preference Conditions for N.Z.

Exports to Australia

Manufacturers Index

Facts about the Australian Dumping Law

Australian Customs Valuation

Communicating Information to Disadvan-

taged Consumers

Customs Valuation Information

$
56,437
770
5,706 1,000 333,000
200,000 110,000
2,000 109,000
25,000 4,000 46,999
300
$4,000
15,000 3,000 1,000
4,000 3,000

(3) (b) to obtain the individual distribution costs of the publications listed in (3) (a) would require a commitment of considerable resources that I would not be prepared to authorise. The total cost of the distribution of publications for 1980-81 is anticipated to be approximately $85,000.

Employment of Private Consultants: Department ofPrimary Industry
(Question No. 1264)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80; if so (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed, and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firms.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) A total of seven consultants and one consultancy firm were employed by my Department in 1979-80. Who the consultants or consultancy firms were, the purpose for which they were employed and the payments made to each are detailed below.

(a) Dr A. A. Seawright-employed to produce a monograph on toxicological diseases of animals in Australia-Payment $6,000.00
(b) Professor W. 1. B. Beveridge-employed to produce a monograph on microbiological diseases of animals in Australia-Payment $4,000.00
(c) Dr D. M. Flynn-employed to provide a written report on feral animal control in Australia-Payment $8,000.00
(d) Mr R. R. Pascoe-employed to provide a survey of the needs of the Australian horse industry-Payment $7,000.00
(e) China Consulting and Translation Servicesemployed to provide translation and transcription services during visits by Chinese Vice-Minister for Agricultural Machinery and ,visit by Chinese Sheep and Wool Mission. This firm has also provided ad-hoc translations and transcriptions services-Payment $5,349.00
(f) Ass. Prof. P. Courteney--'-employed to provide a contribution to a report on rural research in Northern Australia-Payment $113.35
(g) Prof. C. G. E. Downing-employed to produce a report on agricultutal engineering, research, development and extension in Australia-Payment $4,017.60
(h) Prof. Freeburn and Mr Edwards-employed to produce a paper on the measuring of a country's gain from research theory and application-Payment $800.00.

Employment of Private Consultants: Department of Defence

(Question No. 1267)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

(1) Were any private consultants or' consultancy firms employed by the Department of Defence in 1979-80; ifso,

(2) How many were employed,

(3) Who were they,

(4) For what purpose was each employed and,

(5) What payments were made to each consultant or con-

sultancy firm.

'

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) Yes-but it should be understood that, in the context of the Public Service Board 'Guidelines for the Engagement of
Consultants and Contractors for Services-May 1978', all outside lecturers and guest session leaders engaged for Defence Force and Departmental approved courses of training are regarded as consultants. These persons are paid sessional fees at the rates prescribed in the Rates of Pay Manual. Examples of this type of consultant are: Eminent persons who lecture to the Joint Services Staff College and individuals who led sessions at Pre-Retirement Counselling seminars.

(2) Excluding outsid'e lecturers a total of 12 individuals and 7 consultancy firms were engaged during 1979-80.

(3,4 and 5) See attached list for details.

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE-CONSULTANTS 1979-80

Serial 2

Consultant Organisation Campbell, Mahlook Partners
Australian Association for pre-Determined Time Standards & Research

Purpose
Train Service Recruiting Officers in Marketing and Sales Techniques
Conduct MODAPTS and SSLP-Master Trainers Course

Payment $
2,575
1,750

3576 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Serial
3 4 5 6

Consultant
Organisation Consulting a~d Research Pty Ltd
Richard Croll and Associates
Martin Stone'and Associates Digital Equipment Coy

7

Film Australia

Purpose
Engagement of principal (Mr D. Young) to direct the 1979 RACT Corps Conference Conduct Unit Public Relations Officers Courses (3) Conduct seminar on Systematic Layout Planning Instruct (ORCS) Defence Research Centre Salisbury, in PDP-I] programming Systems for Project lindalee Conduct Staff Officers Media Awareness Courses (2)
Total

Payment $
950 1,760
733 12,000
5,602
25,370

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE CONSULTANTS 1979-80

Se.rial
1 2 3 4
5
6
7 8 9
10 11 12

Consultant

Individuals. Professor A: R. Billings
Prolessor A. L. G. Rees Professor K. T. H. Farrer Dr M. Clark (City of London Polytechnic)

Professor B. Chavell (Universitr of Pennsylvania)

Dr G. Oates (Central Electrical Generating
Board-Manchester, UK) Dr W. Weldon Dr R. A. Marshall (University of Texas)
Dr Baxter (Adelaide University)

Professor A. D. Young (Sydney University)

M~M. Sullivan

'

Dr R. E. Christal USAF Human Resources Lab-

oratory

Consultancy purpose
Defence Science & Technology External Review
Discussions with Materials Research Laboratories (MRL) Scientific trends and techniques Discussions with MRL on Physiology Investigations Discussion with MRL on Metallurgical and Engineering Problems Discussions with MRL on Scientific Techniques
Course in PARSEAL progressive languages for Defence Research Centre Salisbury (ORCS) WindTunnel techniques consultancy for DRCS Archaeological survey of Evans Head range Conduct Occupational Analysis Seminar
Total Individuals Total Organizations Lecturers/guest session leaders
Total expenditure Consultancy Votes

Payment
$ 9,240 14,950 8,780
105
138
276
1,342 1,342
750
763 910 3,463
42,059 25,370 8,149
75,578

Employment of Private Consultants: Department of Finance
(Question No. 1268)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, 9 April 1981:
Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by.the Department of Finance in 1979-80; if so
(a) how many were employed; (b) who were they; (c) for what purpose was each employed; and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or con-
sultancy firm.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has supplied the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(a) one consultancy firm was employed by the Department of Finance
(b) PA Consultancy Services Pty Ltd

(c) The firm was engaged to undertake the study of options for meeting the Royal Australian Mint's long-term requirements for coinage blanks
(d) $27,770
Employment of Private Consultants: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1270)
Mr ~ungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Were any. private consultants or consultancy firms employed by the Attorney-Genera]'s Department in 1979-80; if so, (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.
Mr Viner--The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
During the year 1979-80 the following consultants were employed:

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3577

(a) Mr J. Q. Ewens, for the purpose of drafting necessary legislation in preparation for self-government of Norfolk Island. A consultants fee of $162 per day was paid.
(b) Mr C. K. Comans, for the purpose of drafting complex and extensive Commonwealth and State legislation for the Office of Parliamentary Counsel. A consultants fee of $162 per day was paid.
(c) Mrs M. E. Heiskenan, for the purpose of preparing taxation returns for the Office of the Curator of Estates of Deceased Persons; Australian Capital Territory. A consultants fee of $50 per day was paid.
Recruitment through Private Employment Agencies: Department of Education
(Question No. 1300)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Fife--'-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
One person was recruited through a private employment agency in 1979-80, for the position of Steno-Secretary Grade 1 to the Principal, Canberra College of Technical and Further Education. The cost was $691. This was done with the approval of the Public Service Inspector's regional office, which was unable at the time to provide a qualified officer, pending the filling of the position on a permanent basis.
Female Officers and Empl~yees: Department of Communications
(Question No. 1339)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many female officers and employees are employed in his Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister to Question No. 1336 (Hansard, 5 June 1981, page 3314).
Female Officers and Employees: Department of Defence
(Question No. 1345)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many female officers and employees are employed in his Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (3) I refer the honourable member to the reply to Parliamentary Question 1336 (Hansard 5 June 1981, page 3314)

Industrial Action: Department of Defence

(Question No. 1371)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(1) How many officers or employees' in his' Department have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last two years.

(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.

(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so on what occassions.

(4) Were any pay reductions or qisciplinary. actions taken

in respect of officers or employees on go slow; work to regula-

tions or other restrictive work actions, if so, on what

occassions.

.

Mr Killen-The answe~ t9 the honourable

member's question is as follows:

(1) The Department does not keep records on whether an

individual officer or employee has been on strike or engaged in

any restrictive work actions. However, it is possible to identify

several groups of employees who have engaged in such activi-

ties during each of the last two years. These groups include

employees' at Williamstown and Garden' Island. Dockyards,

foremen, storemen and packers, and a substantial number of

officers in the Clerical grades. It is th~refore possible to esti-

mate the number of officers or employees who have been on

strike or who have engaged in restrictive work action at 'ap-

proximately 6500.

.

,

(2) During the year ende(l 31 March 1980, 182,605 manhours were lost through strikes. DurIng the year ended 31 March 1981, 474,459 manhours wete lost through strikes. Of the latter figure 222,092 manhours were lost in one dispute, concerning the manning of the Plate Preservation Line at Williamstown Dockyard. Because of the nature of restrictive work actions it has not been possible to ascertain the number of manhours involved in them.

(3) No officers or employees have been paid for any periods during which they have been on strike.

(4) Most employees whose conditions of employment are governed by Public Service Arbitrator's Determination No. 44 of 1955 normally receive a naval work adjustment allowance. This allowance currentlly rariges between $3.60 and $9.40 per week. When these employees, most of whom are employed at Williamstown and Garden Island Dockyards, engage in any restrictive work practices this allowance is not paid. On occassions, management has insisted that employees perform work that is under ban or limitation. Upon refusal the paY'of the individuals concerned has been stopped.

Industrial Action: Department of Education
(Question No. 1378)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) How many officers or employees in his Department have been
(a) on strike; and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other re-
strictive work actions, in each of the last two years.

3578 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.
(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occassions.
(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occassions.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) A total of 688 departmental officers and employees were engaged in strike action during the calendar year 1980. In the calendar year 1979 the number of officers involved was 666. All were Australian Public Service StatT. A total of 16 APS StatT of the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority were engaged in strike action during 1980 and 3,507 Commonwealth Teaching StatT were involved in 1979.
(b) 113 officers and employees of the Department were involved in go slow actions during 1979; no statT were involved in go slow action in 1980.
(2) The total manhours lost in strike action were 5,851 for the Department, 17,325 for CTS StatT at Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority and 117 for APS StatT from the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority. Go slow action by Departmental officers and employees totalled 413 manhours.
(3) No officers or employees were paid for the period of any strike action.
(4) Deduction from pay was etTected in relation to go slow action taken by a Departmental officer, during the quartcr ending 30 September 1979, in the course of the ACOAjAPSA campaign against the CE (RR) Act 1978 and the CE (EP) Act 1978.
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Communications
(Question No. 1417)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expendi. ture on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Department in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by his Deparment within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of his Department, or other Commonwealth and State Departments or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by his Department occur outside Australia during this period, if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I draw the honourable member's attention to an answer given by the Prime Minister in respect of Question No. 1413 which covered the matters raised with the exception of the components relating to Commonwealth sponsored international conferences in Australia and information on expenditure outside Australia.

Expenditure on international conferences in Australia sponsored by the Department of Communications is nil, for 1979-80.
Expenditure on entertainment and hospitality outside Australia during 1979-80 was incurred only by departmental officers in the course of overseas visits and under prescribed conditions. The total was $1,185.
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Finance
(Question No. 1424)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by the Department of Finance in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by the Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of the Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in the Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by the Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Prime Minister to Question No. 1414 (refer Hansard of 5 June 1981).
In addition to the above response I am advised that no expenditure on official entertainment at Commonwealth sponsored international conferences in Australia was incurred by my Department in 1979-80; expenditure incurred by my Department on official entertainment outside Australia in 1979-80 was $7,751.
Air Travel in Australia: Department of Defence
(Question No. 1475)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What sum was paid by his Department, or by departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Records maintained in my Department are not in a form which readily provide all the detail sought. Departmental records do permit however, the dissection of air travel within Australia as follows:

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3579

Airline

Expenditure in 1979-80

(a) Trans-Australia Airlines (b) Ansett Airlines of Australia Ltd (c) Others

$m 5.396 4.405
0.506

Total

10.307

In addition, expenditure of $0.617m was incurred by the Defence Science and Technology Organisation, and the Natural Disaster Organisation on air travel within Australia in
1979-80. However, a breakdown by airline is not available and I am not prepared to authorise the use of resources which would be required to identify that detail. Nevertheless, it
would be reasonable as an approximate guide to assume that this expenditure would be dissected in about the same proportions as shown for the rest of the Defence organisation in
the table above.

Head Office, Department of Defence

(Question No. 1501)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(I) Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how
many staff are in each?

(2) If so, when?

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) The Head Office of the Department of Defence consists of the central policy and coordinating divisions and certain operating elements which have other than single Service interests. Apart from some overseas positions, the policy and
coordinating divisions are all located in Canberra. The operating elements are located throughout Australia. The details of
those outside Canberra are set out below:

Australian Joint Warfare
Establishment
Standardisation and Cataloguing
Brancht Technical Training Sectiont
Defence Printing Establishment
Management Advisory Service
Brancht (Defence) Recruiting Brancht
Internal Audit Brancht Defence Force Pay Accounting
Centre Industrial Mobilisation Sectiont
Defence Industry Development
Brancht Melbourne Regional Computer
Centre Defence Science &
Te ch n 01 ogyt ~ Sp e ci al Undertakings Section
Defence Information Servicest~Information Systems Development Section
Army Scientific Adviser Brancht
Navy Scientific Adviser Brancht RAN Research Laboratory
Armed Forces Food Science
Establishment

4 Civilian 30 Service
142 Civilian 2 Service 5 Civilian
62 Civilian 15 Service
27 Civilian 6 Service 37 Civilian 192 Service 125 Civilian
237 Civilian 1 Civilian I Service
113 Civilian
40 Civilian 6 Service
5 Civilian I Service
5 Civilians
2 Civilian I Civilian 76 Civilian 6 Service
25 Civilian 3 Service

Joint Tropical Trials and Research Establishment . . .
Materials Testing Laboratory
RAN Trials and Assessing Unit
Engineering Development Establishment
Trials Resources Laboratory Defence Support Centre,
Woomera
Aeronautical Research Laboratories
Defence Research Centre Salisbury--- Administration
Advanced Engineering Laboratory
Electronics Research Labor-
atory Weapons Systems Research La-
boratory
Materials Research Laboratories
Defence Signals Directorate
Australian Counter Disaster College
Fall-Out Shelter Survey

28 Civilian 6 Service 40 Civilian 38 Civilian 36 Service
364 Civilian 15 Service 82 Civilian
252 Civilian
487 Civilian
50 I Civilian
1222 Civilian
451 Civilian
404 Civilian 574 Civilian
'See note
49 Civilian I Service 3 Civilian

Note:
- In accordance with normal practice, details of Defence Signals Directorate are not published.

1" Main Section location is Canberra, but positions as listed are outposted to perform functions in Regions.

(2) Decisions to relocate units of Government Employment to Canberra are taken by Government on the advice of the Location of Australian Government Employment Committee (LAGE), an IDC chaired by the PSB. The advice ten-
dered to Government by the LAGE Committee is based on submissions by the relevant Department, and consultations with interested bodies such as stafI organisations. Any plans to
relocate the sections in Canberra is a matter for LAGE consideration and subsequent decisions by Government.

Vehicle Conversion to LPG Usage: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 1563)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many (a) cars, (b) commercial vehicles and (c) trucks were being operated by his Department as at 30 June 1980.
(2) How many of these vehicles had been (a) converted to LPG usage and (b) purchased already equipped for LPG usage.
(3) Have plans been made to increase use of LPG in vehicles operated by his Department; if so, what are the details.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The honourable member has asked similar questions of all Ministers and my Department has collated the information provided.
(I) There were 7,500 cars, 6,072 commercial vehicles and 3,151 trucks operated by all departments as at 30 June 1980.
(2) At that time 140 of these vehicles had been cOflverted to LPG usage and 2 had been purchased already equipped for LPG usage.
(3) Since 30 June 1980 a further 50 factory fitted LPG cars have been purchased, another 10 have been converted and arrangements are in hand to convert a further 215. Consideration is also being given to the scope for a substantial increase

3580 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

in the use of LPG in vehicles operated by all departments. Details will be announced when a final decision has been taken.
Tea Services: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 1609)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many-
(a) full time and (b) part time staff are employed on tea making and distri-
butionin (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of the Department of Social Security.
(2) What was the cost of-
(a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in the De-
partment in 1979-80.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Throughout the Department of Social Security's network of regional offices there is generally no official tea service, while in mUlti-occupied buildings in some of the capital cities the cost of tea services is met by the Department of Administrative Services rather than the individual departments. The costs the Department of Social Security incurred in 1979-80 in the provision of official tea services are set out below.
In Western Australia, the Northern Territory, and Central Office (Canberra), staff were employed to provide tea services, and the details were as follows:

(I) (a) Full-time staff (b) Part-time staff
(2) (a) Salaries (b) Other charges

WA

NT

CO

3 4 $49,496 $70

nil

4

I

2

$6,341 $44,313

nil

nil

In New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia the Department was charged $94,540 by the Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Ltd. Other charges in those States totalled $21,860.

Costs of Maintaining Historic Postal Properties
(Question No. 1638)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Did the annual report of the Australian Postal Commission for 1979-80 indicate that extraordinary maintenance costs for maintaining historic postal properties was calculated at $700,000 per annum.
(2) [I' so, what considersation has been given to this expenditure being borne by the Commonwealth Government rather than by the Australian Postal Commission.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) The information sought by the honourable member is a matter which comes within the responsibility of the Minister for Home Affairs. I have been advised that consideration is being given by t.he Government to recommendations concerning this issue made by the House of Representatives Standing Committee on environment and conservation in its report entitled 'Environmental Protection, Adequacy of Legislative and Administrative Arrangements, First Report', presented on 18 October 1979.
The Committee recommended that the desirability of introducing a separate item into departmental appropriations to separate the costs on maintenance of Commonwealth properties listed in the register of the national estates be examined. The Committee also recommended that a fund be established for the maintenance of redundant Commonwealth properties listed in the register.
Royal Australian Navy: Committees of Inquiry
(Question No. 1657)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) What incidents with (a) River class destroyers, (b) Oberon class submarines and (c) Attack class patrol boats of the Royal Australian Navy have justified the establishment of a Committee of Inquiry.
(2) What was the date, place and nature of each incident and what personnel were killed or injured in each incident.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2)-

HMAShip/ Submarine

Date

SWAN YARRA PARRAMATTA SWAN TORRENS

3 May 76 IOMay76 31 May 77 5 Feb 80 27 Apr 81

ONSLOW
OVENS OVENS

20Sep74
10 May 78 9 Sep 78

Place

Incident

Fatalities/ injuries

(a) River Class Destroyer

Alongside HMAS STIRLING Garden Island Dockyard Williamstown Naval Dockyard At sea Garden Island Dockyard

Damage to Ikara Launcher Fire in Main Signal Office Flood in Boiler Room Defect in Ship'S Stabiliser Fire in Switchboard

Nil 3 injured
Nil Nil 13 affected by smoke inhalation

(b) Oberon Class Submarines

At sea (off Singapore)
At sea Coffs Harbour

Collision with HMS Nil LEOPARD Exceeded Deep Diving Depth Nil
Sailor fell from fin of SubmarI injured ine

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3581

HMAShip/ Submarine OTWAY ORION ONSLOW

Date
28 Feb 79 23 Nov 79 01/02 Mar 81

ARROW BUCCANEER BARRICADE ARDENT ADROIT AWARE ADVANCE BUCCANEER BOMBARD BUCCANEER BOMBARD ADROIT BARBETTE ADROIT BOMBARD ADROIT BOMBARD BOMBARD

25 Dec 74
10 May 75 24 Apr 76 25 Mar 77 30 Mar 77 2 May 77 13 Oct 77
21 Oct 77 I1Jan 78
15 Jan 78 lJul78
31 Jul78
Oct/Nov 78 8 Nov 79 24 Mar 79 28 Jul80 22 Oct 80 4Nov80

ADROIT/ ARDENT

11 Jan 81

Place

Incident

Fatalities/ injuries

Cockatoo Island Dockyard At sea (off Singapore) At sea

Fire on board Failure ofPort Main Generator Escape of diesel exhaust fumes

Nil Nil 1 fatality, a number of the
crew affected by smoke inhalation

(c) Attack Class Patrol Boats

Darwin Harbour

Loss of HMAS ARROW dur2 fatalities

ing Cyclone Tracy

Cone Bay

Grounding

Nil

Thursday Island

Man overboard

1 fatality

At sea

Damage to Port Main Engine Nil

Liverpool Harbour

Grounding

Nil

Mooloolaba Harbour

Grounding

Nil

Darwin

Foreign object found in StarNil

board Main Engine

Palm Island

Grounding

Nil

At sea

Collision with civilian aircraft 2 civilian aircrew

during exercises

fatalities

Newton Island

Grounding

Nil

Cockatoo Island Dockyard

Sailor hanged himself in engine I fatality

room

Cockburn Sound, Western Grounding

Nil

Australia

North Queensland Area

Propellor damage

Nil

Moss Shoal

Foreign Fishing Vessel incident Nil

At sea

Fire in engine room

Nil

Wildcat Reef

Grounding

Nil

Barry Beach

Grounding

Nil

Eden

Commanding Officer ordered Nil

ship to sea without due regard

for safety and failed to maintain

order on board

At sea

Collision between ships

Nil

The following incidents occurred prior to 1974 and full details are not available without recourse to a search of Archives:

HMAShip/ Submarine

Incident

HMAShip/ Submarine

Incident

(a) River Class Destroyers

PARRAMATTA Damage to main engines

STUART

Fire in Combined Radar Office

DERWENT

Loss at sea ofEMC B. M. Pearce

STUART

Diving incident Jervis Bay

PARRAMATTADamage to Hull Outfit 20 whilst entering

dry dock

DERWENT

Contamination of boiler

STUART

Contamination of Furnace Fuel Oil and

damage to gauge glasses

PARRAMATTA Damage to main engines

DERWENt

Burnt out motor alternator

STUART

Flooding in No.2 Naval Store

DERWENT

Loss of feed water for boiler

DERWENT

Death of ABQMG D. B. McKee

STUART

Incorrect drill procedures for Ikara missile

launch

PARRAMATTA Malicious damage to diesel generator

gauges

PARRAMATTA Collapse of sailor in double bottom

OXLEY OTWAY ONSLOW

(b) Oberon Class Submarines
Loss of torpedo in Jervis Bay Loss of torpedo After services system blowout, due to corrodedpipe

(c) Attack Class Patrol Boats

BUCCANEER BOMBARD BARRICADE ARDENT SAMARAI

Weather damage Ditching of explosives in Jervis Bay area Stabbing incident at Daydream Island
Galley fire Interference with main engine governors

Royal Australian Air Force Aircraft Lost or Destroyed
(Question No. 1658)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many (a) F III aircraft, (b) Mirage fighters, (c) Macchi jet trainers, (d) Orion aircraft, (e) Hercules aircraft, (f) other fixed wing aircraft and (g) helicopters of the Royal Australian Air Force have been lost or destroyed during the last 10 years.

3582 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) What was the (a) type of aircraft, (b) date, (c) place, (d) cause and (e) number of personnel killed or injured in each case.

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) 4 (b) 22 (c)3 (d) Nil (e) Nil (f) 6 (g) 9
(2) See following table:

(2)-

RAAF AIRCRAFT LOSSES DURING THE PERIOD APRIL 1971 TO APRIL 1981

Date

Type

Location

Cause

Fatalities /Injuries

17 April7! 7 June 71 17 June 71 60ctober7! 23 March 72 27 April 72 24 May 72 6 July 72 17 July 72 3 August 72 28 August 72 3 April 73 10 April 73 11 June 73 11 January 74 ! April 74 28 September 74 24 October 74 25 December 74 25 December 74 29 October 75 16 March 76 6 April 76 8Jun 76 24Jun 76
6 July 76 6 July 76 6 July 76 10 Aug 76 2 February 77
28 April 77 29 July 77 29 September 77 5 December 77 17 February 78 25 October 78
25 November 78
13 December 78 19 July 79 7 August 79 16 August 79 24 August 79 15 February 80 18 February 80 2 May 80

Iroquois Iroquois F4E Mirage Jroquois Mirage Mirage Mirage Mirage Mirage Caribou Mirage Winjell Iroquois Iroquois Mirage Iroquois Mirage Iroquois Dakota Macchi Mirage Mirage Mirage Mirage
Mirage Mirage Mirage Mirage Mirage
FIll Iroquois FIll Mirage Mirage Fill
Iroquois
Airtrainer Macchi Mirage Airtrainer FIll Macchi Mirage Mirage

Vietnam

Hit by ground fire

Vietnam

Hit tree operational hazard

Evans Head

Unknown

Williamtown

Unknown

Tailisen, ACT

Engine failure

Darwin

Birdstrike

Malaysia

Unknown-hit ridge at night

Malaysia

Engine fire

Butterworth

Engine fire

Avalon, Vic

Engine failure

PNG

Pilot Error-Hit ridge

Gloucester, NSW Engine failure

Point Cook, Vic.

Pilot error

PNG

Pilot error

Stanthorpe, Qld

Engine drive shaft failed

Butterworth

Engine failure

PNG

Pilot error

Tullamarine, Vic

Landed undercarriage up

Darwin

Ground accident Cyclone

Darwin

Ground accident Cyclone

Williamtown

Pilot error unauthorized Manoeuvre

Williamtown

Engine stall

Nowra

Engine hot air leak

Butterworth

Engine failure

Williamtown

Unknown-Probably pilot disorien-

tation

Butterworth

Pilot error--landed without clearance

Butterworth

Pilot error- --landed without clearance-

Butterworth

Aircraft collision

Williamtown

Undercarriage Failure

Williamtown

Unknown-Probably pilot disorien-

tation

Armidale

Engine bleed duct failure

Irian Jaya

Pilot error-helicopter hit ridge

Evans Head

Birdstrike

Butterworth

Engine failure

East Sale

Tyre failure on take-off

Auckland, New

Unknown-Possibly bleed duct fail-

Zealand

ure

El Alamein, South

Australia

Pilot error-helicopter hit ridge

East Sale

Pilot error

Pearce

Pilot error-inverted spin

Williamtown

Undercarriage failure

Oakey

Pilot error-unauthorized manoeuvre

Ohakea, New Zealand Engine failure on take-off

Pearce

Canopy opened in flight

East Sale

Engine failure

Williamtown

Undercarriage failure

Nil 2 Fatal 2 Fatal 1Fatal Nil Nil 1 Fatal Nil Nil Nil 25 Fatal I Fatal Nil Nil 2 Fatal, I Injury Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 1 Fatal
Nil Nil 1 Fatal Nil 1 Fatal
Nil 1 fatal, 2 injuries 2 Fatal Nil Nil Nil
5 Fatal Nil fatal 1 Injury Nil Nil 2 Fatal Nil Nil fatal, 1 Injury Nil Nil

Navy and Army Aircraft Lost or Destroyed
(Question No. 1659)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many planes and helicopters of the (a) Royal Australian Navy and (b) Australian Army have been lost or destroyed in the last 10 years.

(2) What was the (a) type of machine, (b) date, (c) place, (d) cause and (e) number of personnel killed or injured in each case.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) 22 fixed wing aircraft and 8 helicopters. (b) Details of each loss are as follows:

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3583

Type

Date

Macchi Macchi Skyhawk
Skyhawk
Skyhawk Wessex Tracker Skyhawk Sea King Sea King 9 x Tracker Sea King Wessex Be11206B Skyhawk
Skyhawk Sea King Skyhawk
Skyhawk Skyhawk Skyhawk
Iroquois
Bell 47G-8-1 Bell 47G-8-1
Bell 47G-8-1 Bell 47G-8-1
Bell 47G-8-1 Cessna 180 Bell 47G-8-1 Be1147G-8-1 Be1147G-8-1
Bell 47G-8-1
Bell 206 Kiowa) Bell 206 (Kiowa)
Bell 206 (Kiowa) Porter
Be11206 (Kiowa)
Bell 206 (Kiowa)
Porter

27 Apr 71 07 Dec 72 OSJun 73
08 Nov 73
16 May 74 19 Nov 74 10 Feb 75 17Jti175 21 Oct 75 02 Dec 76 04 Dec 76 09 May 77 13 Jul77 28 Jul 77 23Jan 79
23 May 79 23 May 79 24Sep 79
28 Apr 80 02 Oct 80 21 Det80
26 Mar 81
28 Sep 71 29 May 72
30 June 72 24 Aug 72
OSMar73 26 Mar 73 19 Jun 73 21 Sep 73 06 Oct 73
29 Nov 73
26Jun 74 09 Jul75
16Jun 76 23 Mar 77
24 Feb 80
19 Aug 80
28 Nov 80

Place

Cause

Personnel
killed or injured

(a) Royal Australian Navy

SWofNowra NASNowra East of Williamtown, New South Wales HMAS Melbourne
East of Nowra East of Nowra HMAS Melbourne Beecroft Range East of Nowra East of Nowra Nowra HMAS Melbourne HMAS Melbourne NW Australia Braidwood, New South Wales HMAS Melbourne HMAS Melbourne HMAS Melbourne
NASNowra HMAS Melbourne HMAS Melbourne
NASNowra

Pilot error Engine failure Engine failure
Support services errorcatapult malfunction Unknown Engine failure Pilot error Pilot error Main rotor gearbox failure Engine failure Destroyed in hangar fire Pilot error Engine failure Pilot error Engine failure/fire
Arrestor wire failure Loss oftail rotor Support services error-flight deck maintenance drill error Engine Failure Engine failure Support services errorcatapult drill error Under investigation

(b) Australian Army

Rainfield, Queensland Oakey, Queensland

Maintenance error Incorrect ground drills

Townsville, Queensland Papua New Guinea AiomaArea West Malaysia Rainfield, Queensland
Cooktown, Queensland Amberley,'Queensland Sebidiro, Papua New
Guinea Mt Wilhelm, Papua New Guinea
Oakey, Queensland Holsworthy, New South Wales
Townsville, Queensland Buckambool, New South Wales Bourke, New South Wales Ho!sworthy, New South
Wales Oakey, Queensland

Pilot error Tail rotor failure
Pilot error Pilot error Pilot error Pilot error Pilot error
Pilot error
Pilot error Pilot error
Pilot error Pilot error
Unknown
Unknown
Pilot error

I injured Nil Nil
Nil
I killed Nil Nil I killed Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 2 injured I injured
Nil Nil Nil
Nil 1 injured 1 injured
Nil
2 killed 1 kiIled 11 injured Nil 1 injured
1 injured Nil Nil Nil Nil
1 kiIled 1 injured ! injured 1 injured
2 injured Nil
I injured
3 injured
Nil

Legal Aid
(Question No. 1670)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) What sums were expended through legal aid to finance litigation in (a) representative actions and test cases and (b) environmental cases.
(2) Will the Attorney-General detail the litigations.

Mr VinerThe Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Between I July 1973 and] June 1981 the following sums were expended as financial assistance:
(a) in representative actions and test cases; and
(b) in environmental cases.

3584 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

EXPENDITURE

Financial year

Environmental cases

Representativeand test cases

1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

1,912.85 70,175.83 21,429.09 38,282.92 6,028.91
Nil
Nil
Nil

Nil
Nil 1404.09
Nil
Nil
Nil Nil 8004.44

Total

137,829.60

9408.53

(2) Financial assistance was provided in respect of the following actual or potential litigation-
(a) Representative actions and test cases
(i) a 8igh Court challenge by an elector concerning electoral boundaries of a federal electorate in Victoria;
(li) a proposed damages action on behalf of a thalidomide victim against a pharmaceuticals company;
(iii) an action by a Vietnam veteran and his family for damages for negligence against the Commonwealth and several chemical companies;
(iv) proposed proceedings by a person seeking clarification of s. 44 of the New South Wales Partition Act in its application to the Australian Capital Territory.
(b) Environmental cases
(i) proceedings in the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory by a group of individuals contesting the construction of the communications tower on Black Mountain;
(li) an appeal by a citizens' committee to a Local Government Court against permission granted to a company to mine clay and produce clay products without the imposition of adequate conditions to prevent pollution, in a major catchment area;
(iii) action by a conservation organiZation first to oppose,' in a Mining Warden's Court, applications for sandmining leases, secondly, in a Supreme Court seeking the issue of a writ of mandQlllus to require a Mining Warden to holli a proper hearing; and thirdly, when the writ was refused, by way of appeal to the High Court of Australia; ,
(Iv) appeal proceedings by a conservation group to a Local Goverruhent Court against a local government council acting without authority in granting approval for cement works to be constructed on the shores of a city's river;
(v) involving a State Commission of Inquiry in which two conservation groups were exonerated from suggestions of dishonesty in the collection of funds fot the purpose of setting up a trust to pr.eserve caves containing Aboriginal Art regarded as part of the National Estate;
(vi) action by a conservation group objecting, in a Mining Warden's Court, to the issue of mining leases over land which the group claimed, in the public interest, should be included in a prQPosed National Park;

Answers to Questions
(vii) action by a conservation group objecting, in a Mining Warden's Court, to applications by a company for total exemption from labour conditions on mining leases within a proposed National Park;
(viii) Supreme Court proceedings in which an association and certain named members of it were first, respondents to an appeal from a decision of a Local Government Court which had upheld the association's objections to rezoning approvals given by a City Council, and subsequently, respondents to a Privy Council appeal from the decision of the Supreme Court;
(ix) proceedings in a Mining Warden's Court concerning an objection by a group to applications by a company for mining leases which threatened underground water supplies to a rural community;
(x) assistance was provided to a conservation group to obtain a legal opinion on the prospects of a successful challenge being made to the proposed construction of oil pipelines through parks and recreation areas;
(xi) Supreme Court proceedings by an individual representing the public interest, aimed at curtailing quarrying activities in an area adjacent to a National Park;
(xii) a proposed appeal, by two conservation groups, to a Town Planning Appeals Tribunal to obtain resiting of proposed sewerage works which threatened sea pollution at Westernport, near Flinders Naval Base, Victoria;
(xiii) assistance was provided to a conservation group to obtain counsel's opinion on whether a local authority was exceeding its powers in its dredging activities associated with a creek, preparatory to piping the creek through a small remaining pocket of natural vegetation on the Mornington Peninsula, Victoria;
(xv) an appeal by a conservation group to the Full Court of a Supreme Court from a decision which had reversed the findings of a Mining Warden in relation to prospecting in a rare wilderness area;
(xvi) assistance was provided to an association for legal representation to oppose an appeal by a developer to an interim Planning Appeals Board against a City Council's refusal to permit high density housing on scenic slopes at the approaches of a capital city;
(xvii) an objection by two conservation groups to a Metropolitan Regional Planning Authority against proposed extensions to a motor freeway along the foreshores of a city's river;
(xviii) assistance was provided to enable a conservation group to be legally represented in proceedings before the Commission of Inquiry into Fraser Island, Queensland;
(xix) assistance was provided to a conservation group invited to appear before the Commission of Inquiry into Moreton Island, which was set up by the Queensland Government;
(xx) assistance was provided to a society (as relator) which was granted the fiat of a State Attorney-General to pursue a Supreme Court action for a declaration that mining leases being operated within a recreation reserve had been issued invalidity;
(xxi) Supreme Court proceedings by a group of individuals to establish whether a City Council held

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3585

certain land in trust for public recreational purposes thereby preventing the Council from seIling the land for commercial development;
(xxii) proceedings involving a conservation group's objections in a Mining Warden's Court to the grant of mining leases in an area which had been recommended for a National Park Reserve;
(xxiii) assistance was provided to a conservation association to obtain counsel's opinion on whether discharge of sewerage into river by a sewerage authority could be restrained.
(xxiv) an appeal by a conservation trust to the High Court in relation to the prevention of prospecting within a rare wilderness area;
(xxv) an appeal by an environmental association to a State Planning Authority against consent given for the construction of radio masts in an area which is a scenic backdrop to a capital city;
(xxvi) assistance was provided to three conservation groups for representation by counsel at the final stages of the Ranger Uranium Environmental Inquiry;
(xxvii) assistance was provided to a conservation group to object in a Mining Warden's Court to applications for mining leases within a proposed National Park area.
(xxviii) proceedings in a Mining Warden's Court concerning an objection by a conservation group to an application for a mining lease in a National Park;
(xxix) appeal proceedings in a Local Government Court by a conservation organization in relation to a sand mining lease in a proposed National Park;
(xxx) Supreme Court proceedings, by a conservation organization, in which a writ of mandamus directed to a Mining Warden in respect of sand mining leases was sought; and
(xxxi) proposed Supreme Court proceedings by a conservation organization to challenge the validity of sand mining leases on Fraser Island, Queensland.

(1) Is he able to say whether concern is being expressed in Hawaii that the Australian Navy has participated in exercises which included the bombardment of a range on an Hawaiian island.

(2) Have any Australian naval craft or personnel par-

ticipated in exercises with or independently of the United

States of America Navy in Hawaiian waters off the Hawaiian

islands.

.

(3) If so, on how many occassions has the Australian Navy participated in these exercises.

(4) Have these exercises included the bombardment of a range on any Hawaiian island.

(5) Have any Australian naval or airforce planes participated in exercises which include the bombardment of a range on any Hawaiian island.

(6) Is he concerned that Australia's image could be impaired by the participation of Australian naval craft in exercises which include the bombardment of a range on Hawaiian land in view of the opposition within Hawaii to the military use of Hawaiian land.

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) to (4) On seven occassions between 1971 and April

1980 the RAN participated in exercises involving the use of

firing range on the island of Kaho'olawe. Concern in Hawaii

about such use was first brought to my atention in March 1980

when a letter was received from the staff attorney of the Legal

Aid Society of Hawaii, acting on behalf of a private group

called the Protect Kaho'olawe Ohana.

.

(5) Yes.

(6) Any future RAN use of the range would be in accordance with the terms of a consent decree signed in December 1980 by the US Navy and the Protect Kaho'olawe group. The terms of the decree state that ordnance used by foreign users shall also be governed by the decree. In these circumstances RAN use of the range should not lead to impairment of Australia's image

Insulin Syringes and Pharmaceutical Needles: Cost if Placed on the National Health Scheme
List
(Question No. 1908)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What would be the annual cost to the Government if insulin syringes and pharmaceutical needles were placed on the national health scheme list assuming that (a) the current percentage using disposable syringes continued and (b) all those diabetics using insulin switched to disposable syringes and needles.

Special Assistance Grant for Children
(Question No. 1936)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that at a meeting of State and Commonwealth Welfare Ministers the Minister refused to commit the Commonwealth Government to maintenance of present spending levels in respect of pre-school and other early childhood programs.
(2) When was the last increase in the special assistance grant for children in care.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) and (b). My Department does not have definitive information on the number of insulin-dependent diabetics in Australia, nor on the percentage who use disposable syringes and needles.
Australian Navy Exercises in Hawaiian Waters

(3) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the view expressed by some State Welfare Ministers that because of inadequate unemployment benefits for persons under 18 years of age, extra demand is placed on State resources and services for this group.
(4) What commitments will the Government make in respect of Commonwealth spending levels for pre-school and other early childhood programs.

(Question No. 1930)

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has

Mr Howe asked the Minister for Defence, upon provided the following answer to the honourable

notice, on 28 April 1981 :

member's question:

3586 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June J981

Answers to Questions

(l) Yes. The level of funds to be made available [or children's services in 1981-82 will be considered by the Government in the Budget context. However, [ indicated that expenditure by this Government on children's services, other than expenditure on pre-schools, had greatly increased in real terms since 1975-76.
(2) I assume that the 'special assistance grant' mentioned is in fact 'special needs subsidy' payable to certain services subsidised under the Children's Services Program.
Special needs subsidy is paid to assist day care services to rebate the fees oflow income families.
Special needs subsidy is payable under the general provisions of the Children's Services Program for family day care, and under the provisions of the Child Care Act for centre based services.
Under the general provisions, each family day care scheme receives Commonwealth special needs subsidy equal to the amount of fees foregone as fee rebates, up to a maximum total amount which is calculated on the basis of $7 per week for each equivalent full time child income.
The current rate of $7 per week used to calculate the maximum was introduced in 1977. A scheme can apply to the Minister for increased Special Needs Subsidy payments if it finds that the maximum amount does not cover the costs of fee rebates. Such increased payments are approved at ministerial discretion after an assessment of need. These arrangements also apply to day care centres funded under the centre based day care arrangement with the State governments.
Under the Child Care Act, payments to centres are made on the basis of the numbers of certain categories of children specified in Section 12 of the Act. Since 1975, each centre has been eligible to receive 25c subsidy per hour per child three years and over, and 40c per hour per child under three years.
(3) The question of the appropriate level of unemployment benefit for people under the age of 18 is bound up with the broader question of the assistance available for them in unemployment, education and training. This has been under study in the context of the review of ways of increasing the opportunities available for young people in education, training and employment.
The welfare and education implications for State governments as well as possible effects on State financial responsibilities, are relevant to consideration of possible changes in this area. State governments have been consulted as part of the review and the matter has been discussed by the Council of Social Welfare Ministers.
(4) See the answer to (I) above.
Statement of Professor Milton Friedman on Unregulated Monopoly
(Question No. 1952)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the statement of Professor Milton Friedman that unregulated monopoly may not be tolerable and either public regulation or ownership may be the lesser evil.
(2) Does he support this statement; if so, will he increase the resources of the Trade Practices Commission and Prices Justification Tribunal to regulate the conduct of firms enjoying monopoly-type power.
(3) If he will not increase these resources, what is the reason.
(4) Has his attention been drawn to reports in the press that the Prices Justification Tribunal will be abolished or merged

with the Trade Practices Commission; if so, is there any substance to these reports, and particularly to the report that he would not be unhappy if the Tribunal were abolished.
Mr Moore--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) [ understand that Professor Friedman made a statement to the elrect stated in the question.
(2), (3) and (4) The Government is committed to the principle of free and fair competition throughout the Australian economy including, where appropriate, regulation of monopoly power. The Government has reviewed, inter alia, the operations of the Trade Practices Commission and the Prices Justification Tribunal and its decisions were set out in the Prime Minister's Statement to the Parliament on 30 April 1981 on the Review of Commonwealth Functions.
Military Armament Depots
(Question No. 1971)
Mr Shack asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(I) How many military armament depots are there in Australia.
(2) What are the names of each of these depots and where are they located.
(3) How close to the nearest residences are stored explosives at each depot.
(4) How many accidental explosions have there been at each depot during the last 10 years.
(5) What was the extent of damage to property and injury to persons for each of these accidents.
Mr KiIlen--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) There are 17 armament depots in Australia.
(2) The names and locations of the depots are as follows:
(a) RAN Armament Depot (RANAD), Newington, Silverwater, New South Wales;
(b) RAN Armament Depot (RANAD), Kingswood, New South Wales;
(c) No 1 Central Ammunition Depot (l CAMD), RAAF, Kingswood New South Wales;
(d) RAN Armament and Weapon Equipment Depot (RANAWED), Maribyrong, Victoria, with its explosives storage at Somerton, Victoria;
(e) RAN Armament and Weapon Equipment Depot (RANAWED), Byford, Western Australia;
(f) 51st Supply Battalion, Byford, Western Australia;
(g) 2nd Field Supply Battalion, Townsville, Qld;
(h) 13lst Supply Company, Wallangarra, Queensland/ New South Wales Border;
(i) 141st Supply Company, Ashgrove, Brisbane, Queensland;
(j) 221st Supply Company, Bogan Gate, New South Wales;
(k) 222nd Supply Company, Myambat, New South Wales;
(1) 223rd Supply Company, Marrangaroo, New South Wales;
(m) 3I lth Supply Company, Wirlinga, New South Wales;
(n) 311th Supply Company, Ettamogah, New South Wales;

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3587

(0) 331st Supply Company, Mangalore, Victoria;
(p) 21st Supply Battalion, Moorebank, New South Wales;
(q) 41st Supply Battalion, Penfield, South Australia;
(3) The nearest residences to stored explosives at each depot are:
(a) RANAD,Newington-170m
(b) RANAD, Kingswood-1350m
(c) ICAMD, Kingswood-320m
(d) RANAWED, Maribyrnong/Somerton-1400m
(e) RANAWED,Byford-430m
(f) 51stSupply Battalion-490m
(g) 2nd Field Supply Battalion-1279m
(h) 131stSupplyCompany-444m
(i) 141st Supply Company-137m U) 221st Supply Company-460m
(k) 222nd Supply Company-120m
(1) 223rd Supply Company-288m
(m) 311thSupplyCompany-380m
(n) 311th Supply Company-490m
(0) 331st Supply Company-500m
(p) 21st Supply Battalion-292m
(q) 41st Supply Battalion-676m
(4) One accidental explosion occurred at RANAD Newington in 1975. There have been no accidental explosions at the other depots during the last 10 years.
(5) In the RANAD, Newington accident two depot personnel were killed and one suffered shock; some furniture and fittings in the explosives workshop were damaged and the building suffered superficial internal damage.
Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education: Total Enrolments
(Question No. 1997)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:
(1) What progress has been made in pursuing the recommendations contained in the report of the Committee of Review into the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (the Williams Committee) that universities and colleges of advanced education should strive for more accuracy in recording the number of their total enrolments.
(2) Are the numbers of effective full-time students at these institutions being satisfactorily recorded and is the Government satisfied that the numbers are accurate.
Mr Fife-The reply to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Committee of Inquiry into Education and Training established in 1976 under the chairmanship of Professor Sir Bruce Williams recommended, R6.25,' . . . a considerable improvement in the accuracy and comprehensiveness of advanced education statistics to make possible comparative studies that should guide any further decisions on rationalisation.' This was one of a number of Williams Committee recommendations referred to the Tertiary Education Commission for consideration.
At present different measures are used to calculate the number of equivalent full time students, 'student load', for the university and advanced education sectors. For universities student load is measured in terms of the weighted student unit (WSU) which is calculated by measuring the academic

program for each student against the normal program for a full time student in each course. Higher degree enrolments are given special weightings. For colleges of advanced education student load is calculated by giving a weight of 1.0 to full time students and 0.5 to part time and external students.
There are difficulties in accurately calculating student load in colleges of advanced education because the measures currently being used tend to overstate it. The Tertiary Education Commission, in Volume 1 Part 1 of its Report for the 1982-84 Triennium, has advised that it considers that since most part time students in advanced education, and particularly external students, undertake less than one-half of a full year's work, the real student load generated by a part time enrolment is likely to be closer to 0.4 than 0.5 of the load of a full time student. The Commission has taken this into consideration in formulating its recommendations on the advanced education sector.
The development of a WSU type measure is under consideration by the Joint Committee on Advanced Education Statistics.
Analysis of Suspected Fire-damaged KTCP
(Question No. 2059)
Mr West asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) Were samples ofsuspected fire-damaged KTCP (Potassiumtrichlorophenolate, a potassium salt of 2,4,5-T) sent by the Industries Assistance Commission to the Australian Government Analytical Laboratories for analysis during or about March 1981.
(2) If so, has it been analysed and what are the results.
(3) From where did the lAC obtain the sample.
(4) Is he able to say if more of the sample is present in Australia; if so, where is it.
(5) What does the lAC propose to do with the sample.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Chairman of the lAC has advised me that-
(1) A sample which the Commission then believed to" be fire damaged KTCP was forwarded to AGAL during March 1981 for analysis.
(2) Yes. The analysis showed that the sample was mainly iso-butyl ester 2,4,5-T with a lesser amount of n-butyl ester. The sample does not contain KTCP or 2,4-D. Dioxin (TCDD) content of the sample is 19 mg/kg which is equivalent to 26 mg/kg on a 2,4,5-T acid base.
(3) The sample of about 130 ml was received about January 1973 from Chemical Industries (Kwinana) Pty Ltd as part of its evidence in relation to the Tariff Board inquiry into 2,4,5-T products and 2,4,5-Trichlorophenol and its Salts (Dumping and Subsidies Act).
(4) The sample was forwarded to AGAL.
(5) See (4).
Import ofKTCP
(Question No. 2061)
Mr West asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
What is the name of the company which imported 300 tonnes ofKTCP from Singapore during 1969-71.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

3588 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

On the basis of avialable records, Chemical Industries (Kwinana) Pty Ltd and Farm Chemicals Pty Ltd (Queensland) imported about 350 tonnes of KTCP from Singapore during the period in question.
United States Sonar Base on Christmas Islands
(Question No. 2063)
!VIr Fry asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) What is the status of the United States of America sonar based on Christmas Island.
(2) If the base is no longer operational, has its functions been taken over by any other establishment on Australian terrilory, and is the Government kept informed of the function of the base.
!VII' Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) I refer the honourable member to my answer to Question No. 506 (Hansard of 5 May, page 2004). In particular I would draw his attention to the answers to parts (5) and (6) of that question in which J stated:
'For obvious security reasons I will not provide answers that would confirm or deny whether Australia has underwater sensor systems for operational purposes. For equally sound reasons J would not provide an answer to the honourable member's Question 6. Suffice to say that if such systems were in operation they would be under Australian control, and would be serving Australia's defence interests.
Question 5 (a), specifically concerning Christmas Island, raises however the issue of claims over the past year or so about United States involvement in Operation Flowerless and of a military installation on Christmas Island. These claims are without foundation. I will state now that there is no underwater sensor system at Christmas Island.'
Immigration Prosecutions
(Question No. 2072)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on6May1981:
(1) Was a Sydney solicitor, a Mr W. Lee, charged by Australian Federal Police in connection with an alleged immigration racket.
(2) Were any other persons charged in conmnection with the same matter; if so, what were the names of those involved.
(3) What was the nature of the charges and when were they laid.
(4) Has the matter been before the courts; if so, what was the outcome.
!VII' Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answers:
(1) A Sydney barrister, Mr William Jansing Lee was charged with conspiracy in 1980.
(2) Mr To Chew was also charged in connection with the same matter.
(3) Messrs Lee and Chew were charged under paragraph 86 (I) (d) of the Crimes Act with conspiracy to effect a lawful purpose by means that are unlawful under a law of the Commonwealth. [n substance the allegation was that the defendants had conspired to bribe an Immigration officer to obtain permanent residence in Australia for two prohibited immigrants, The charges were laid on 5 May 1980.

(4) Committal proceedings against Messrs Lee and Chew were heard from 27 October to 3 November 1980. Both defendants were discharged.
Defence Forces: Training of Recruits
(Question No. 2085)
!VIrs Kelly asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 6 May 1981 :
(1) What intake into each of the Defence forces has occurred in each of the past three years.
(2) What intake is planned for each of the next three years.
(3) Do plans exist for the expansion of each of the three forces; if so, what are the plans.
(4) What construction has taken place at the Singleton base, New South Wales, during the last 12 months and what further construction is planned in 1982.
(4) What provision was made in the 1980-81 Defence budget for the training of recruits in each of the three services.
(6) Will similar provision be madefor 1981-82.
!VIr Killen The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) FY 19'J7-78-RAN: 1819, Army: 3755, RAAF: 2315.
FY 1978-79-RAN: 2032, Army: 3809, RAAF: 2149.
FY 1979-80-RAN: 1964, Army: 4279, RAAF: 2307.
(2) Intakes for the next three years will be of a size to cover losses from the services and to meet the expansion in strengths outlined in lhe response (3) following.
Recruitment planning is carried out on an annual basis and is closely monitored to adjust for unexpected variations in losses from the services. Losses for 1979-80 totalled 7535, whilst recruitment was 8550, The intake for 1980-81 is expected to be approximately 9040. Intakes for future years wiII depend upon ceiling strength levels yet to be approved.
(3) In February 1980 the Government announced its intention to increase regular service manpower by about 5000 by 1984-85. In the current financial year, the ceiling has been increased by 370 for the RAN, 840 for the Army and 370 for the RAAF. The actual size of increase for each service in 1981-82 and subsequent years has not yet been approved.
(4) During the last 12 months, only construction ofaminor nature has been carried out at the Singleton base. This involved individual works valued at less than $15,000 to a total aggregate of about $138,000.
The following new construction is planned for 1982:
An office building, workshops and stores facility and alterations to existing buildings for the Singleton Workshop Platoon at an estimated cost of $170,000.
Provision of 5 x 3 bedroom married quarters at an estimated cost of $300,000,
Provision of Fixed Fire Protection for 8 Camp Hospital at $21,000.
Minor construction work to a lotal aggregate of about $200,000.
(5) Defence resource planning procedures are expressed in terms of prime inpul categories. Recruit training costs cannot be identified as a separate category. The budget for 1980-81 has made provision for the approved expansion of the Defence Forces.
(6) The Defence Budget for future years wiII take into account the planned increase in Defence Force strengths.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3589

National Research Organisations
(Question No. 2086)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Educatio'l, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) Will the Government be promoting the work of national research organisations during the next two years.
(2) What funds and staff have been applied to the (a) Australian National University, (b) Institute of Advanced Studies at the Australian National University and (c) Research School of Biological Sciences at the ANU in each year since 1976.
(3) Will the Government increase, in real terms, the level of funding to the Tertiary Education Commission in 198 I-82.

(4) Will the research facilities at the Australian National University be expanded during the next two years; if so, what are the details.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourahle member's question is as follows:
(1) Before last year's general election the Prime Minister announced a major new initiative to provide $16 million to establish research centres of excellence in Australian Universities. On 15 May 1981 I announced the appointment of a committee to make recommendations to the Government on this matter, and funds were provided within the allocation for higher education for the 1982-84 triennium which I announced in my Statement on Commonwealth Education Policy and Financial Guidelines to the Commonwealth Education Commissions.
(2) (a) to (c) The Australian National University has provided the following details:

FUNDS 1976-80 Expenditure in $'000

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

Australian National University Institute of Advanced Studies
Research School of Biological Sciences

67,213 34,890 4,219

73,870 37,293 4,581

79,317 40,905 5,084

83,650 42,918 5,21 I

95,141 48,212 5,892

STAFF 1976-80'

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

Academic
ANU Institute RSBS General
ANU Institute RSBS Total
ANU Institute RSBS

1,028 546 64
2,494 1,171
168
3,522 1,717
232

1,015 527 66
2,511 1,171
177
3,526 1,698
243

1,052 534 59
2,452 1,165
165
3,504 1,699
224

1,032 526 61
2,404 1,127
164
3,436 1,653
224

1,018 529 59
2,350 1,118
159
3,368 1,647
218

* Staff employed in independent operations (e.g. Students Union) are not included;
Figures include the estimated full-time equivalent of part-time staff, visiting staff and staff with external salary support; research officers and assistants are included with general staff; Reference date is 30 April 1981.

(3) Tertiary Education Commission programs are funded on a calendar year basis. The total allocation for 1982 has been increased in real terms. Details were announced in my Statement on Commonwealth Education Policy and Financial Guidelines to the Commonwealth Education Commissions, made in the Parliament on 4 June last.
(4) The expansion of research facilities at the ANU is dependent on government funding for capital works, and on equipment grants. Details wiII not be known until the Tertiary Education Commission presents Volume 2 of its Report, for the 1982-84 triennium due on 31 August 1981 for government consideration.
Participation in Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting: Department of Finance
(Question No. 2171)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:

(I) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division and (e) 4th Division officers in the Department of Finance are engaged (i) full-time or (ii) part-time in administrative, policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.
(2) How many officers of the Department are expected to attend the meeting.
(3) What is the expected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel and other expenses.
(4) What other expenses does the Minister expect the Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the meeting.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has supplied the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Prime Minister to Question No. 2162.

3590 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Participation in Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting: Department of Social
Security
(Question No. 2174)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(l) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division and (c) 4th Division officers in the Department of Social Security are engaged (i) full-time or (ii) part-time in administrative, policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.
(2) How many officers of the Department are expected to attend the meeting.
(3) What is the expected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel and other expenses.
(4) What other expenses does the Minister expect the Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the meeting.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) (a), (b) and (c) None.
(2) As at 16 June 1981, none.
(3) Nil.
(4) Nil.
Participation in Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting: Department of Veterans'
Affairs
(Question No. 2184)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:

(I) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division and (c) 4th Division officers in the Department of Veterans' Affairs are engaged (i) full-time or (ii) part-time in administrative, policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.
(2) How many officers of the Department are expected to attend the meeting.
(3) What is the expected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel and other expenses.
(4) What other expenses does the Minister expect the Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the meeting.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Trefer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Prime Minister to Question No. 2162.
Movement of Naval Ships in the Indian Ocean
(Question No. 2192)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
Will he bring up to date the information he gave in answer to Question No. 66 (Hansard 25 February 1981, page 197) on the movement of naval ships in the Indian Ocean.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Monthly classjday figures of Soviet naval and naval associated ships which operated in the Indian Ocean during the period I November 1980 to 30 Aprill981 are shown in the table below.

NAVAL ACTIVITY IN THE INDIAN OCEAN

Nov.

Dec.

Jan.

Feb.

Mar.

Apr.

Aircraft Carrier Kiev
Cruisers Sverdlov
Knista
Destroyers Kotlin
Kashin
Frigates Krivak
Petya
Riga
Submarines Foxtrot
Echo II Minesweeper
T-58
Landing Ships IvanRogov Polnocny
Alligator Ropucha

20

31

28

31

30

30

13

39

31

31

28

31

30

30

31

31

28

31

3

69

68

66

56

62

63

6

30

10

60

62

63

72

62

60

20

2

31

28

31

30

30

31

31

28

31

30

67

62

62

56

62

33

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3591

Auxiliaries Tugs Store ships
Barrack ships Cargo ships Buoy tenders
Oilers Repair ships Sub tenders
Tankers Miscellaneous Others Oceanographic
Hydrographic Intelligence collectors

Nov.

Dec.

Jan.

Feb.

Mar.

Apr.

30

31

31

25

30

31

31

28

46

20

60

88

62

53

31

30

30

31

31

28

31

30

58

38

31

28

31

30

63

48

31

32

74

84

198

232

212

193

159

180

72

62

96

84

72

62

30

31

31

5

26

62

40

44

31

28

31

42

There have been 17 transits by 15 ships through the Suez Canal from 1 November 1980 to 30 April 1981.

Indian Ocean ship day figures for the USSR, USA, UK and France are shown in the following table:

1980 (from 1 November-31 December)

USSR
USA UK
France

1,952
3,353 670
2,141

1981 (from I January-30 April)

USSR USA UK France

3,398 2,982
640 2,244

Mandata System
(Question No. 2208)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(1) What improvements, increased efficiencies and other benefits have been achieved with the introduction of the Mandata system?
(2) What is the expected return from the sale of equipment following the termination of the system?
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The consensus of departments is that the Mandata project was of value as an aid to effective management. However, as indicated in the Public Service Board's 1980 Annual Report, whilst the project has achieved reasonably reliable operations within defined limits, it has failed to meet the objectives earlier set for it and with hindsight, the project has not proved cost-effective.
(2) Action is in hand to make known to departments and instrumentalities/authorities details of the items which will become surplus. It is expected that most of the equipment will be taken up by government agencies thus avoiding additional outlay for approved ADP acquisitions. The return will be known when this is done.

Service Personnel: Long Service Leave
(Question No. 2235)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) What percentage of funds allocated for long service leave for service personnel is payment in lieu of leave.

(2) Do service personnel have a right to long service leave.
(3) If so, is it practice to reject applications for leave when eligibility for leave has been reached.
(4) Is long service leave actually a form of retirement pay under existing legislation.
(5) Is an entitlement for pay in lieu established progressively as qualification periods for long service leave are completed or is this entitlement only available at retirement.
(6) Does a serviceman seeking to take long service leave entitlement have any recourse to review by an independent person or authority where this leave is refused.
MI' Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) There is no allocation of funds for the payment of Ibng service leave to serving members. Members receive normal salary while on long service leave. However, funds are allocated for the payment in lieu oflong service leave.
(2) A member may be granted subject to Service convenience long service leave once he has completed 10 years admissible service.
(3) Long service leave is generally approved. However, an application may be rejected when the taking of long service leave by a member is not in the interests of the Service or because of manning requirements.
(4) No. Long service leave is a period of rest and recuperation, whilst on service, after a minimum of 10 years service. Pay in lieu of long service leave can be taken only for unexpended credits at discharge.
(5) An entitlement to long service leave accrues progressively during a member's service. Payment in lieu of long service leave can only be made to a member when he separates from the Service.
(6) Should a member's application for long service leave be denied, he may submit a request for reconsideration of his application through the normal Service channels. In addition, the member has recourse to the long established Services Redress of Wrongs system, and to the Office of the Defence Force Ombudsman, if he is not satisfied with the results of a request for reconsideration.
Defence: Estimated Expenditure on Wages and Salaries
(Question No. 2239)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:

3592 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Does the reduction of $1 03m (sic) in estimated expenditure by his Department on wages and salaries in 1980-81 indicate:
(a) that recruitment will be below the figure stated at the time of 1980 Budget;
(b) that expected changes in conditions contained in recommendations of the Defence Forces Pay Review Tribunal and approved by him will cost less than was originally anticipat~d; or
(c) that the recommendations of the Review Tribunal have been delayed beyond the time when it was anticipated that payment of new rates would have commenced.
Mr Killen-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(a) No.
(b) No.
(c) On 31 October 1980 the Committee of Reference for Defence Force Pay recommended interim salary increases of around four per cent. These interim recommendations have been approved and implemented.
I understand from the Chairman of the Committee of Reference that it hopes to be in the position to present a further report to the Minister by the end of July 1981.
The amount of $103m (initially $llOm) was included by the Department of Finance in the Defence Budget estimates for 1980-81 to meet prospective increases in wage and salary rates of both Service and civilian personnel within Defence, stemming from national wage cases and work value studies.
The actual additional estimate variation for salaries sought by Defence for 1980-81 is $91.795m to cover mainly increases flowing from national wage cases and work value studies so far awarded to Service personnel and civilians.
Williamstown Naval Dockyard
(Question No. 2240)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the public statement emanating from the Royal Commission into the Painters and Dockers Union that employees of the Williamstown Naval Dockyard, Victoria, were collecting their pay, rejoining the queue and being paid a second time.
(2) Is there any substance to this claim, if so, why are" the administrative procedures so poor or the staff of his Department so incompetent that second salaries can be paid to individuals without this being discovered by those responsible for the management of payrolls and by the Government auditors.
(3) If the Royal Commission's statement is correct, in what way are appropriations provided for the second payments to individuals, and who arranges this.
(4) Can he assure the House that this practice does not, or never did, occur.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Employees can and do legitimately collect more than one pay; their own, and with proper authority from a workmate, his also. This is common practice in Commonwealth employment.

(3) Although allegations have been made before the Royal Commission, it is my understanding that it has not been established that any wrong practices are occurring at Williamstown Naval Dockyard. It is likely that further evidence on the same subject could yet be called before the Commission.
(4) See answer 2 and 3.
Construction of Hydrographic Survey Vessel
(Question No. 2242)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 12 May 1980:
(I) What costs have been associated with the construction of the hydrographic survey vessel at Williamstown Dockyard, Victoria.
(2) Have significant alterations to the design of this vessel during construction created serious delays in deliver.
(3) What have been the additional costs incurred by the design alterations.
(4) What has been the (a) cost and (b) cause of the period of delay resulting from design and operational problems in the multi-pitch screw hydraulics.
Mr Killen-The following answer is provided to the honourable member's question:
This answer presumes that the honourable member is referring to the Oceanographic Research Ship HMAS Cook presently under construction at Williamstown. The hydrographic survey vessel HMAS Flinders was also constructed at Williamstown; however that vessel has been in operation for the last seven years.
(I) The cost of the Oceanographic Research Ship HMAS Cook is $30.886m at Decemher 1980 prices. The estimated project cost in September 1974, construction commencement date, was $17.5m. The total net real price increase amounts to $2.03Im of the increase of $13.386m. The balance of the increase, i.e., $ll.355m, has occurred due to inflationary factors.
(2) No-the design work package for this ship was completed prior to 1974. Minor design changes have been included in the shipbuilder's work package subsequent to that date; howevcr these have not delayed the completion of the ship.
(3) An increase in real costs of $O.188m (approx) to implement 111 design changes. Balanced against this cost figure is a saving of $0.141m which resulted from implementation of four design changes.
(4) The cause of the period of delay in completion of the ship can be attributed to the inability of the main machinery contractor to satisfactorily instal the main propulsion machinery in the ship to meet specification contract requirements.
Reimbursement of costs associated with rectifying the machinery deficiencies, together with the shipbuilder's consequential costs resulting therefrom, e.g., additional docking, delays to other scheduled docking, dockyard services, are being actively investigated by the contractual authority; the Department of Administrative Services.
Answers to Questions on Notice
(Question No. 2250)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:
When may I expect to receive an answer to questions Nos 458 and 484 which first appeared on the notice paper on 24 February 1981.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3593

Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
See the answer. to Question Nos 458 and 484 (Weekly Hansard, 10 June 1981).
Enemy Subjects Trust Account
(Question No. 2285)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(1) When was the Enemy Subjects Trust Account established.
(2) What sums are lodged in the account.
(3) Are there any outstanding claims against the account.
(4) On termination of the account (Hansard 30 April 1981, page 1844) what use will be made of the funds.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1') The Enemy Subjects Trust Account was established on 6 October 1939 in accordance with the provisions of section 14 of the Trading with the Enemy Act 1939 to receive and deal with the proceeds of disposal of property formerly owned by Enemy Subjects.
(2), (3) and (4) Funds which became available earlier have been distributed over the years, including two general distributions to eligible ex-prisoners of war and their dependants. Since no transactions involving receipts to the Account have occurred for several years and since it seems most unlikely that any further claims on the Account will arise, it has been decided that its continuation is no longer justified.
Pending its closure the balance of funds that remained in the account ($19;579.93), being too small to justify another general distribution, has been transferred to the Services Canteens Trust Fund.
Defence Force Review Tribunal: Report on Salaries and Conditions
(Question No. 2294)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(1) Has the report by the Defence Force Review Tribunal on Salaries and Conditions of Members of the Defence Forces been completed. .
(2) If not, has the time taken for the review been excessive and will he seek to have the finalisation of the Report expedited.
(3) Has an amount of $103m been deducted from the appropriation for the Defence Forces accounts savings, as a result of the Report not being available when initally anticipated.
(4) Will he ensure that the operative date of any beneficial changes to service conditions and salaries will be backdated, in order that Service personnel will not be financially disadvantaged by delays in the preparation or approval of the Tribunal's recommendations.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No.
(2) I do not consider the time taken for the review to be excessive. The Committee of Reference for Defence Force Pay was given its terms of reference on 22 July 1980. The Committee submitted to me an interim report on 31 October 1980

on the work value aspect of the reference recommending an increase in Service remuneration on grounds of work value change. This recommendation has been approved and implemented.
Additionally, in December 1980, the Committee of Reference was tasked with an examination of appropriate allowances for Special Action Forces. The report on this subject was presented on 6 March 1981. Without doubt, this intervening but extreinely urgent reference eelayed to some extent continuance of the work required by the earlier reference.
Despite these strictures on the time of the Committee, two members of which are full-time members of the Arbitration Commission a further report is expected to be forthcoming by about the end ofJuly 1981.
(3) The amount of$103m (initially $11 Om) was included in the Defence Budget estimates for 1980-81 by Department of Finance, as an Allowance to meet prospective increases in wage and salary rates of both Service and civilian personnel within Defence.
The actual additional estimate for the salaries sought by Defence for 1980-81 is $91.795m to cover mainly increases flowing from national wage case decisions and work value increases so far awarded to both Service personnel and civilians.
(4) The interim increase recommended by the Committee of Reference, which is mentioned in 2. above, was effective from 22 July 1980. This was the date terms of reference for the inquiry were given to the Committee of Reference. In the report accompanying the recommendations, the Committee of Reference stated that it should not be inferred that 22 July 1980 will be the operative date for the final work value assessment or for other recommendations made necessary by the terms of reference. That final date of effect is to be a matter for separate consideration.
Australian Army Reserves
(Question No. 2295)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(1) Did the 1980-81 Budget estimates indicate the estimated strength of the Australian Army Reserves to be 31,550.
(2) Do the supplementary estimates in Appropriation Bill (No.3) 1980-81 show a reduced estimated figure of 31,260; if so, is it anticipated that the figure will be reached.
(3) Have estimates of the numbers of recruits and retrenchments been rendered inaccurate by changes in methods at unit level of assessing the numbers of Army Reserve members.
(4) What is the current estimate of the numbers of members of the Army Reserve for June 1981.
(5) Will the public advertising campaign to attract recruits to the Australian Defence Force Reserves be extended into 1981-82.
Mr Killen-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) The supplementary estimates in Appropriation Bill (No.3) 1980-81 comprehend a reduced estimated target for 30 June 1981 of 31260 but latest returns indicate now that this target will not be reached.
(3) Army has made no policy changes in the method of assessing numbers since the expansion began. Headquarters Field Force was made aware last February of one Army Reserve Officer, who on his own initiative encouraged his subordinates to delay the declaration of non-effective members.

3594 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Orders were immediately given to prevent such a practice being contemplated elsewhere.
(4) It is expected that the Army Reserve will achieve a strength of 28,500 at 30 June 1981, with the target figure of 30,000 being reached in September 1981.
(5) Yes.
Defence: Scientffic and Technical Research
(Question No. 2296)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(I ) Was the report of the Defence Science and Technology
Organisation Review Committee made available to the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions prior to the decision being made to reduce his Department's capacity for scientific and technical research.
(2) Was he consulted on this decision prior to the an
nouncement of the effects of the Review of Commonwealth Functions.
(3) Were officers of this Department required to give evi
dence to the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Func tions; if so, was this evidence given on his authorisation.
(4) Was he made aware at the time of the purpose to which
the evidence would be put.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Conclusions of the DSTO Review relevant to RCF de
liberations were amongst information provided to the RCF Committee by the Department of Defence.
(2) Yes.
(3) Officers of the Department of Defence. on my authoris
ation, provided factual information to the RCF Committee.
(4) I was aware that the information would be used in the
context and for the purpose for which it was provided, i.e. re view of Commonwealth functions.
Petrol Prices
(Question No. 2302)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that since the
release of the recent Prices Justification Tribunal (PJT) report on petrol prices, the extent of discounting petrol has increased markedly in New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland.
(2) Is it a fact that South Australia motorists have not
shared in the benefits of the resultant lower level of pertrol prices.
(3) Is he satisfied that petrol resellers and motorists in
South Australia are not being discriminated against by the oil companies; if not, will he (a) instruct the body replacing the PJT to investigate immediately this discrimination by the oil companies in South Australia and (b) continue to monitor petrol pricing throughout Australia.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I ) No. Indeed I have noted reports that some oil
companies intended to withdraw discounts, following the re
lease of the PJT report of 31 March 1981 on petroleum prod uct prices. I am not able to confirm or deny the accuracy of
those reports nor to say whether market conditions will enable companies to withdraw those discounts.

{2) See answer to (I) above.
(3) According to ABS figures (catalogue No. 6403.0) the
average retail price of super grade petrol in Adelaide during
the March quarter of 1981 was higher than in other State capi
tals. In the previous quarter the reverse applied.
(4) Prices determined by the PJT for the oil companies are
maximum justified prices. They differ between States only to the extent of differences in State taxes or other charges levied on petroleum products.
Oil companies are not obliged to charge the maximum jus tified prices and, where competition is keen, they might not be able to obtain the full justified price. Actual prices to resellers would reflect both the strength of competition of any State price controls that may apply.
The Petroleum Products Pricing Authority will take over from the PJT the respnmsibility for monitoring prices charged by the oil companies. It will have powers as proposed in the Petroleum Products Pricing Bill which I introduced into Par
liament on 27 May 1981.
As the Commonwealth's jurisdiction over prices is limited to the corporate sector, effective action to monitor retail petrol prices, including the margins applied by non-corporate resellers, is a matter for State Governments to consider.
Domestic Fallout Shelter Guide
(Question No. 2309)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for De fence, upon notice, on 26 May 1981:
(1) Is the Domestic Fallout Shelter Guide 1980 issued by
the natural disasters organisation within his Department sup posed to provide guidance to Australians in the event of nu clear accident or the explosion of nuclear weapons in Australia.
(2) If so, (a) is the Government satisfied with the ad
equacy of the guide and (b) what additions, amendments or alterations can be made to improve the guide.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) The booklet was produced to give those who
may wish to plan for protection from radioactive fallout following a nuclear explosion some guidance on domestic shelters which could be constructed at moderate cost.
I am satisfied that the booklet is adequate for that purpose.
The booklet was produced as part of the Natural Disasters Organisation's ongoing public information program. Relevant material is constantly being reviewed and pamphlets produced, in conjunction with appropriate authorities on a range of disaster subjects.
Information on nuclear health matters is presently being gathered under these arrangements. This information could form part of a more comprehensive booklet which would in clude information about fallout shelters and any other relevant material which is ready for dissemination at the time.
United States and Japan Alliance
(Question No. 2320)
Mr Fry asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 26 May 1981:
{I) Does the recently announced alliance between the
United States of America and Japan have any impact on Australian foreign policy and defence planning.
(2) If the alliance leads to a re-arming of Japan, what impli
cations will this have for Australia and what would be the effect on Australian foreign affairs and defence policy.

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3595

(3) Did the United States Government consult with the Australian Government before announcing this alliance.
(4) Has the USA any obligation, either legal or moral, to consult with Australia on such a matter.
(5) If the Australian Government was consulted, what response did it give.
(6) If the Australian Government was not consulted on this matter, (a) is this a cause of concern for the Australian Government and (b) what guarantee is there that the USA will consult Australia on any future foreign policy initiative involving countries in the area.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) An alliance between the United States and Japan has tIot been announced recently. In the joint communique issued by Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki and President Ronald Reagan on 8 May, it was stated that 'the Prime Minister and the President, recognising that the alliance between Japan and the United States is built upon their shared values of democracy and liberty, reaffirmed their solidarity, friendship and mutual trust'. Although there has been debate in Japan about the interpretation of the word 'alliance' in this sentence, in particular as to whether it committed Japan to a new or altered security relationship with the United States, the Government of Japan has made it clear that its relationship with the United States remains as it has been.
(2) The joint communique further states that 'the Prime Minister and the President reaffirmed their belief that the Japan-United States Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security is the foundation of peace and stability in the Far East and the defense of Japan. In insuring peace and stability in the region and the defense of Japan, they acknowledged the desirability of an appropriate division of roles between Japan and the United States. The Prime Minister stated that Japan, on its own initiative and in accordance with its constitution and basic defense policy, will seek to make even greater efforts for improving its defense capabilities in Japanese territories and in its surrounding sea and air space, and for further alleviating the financial burden of US forces in Japan. The President expressed his understanding of the statement by the Prime Minister.'
These positions outlined in the communique do 'not alter our perception of Japan's defence and security policies nor of Japan's relations with the United States. The Government sees cooperation under the Japan-United States Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security as a vital part of the defence of the Asia/Pacific region, as are the separate arrangements under ANZUS. It is in Australia's interest that the defence relationship between Japan and the United States remain a harmonious one.
(3), (4), (5) and (6) As suggested in answer to questions (1) and (2), no event as suggested by those questions took place which required specific consultations with Australia by any other government. In both formal and informal consultations with the United States on security issues in the Pacific area, discussion would include, as appropriate from time to time, subjects related to Japan. Similarly, established patterns of consultations with Japan on matters of common international concern include subjects such as Japan's, and our own, relations with the United States.
Replacement ofHMAS 'Melbourne'
(Question No. 2331)
Mr Fry asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(1) What proportion of the annual Defence budget is spent on the acquisition of new equipment.

(2) What are the implications for the Army and Air Force, in terms of new equipment, from the decision to replace HMAS Melbourne with another aircraft carrier or carriers.
(3) For how many years will the proportion of the Defence budget allocated for purchase of capital equipment be tied up in paying off a new aircraft carrier.
(4) Does he favour an aircraft carrier rather than a mix of conventional submarines and small surface ships for the protection of Australia; if so, why.
(5) Is HMAS Melbourne being replaced by another aircraft carrier so as to enable Australia to project a visible presence in the South Pacific and Indian Oceans.
(6) Will other powers in the area interpret the replacement ofHMAS Melbourne in the terms referred to in part (5).
(7) Is the career structure of the Royal Australian Navy centred around serving on an aircraft carrier.
(8) Has Australian thinking on a replacement for HMAS Melbourne been influenced by United States of America Naval doctrine.
(9) How many Oberon-class submarines could be purchased from the sum necessary to replace HMAS Melbourne with another aircraft carrier.
Mr Killen-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(I) The proportions of total Defence expenditures spent on capital equipment over the financial years 1975-76 to 1979-80 are 8.3 per cent, 12.8 per cent, 13.2 per cent, 15.5 per cent and 16.4 per cent respectively. On 19 February 1980 the Prime Minister announced in Parliament details of a defence program which is expected to raise the proportion of expenditure on capital investment to over 25 per cent of the defence vote by 1984-85.
(2) The acquisition of new major capital equipment is considered primarily in the context of its contribution to the development of defence force capabilities as a whole. Planning for the development of Army and Air Force capabilities will necessarily take account of concurrent development of the RAN.
(3) None. In anyone year the major equipment component of the Defence Budget comprises financial allocations for a range of equipment approved in earlier years and for new equipment to be approved in the Budget year.
(4) Studies to assisnhe selection of an aircraft carrier design are continuing. Conventional submarines and small surface ships are not alternatives to the anti-submarines helicopters which will be deployed with any new carrier. The carrier is to have potential for operating short take-off and vertical landing (STOVL) aircraft. The Government will consider in 1983 whether or not to acquire STOVL aircraft, in the light of aircraft costs, capabilities and other relevant factors.
(5) See my answer (4) above. A new carrier would, as do HMAS Melbourne and other major ships of the RAN,conduct operations in the Pacific and Indian Oceans.
(6) I cannot comment accurately on how neighbouring states might interpret Government decisions on Australian defence force development. I should expect them to see a decision to acquire a helicopter carrier as a military matter rather than, as the question implies, a political one.
(7) No. Service with the aircraft carrier is not a prerequisite for advancement in the RAN.
(8) No. Decisions on Australian defence force development are based on Government assessments of Australian defence needs.
(9) See my answer to (4) above. No useful answer can be given to this question. The eventual cost of a new carrier will

3596 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

depend on the type of ship selected and the range of capabilities that it might include. The Oberon submarine is no longer in production.
Visits by United States Attack Submarines
(Question No. 2384)
!VII' Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(1) Will he update the record of visits by attack submarines of the United States Navy provided in answer to Question No. 508 (Hansard, 5 May 1981,p. 2004).
(2) Is he able to say which of the submarines visiting since 1979 have been Los Angeles class attack submarines.
(3) Have the visiting submarines cooperated with Australian Orion P-3C aircraft in surveillance activities in the Eastern Indian Ocean area; if so, on what occasions.
(4) Have the visiting submarines conducted exercises with RAN units and/or RAAF aircraft; if so, (a) on what occasions and (b) which Australian units were involved on each occasion.
!VIr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The following visits to HMAS Stirling by nuclear powered submarines have taken place in 1981:

Name of submarine
USSMemphis US Gurnard US Cavalla USSPintado US Bluefish

Dates of visit
6-11 February 27 February-6 March 15-22April 22-27 May 29 May-3 June

(2) US Los Angeles, US Baton Rouge, US GroTon, US Omaha, US Philadelphia, US Memphis.
(3) No.
(4) a and b Yes. The occasions on which RAN and RAAF units have exercised with visiting submarines since 1979 have been prior to or on completion of the visits by the US TauTog in August 1980, US Gumard in March 1981 and US Pintado in May 1981. RAAF Orion aircraft participated on all three occasions, and HMAS Perth participated also in exercises with US Pintado.
Sound Surveillance System on Christmas Island
(Question No. 2385)
!VIr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(J) Has his attention been drawn to the article by Joel S. Wit entitled 'Advances in Antisubmarine Warfare' in the Scielllific American, February 1981, Volume 244, Number 2; if so, does a map appearing on page 37 indicate the presence on Christmas Island of a Sound Surveillance System (SOSUS) shore facility connected with the US antisubmarine warfare program.
(2) Does the facility shown on the map actually exist; if so, is it under Australian or United States control.
(3) In view of the SOSUS offshore arrays near Indonesian waters and the SOSUS shore facility, has Australia access to intelligence gathered on the movements of Soviet and other nations' submarines.
!VII' KillenThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(l) Yes; yes.
(2) No. See my answer to Question No. 506 (Hansard, page 2004).
(3) I will not comment further on the accuracy or otherwise of details about underwater sensor systems contained in the ScienTific American article. Australia obtains intelligence about the movement of other nations' submarines from various sources.
Tertiary Student Loan Scheme
(Question No. 2401)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(1) Will the loans made available under the tertiary student loan scheme announced by the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions (Hansard, 30 April, 1981, page 1843) be (a) free of interest or (b) subject to the low rate of interest.
(2) Over what periods will repayments be set.
(3) What procedures will be followed in attempting to secure repayments of loans made under this proposed loan scheme to supplement or replace the TEAS.
(4) Will the Government obtain the services of debt collecting agencies to ensure repayment of loans.
(5) What security will be required of the student in obtaining a loan.
(6) Will loans be taken out at the beginning of a term to last for the duration of the term, or will they be obtained at the beginning of the school year for the duration of that year.
(7) Will students entering their second or third year of studies be required to have paid back the loan for the prcvious year before proceeding or before obtaining a new loan.
(8) What will be the financial indebtedness of a student who secures loans for 3 years of studies and fails in the last term of those 3 years and is unable to continue his or her education.
(9) Is the purpose of providing loans to assist students in (a) the progressive payment of tertiary education fees or (b) meeting expenses incurred while studying for a degree or diploma.
(10) If the purpose of the loan is that referred to in part (9) (b), will students who are not successful in the course of study for which they have received loans, still be required to repay the loan; if so, will the loan scheme add serious financial indebtedness as a penalty to a student's failure to achieve success at his or her studies.
!VII' Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (10) At this stage the details of the proposed student loans scheme have not been finalised and it is not possible, therefore, to provide specific answers to the parts to this question. I shall make a fuller statement on the scheme later in the year after negotiations with banks and tertiary institutions have been completed.
Prices ofPetl'oleum Products
(Question No. 2438)
!VII' Hayden asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 4 June 1981 :
(1) Did the Prices Justification Tribunal say in its report published on 31 March 1981 entitled Inquiry into Prices of Petroleum Products, at page 25, that the Tribunal accepts that a review (i.e. of the Tribunal's criteria and procedures for

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3597

dealing with petroleum product prices) is desirable and accordingly, following the completion of this Inquiry, it will prepare a statement on the criteria, procedures and information requirements for future pricing proposals and that this statement will be made available to the industry and to interested parties for comment before decisions to implement the proposals are taken by the Tribunal; if so, what stage has been reached by the Tribunal in this review of procedures for future out product pricing proposals.
(2) Will he ensure that the new mechanism to be established to maintain the Government's petroleum product pricing policy will continue with and complete this review as promised by the Tribunal.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes-the Prices Justification Tribunal has this matter under consideration.
(2) Yes-It will be the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority's responsibility to continue the work and complete the review.
Commonwealth Funding for Colleges of Advanced Education
(Question No. 2442)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
(I) Further to the Government's announcement that consideration would be given to funding activities of single purpose colleges of advanced education where they have been amalgamated with or into larger institutions to the satisfaction of the Commonwealth Government by the end of 1981 (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1843), is it a fact that Commonwealth funding for 30 single purpose CAE's will cease as single purpose institutions from the end of 1981.
(2) Are a number of institutions listed in Attachment D to the Ministerial Statement on the Review of Commonwealth Functions (e.g. Hartley CAE, Salisbury CAE, Alexander Mackie CAE, Guild T.e., Nursery School T.e., Sydney Kindergarten T.C., Sydney T.C., SCV Coburg, Melbourne and Toorak, and Brisbane Kindergarten T.e.) already beingamalgamated into larger institutions; if so, why are these institutions listed.
(3) If the campuses listed in Attachment D to the ministerial statement amalgamate with, or into, larger institutions by the end of 1981 in a way which results in genuine amalgamations with one governing body and a real saving of resources, will they receive full Commonwealth funding.
(4) How does the Government define a real saving of resources.
(5) Will the Government undertake to guarantee that the total number of student places available in CAE's will not be reduced as a result of the amalgamations.
(6) What guarantees will the Government give to students that there will be provision for them to complete the courses in which they have enrolled.
(7) How will the Government fund courses previously offered by CAEs where they are transferred to neighbouring universities.
(8) Has the Government allocated $5m in 1982 and 1983 to facilitate this rationalisation; if so, is this to be a $Sm grant in each of years 1982 and 1983,
(9) Has the Government rejected the recommendation of the Tertiary Education Commission for $IOm to be allocated during 1982-83 to assist with the rationalisations; if so, why.

(10) Will the amalgamation of CAE's with universities affect access to CAE level courses due to the more stringent entrance requirements of the universities; if so, what action will the Government take to ensure that this does not occur.

(11) To what extent will the University of Western Australia and Murdoch University be expected to collaborate
and share resources.

(12) Has the Government estiinated the cost of pursuing the rationalisations proposed; if so what is the estimated cost.

(13) What. criteria is the Government using to justify the rationalisation ofengineering in Victoria.

(14) Has the Government undertaken a labour power study of the needs for engineers in Australia as a whole and the effect of the proposed rationalisation on the supply of
engineers.

Mr Fife--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) As I explained in my Statement on Commonwealth

Education Policy and Financial guidelines to the Common-

wealth Education Commissions, the Government intends to

reach agreement with each State concerning rationalisation

measures by the end of 1981. If this cannot be done, the Com-

monwalth will not be prepared to continue recurrent funding

for the colleges concerned after the end of 1981 and if the

State Government!; wish these colleges to continue as separate

entities they will have to make their own, separate financial

provision.

.

(2) Some institutions in Attachment D were already being amalgamated and in other cases proposals had been made but not necessarily finalised. The Government wished to confirm and accelerate the process of consolidation.

(3) Yes.

(4), (5), (6) and (7) The Government is concerned to ensure that the funds available for higher education are used in the most efficient and effective manner. The detailed arrangements for these matters will be considered by the Government following the receipt of the reports I have asked
the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission to provide by 30 June and 31 August.

(8) Yes. An amount of $5m p.a. has been earmarked within the general recurrent grants for advanced education in the years 1982 and 1983 as additional resources for CAEs which
are able to expand their effort in the technologies and business studies.

(9) See 8 above.

(10), (11) and (12) See (4), (5), (6) and (7) above.

(13) and (14) The Government's decision to rationalise engineering courses in Victoria is based on advice from the Com-
monwealth Tertiary Education Commission which took account of the findings of the Partridge Committee in Victoria in relation to engineering education and of a working part set
up by the Victorian Post Secondary Education Commission to extend the work commenced by the Partridge Committee. I am advised that the working party considered the numerical
needs for engineering education in Victoria and recommended that the engineering schools of Melbourne, Monash, RMIT, Swinburne and Footscray could, if necessary, meet all those needs. In its Volume I Report the CTEC has explained the
difficulties associated with predicting long-term trends in manpower needs but concludes that in view of the large
number of engineering schools in Victoria and the small size of
some of them, some rationalisation is required on grounds of quality.

3598 REPRESENTATIVES 10 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Public Service Superannuation Entitlements (Question No. 2445)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 4 June 1981 :
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to an article in
the Canberra Times of Tuesday, 12 May 1981, entitled
'Superannuation Scheme Changes Proposed', which indicates that a large Commonwealth department has canvassed a proposal to determine P u blic Service s u p e r a n n uation entitlements on length of service rather than age.
() Is there any substance to the report; if so, has the Aus
tralian Government Retirement Benefits Office or the De partment of Finance responded to the proposal.
(3) If either have responded to the proposal, what were the terms of the response.
(4) If neither has responded to the proposal, what is the (a) reason and (b) Government's attitude to the proposal outlined in the article.
Mr HowardThe Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Male Officers

Male Other Ranks

Female Officers

Female Other Ranks

February 198I Navy Army Air Force
March 1981 Navy Army Air Force
April l981 Navy Army Air Force

99.3 99.3 99.2
99.6 99.3 99.5
99.4 99.4 99.5

99.2 99.0 99.2
99.2 98.9 99.0
98.9 98.8 99.2

95.2 97.8 99.5
98.8 98.9 99.5
IOO.O 100.0
98.0

99.3 96.2 97.5
98.4 98.3 97.9
98.9 98.0 97.1

Retiring Age for Age Pension (Question No. 2520)
Mr Charles asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 June l981:
What is the estimated cost of reducing the retiring age for receipt of the age pension to 60 years.

(I) Yes.
(2) and (3) As the result of a routine request by the Public Service Board for items to be discussed by the Joint Council of the Australian Public Service, an officer submitted to his De partment a proposal ' . . . that the existing Superannu ation Scheme be altered or expanded to provide for retire ment on a 'length of service' basis in place of, or in addition to, the current 'age' basis . . .'. The Department forwarded the officer's proposal to the Australian Government Retire ment Benefits Office which referred it to the Department of Finance. Subsequently, the officer was informed by his Per manent Head that he considered that the proposal could not be pursued at this time. The Department of Finance was also informed of the Permanent Head's views. Accordingly, no re sponse was required.
(4) (a) See (2) and (3) above. (b) The basis of retirement of public servants is not determined by the Superannuation Act 1976, but by long-standing provisions now incorporated in the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Re tirement) Act 1979. There is no proposal before the Government to,change arrangements under which public servants, like the great majority of other employees throughout Australia, become eligible to retire, or are required to retire, on the grounds of age rather than length of service.

Mr HuntThe Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
1 refer the honourable member to my answer to House of
Representatives Question No. 903, asked on 25 March 1981
by Dr Klugman and answered in the Hansard of 29 April
1981 (page 1982). In my answer I outlined the difficulties in estimating the cost of lowering the pensionable age, and provided estimates of the cost of paying an income test free pen sion to men aged 60 to 64 years at November 1980 pension rates and December I980 numbers.
Similar estimates have been prepared based on the estimated number of persons, pensioners and beneficiaries at June 1981, and pension rates applicable from May 1981. The additional cost of paying an income test free pension to residentially qualified men aged 60 to 64 years is now estimated to be about $580 million in a full year. This cost is additional to the estimated $320 million annual cost of exist ing payments to male invalid and service pensioners and un employment and sickness beneficiaries aged 60 to 64 years.
Colleges of Advanced Education: Recurrent Funds
(Question No. 2613)

Services: Retention Rates (Question No. 2501)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
What were the (a) Army, (b) Navy and (c) Air Force re tention rates for (i) male and (ii) female personnel for each month since December 1975.

Mr Dawkins asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) Did he say in his statement on Commonwealth Edu cation Policy of 4 June 1981 (Hansard, pages 3Il l -28) that in
determining the level of recurrent funds for 1982-84 for col leges of advanced education the Government has taken account of such savings in respect of institutions which have been or will be consolidated during the triennium,

Mr KillenThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Information for the period 1975 to January 1981 was pro
vided in answer to the Question No. 829, Hansard, 2 April
1981, (pages 1333-34).
Information for February, March and April l981 is shown in the following table.

(2) If so, (a) what was the total amount of the savings estimated with respect to all institutions, (b) what were the individual savings estimated in respect of each institution proposed for consolidation and (c) by what sum were the re current funds for colleges of advanced education reduced to take account of those savings.
Mr Fife--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

10 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3599

(1) and (2) In determining the l!lvel of recurrent funds for 1982-84 for higher education the Government endorsed the approach taken by the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission to rationalisation but decided to accelerate the process. As I explained in my statement on Commonwealth education policy of 4 June 1981, the Government intends that the consolidation of institutions shoul;d result in a real saving

of resources. The Government has not been prescriptive in its guidelines to the CTEC and consequently will need to await CTEC advice before taken final decisions, which could vary from State to State and from institution to institution. The CTEC will be reporting on progress by 30 June and finally in its Volume II Report by 31 August 1981.


