House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 121, 1981 Tuesday, 24 February 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

AUSTRALIA
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENrfATIVES Hansard 1981
FIRST SESSION OF THE THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT
(SECOND PERIOD)
Pursuant to the Resolution of the House of Representatives passed on 4 December 1980, the House of Representatives met on Tuesday, 24 February 1981, at 2.15 p.m.

Tuesday, 24 February 1981
Mr SPEAKER CRt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.15 p.m., and read prayers.
ELECTORAL
Mr SPEAKER-J inform the House that on 22 January 1981 the Governor-General received letters from the Honourable Ransley Victor Garland and the Honourable John Elden McLeay resigning their seats as members for the electoral divisions of Curtin and Boothby respectively. Honourahle members will be aware that I issued writs for the election of members to serve for the electoral divisions of McPherson, in the State of Queensland; Curtin, in the State of Western Australia; and Boothby, in the State of South Australia, to fill the vacancies caused by the death of the Honourable E. L. Robinson and the respective resignations of the Honourable R. V. Garland and the Honourable J. E. McLeay. The dates in connection with the three by-elections were fixed as follows:
Date of nominalionsWednesday, 11 February 1981, and Friday, 13 February in the case of Boothby
Dale of polling-Saturday, 21 February 1981

Return of writs-On or before Friday, 27 March 1981
I also inform the House that on 17 February 1981 I received a letter from the Honourable Rohert James Ellicott, Q.c., resigning his seal as member for the electoral division of Wentworth. I intend shortly to issue a writ for the election of a member to serve for the electoral division of Wentworth. The dates in connection with the election are under consideration at the present time.
I have now received a return to the writ for the election of a memher to serve for the electoral division of Boothby. By the endorsement on thc writ, it is certified that Steele Hall has been elected.
NEW MEMBER SWORN
Mr Raymond Steele Hall made and subscribed the oath of allegiance as member for the division of Boothby, South Australia.
ELECTORAL Mr LJONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) -Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to address a few remarks to the announcement you have just made about the return of the writs. You were absent overseas when, as Acting Leader of the Opposition, I first heard that the Government proposed to hold by-elections on 21 February.

2 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Electoral

That struck me as being very unusual indeed because, as you know, if the Speaker is overseas, it is left to the Ciovernor-General-in-Council to decide
when a by-ejection will be held. r duly contacted
your Clerk to find out whether I had heard correctly and that there were to be by-elections on 21 Fcbruary. He said yes, he had discussed the matter with you, and that you proposed to write to me secking my comments on the proposals. On 22 January, I duly received from the Clerk a letter which indicated that at that stage-it had been written thc day beforeresignations were anticipated from the then honourable member for Curtin and the then honourable member for Boothby. Assuming that you would consider any submission
that r made, I wrote to you indicating that if, as
suggestcd, 21 February was to be the date of the by-elections, surely that would leave insufficient timc for the respective parties to select candidates and conduct campaigns.
The precedent which 1 put to you quite clearly and quite forcibly was that cstablished in the Werriwa by-election. You will recall that when the previous honourable member for vVerriwa resigned in July 197R you agreed to fix the date for the by-election some 54 days later, which I consider provided adeq uate time. If that precedent had been followed in this case, it would have meant that all partics would havc had a chance to selcet candidatcs and the by-election campaigns could have been conducted over a reasonable time. For example, 21 March would have been in accordancc with the Werriwa prccedent. What gravely concerns me is that [ did not receive a reply to my comments to you. Thc very next day I learned that you had decided to issue the writs for by-cleetions which, according to a statement madc by thc Prime Ministcr (Mr Malcolm Frascr) on telcvision some thrcc or four days previously, were to be hcld on 21 February.
Mr Speaker, that leads me to say to you quite forcihly that in this easc you sccm to have acted more as a mcmber of the Liberal Party of Australia than as an impartial Speaker. There was no rcason at all to deviate from the precedent set in the Wcrriwa hy--election. Thc Australian Financial Review of 20 January stated that the Liberal Party machine had heen advised that the by-clections would be held on 21 February. In other words, the Liberal Party was adviscd well in advance and the Prime Minister in your absence announced to the nation that he thought the byelcctions would be hcld on that date. I think you will agree that, as you invited my commcnts on the proposal and, on your rcturn, you completely ignorcd my correspondcnce in agreeing to those dales, I am entitled to object quite strongly,

firstly, to your lack of courtesy and, secondly, on the basis of precedent: Why was not the Werl'iwa precedent followed? Mr Speaker, if it beeomcs clear to us that you are acting as a member of thc Liberal Party in the seat which you hold and that you will accord to directions given to you by the Prime Minister, I suggest that it is about time that you considered seriously whether you should continue to hold the position of Speaker.
Mr SPEAKER-The Deputy Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. I have given him considerable indulgence. Having given him indulgence, I shall respond. I regard it as a matter of great importance that the office of Speaker in this national Parliament should be occupied in accordance with the current Westminster tradition. If the honourable gentleman feels consistently as he has expressed himself today, I hope he will join me in the process which I am undertaking to have the office of Speaker in this Parliament filled in the Westminster tradition. I hope I can look forward to his support in that.
With regard to the issue raised, the fact is t ha t last year it was announced that two members would be appointed to other posts and it was expected that they would resign from this Parliament. Indeed, they left the ministry for that purpose. On the death of the honourable member for McPherson, the late Mr Eric Robinson, it was necessary to call for the issue of writs for a by-election. While that was in process the two other gentlemen concerned decided to resign. I was then confronted with the situation of either holding separate by-elections or holding three by-elections on the same day. I thought it was desirable to hold the three on the one day and to hold them before Parliament resumed today. I also thought it was desirable to have them before the Parliament resumed today. I adhere to that decision. I think it was a correct one. I intended no discourtesy whatsoever to the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, who, in fact, was Acting Leader of the Opposition at the time. In my conversations with him, through the Clerk, I was punctilious about ensuring that he was informed. If he feels that I was in dereliction of my duty through a lack of courtesy, I will be glad to discuss the matter with him in private. If there was SLich dereliction, I will make an appropriate apology. At this stage, I do not believe that there was any departure whatsoever from courtesy.
DEATH OF THE HONOURABLE ERIC LAIDLAW ROBINSON, M.P.
Ml' MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-On Wednesday, 7 January, members of this House were shocked to hear of the sudden

eath of Mr Eric Robinson

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3

nd untimely death of Eric Robinson. The loss to ustralia, to this Parliament and to his friends nd his colleagues was a heavy one. [ move:
That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 7 nuary 1981 of the Honourable Eric Laidlaw Robinson, a ember of this House for the division of McPherson since 972 a Minister of the Crown from 1975 to 1980, the Presient'of the Queensland division of the Liberal Party from 68 to 1973; and places on record ils appreciation of his fluential and wide-ranging public service, and (enders its epest sympathy to his widow and family.
Eric Robinson's time and energies were given p almost entirely Lo parliamentary life, to the inistry, and to party and community affairs. To n enormous extent, he lived his life for politics. e did not keep his public career at arm's length om his private life. One thing that many honourble members will remember is the generous way
which he opened his home to his colleagues in olitics. Whenever a venue was needed, his home as always available. Eric was alert to the needs f the community. He sought to provide the kind f representation McPherson electors wanted and e represented them truly and well.
Eric Robinson was a strong party man. He beeved in the Liberal Party as a force for good in ustralia and devoted his energies to strengtheng it in Queensland. He was president of the Libal Party in Queensland for five years before he ntered the Federal Parliament. He believed in beralism above all else. lie believed strongly in e free enterprise system and supported the coninment of government expenditure. lie knew at this was the right path to a better life for Ausalians. He saw adherence to these principles as e foundation of progress in our community.
In his own electorate, he was surrounded by the emendous development and progress that can ccur when the energy and initiative of people are obilised by the opportunities that freedom prodes. Eric Robinson will be remembered particurly for his role as a man who had a practical nderstanding of business. fie was himself sucssful in business after responsibility for his famy's affairs was thrust upon him at a very young e.
He built up his family's sporting goods business om a single outlet into a chain that extends up d down the Queensland coast. ;\s a result of is, he knew the needs of the business community d he wished to help business to flourish roughout Australia. The result of his efforts was at the business community often looked to him r a lead. He was prepared to give that lead. The siness community has been grateful for that, d its benefits have been widely felt in the comunity generally.

Rut Eric Robinson was not just a practical man. His pragmatic judgments were informed by deeply held convictions and principles. These principles underlay his day to day responses. lie did his best to ensure that his principles were given practical expression.
We all know that Eric Robinson stood strongly for his principles and convictions. He fought for them with determination. But there were many occasions when he was prepared to set aside his personal feelings for the sake of what he saw as the greater good. I think it is well known to honourable members that] did not agree with Eric on all things. This is not unusual in politics. But it would be right to say that our disagreements were more about means than about ends and perhaps about matters of judgment rather than matters of principle. My differences with him did not diminish my respect for him, or for his contribution to the Liberal cause and to the service of his electorate and Australia.
Eric was a man whose outward calm hid the strength of his own feelings. Often it seemcd that he was impervious to criticism and that nothing could hurt him. But he felt things far more deeply than was understood by people who kncw him casually. [ value my knowledge of Eric Robinson and of the things we did together. His untimcly death is a reminder that public life can bc severe and demanding and that the demands of' a person's own conscience and sense of duty can be enormous. The strains of office, the strength of feeling, the pressures of time and the requirement for immediate action make many demands, and Eric Robinson extended himself to the full, and beyond, in meeting them.
Eric Robinson inspired loyalty and conviction, both amongst his own staff and amongst his Public Service advisers. He worked long and hard but retained the capacity to enjoy life, a capacity which was appreciated by his associates. We will miss him in this House in our deliberations and in the everyday contact of political life. A further feature of Eric Robinson's life was the indispensable foundation of everything that he did. It was at the base of his entire accomplishment. He was totally and utterly devoted to his family. Ilis love and loyalty to his wife, Narelle, together with her constant presence and support, gave to this man continuing strength and perspective in the atmosphere of Canberra politics. Ln expressing our gratitude to Narelle Robinson for her contribution to her husband's public service, we express our deepest sympathy to her and to her family at this time.

4 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Death ofMr Eric Robinson

Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Eric Robinson's service was not confined to

Opposition)-On behalf of the Opposition I join politics. He was prominent also in business, the

the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in excommunity and the sporting life of Queensland.

pressing sympathy to the widow and surviving However, it was in politics that he made the great-

family members of the late Eric Robinson. For est impression on Australians. After his election

those of us who knew Eric Robinson personally, to thc seat of McPherson in 1972 he gained grow-

his death was a considerable sadness. Whatever ing rcspect in this Parliament. In 1975 he was

our political differences with him-there were appointed Minister for the Capital Territory and

vigorous differences of substance and presenthe following year he became the Minister for

tation; for his part he presented the case on behalf Post and Telecommunications and Minister As-

of his party with firmness but always without sisting the Treasurer. In 1977 he was appointcd

rancour-he enjoyed our high personal regard, as Minister for Finance. The corner-stone of Eric

does his widow Narelle and their family.

Robinson's career was his life-long commitment

to frcc enterprise, the protection of the rights of

He was a conscientious Minister, always apindividuals and the fostering of personal initiative.

proachable and ever ready to be helpful where he Eric Robinson's close involvement with the Lib-

reasonably could, while at a personal level hc eral Party in Queensland was an integral part of

maintained a genuine, friendly interest in all of his that commitment.

parliamentary colleagues. His death was sudden

and unexpected, so unexpected as to suggest that As honourable members will be well aware,

the extreme pressures under which he worked, politics can put men-even men with the same

and the increasing tensions to which he was subpolitical philosophy-at odds on issues. Eric

jected, were taking an awful toll. We in this House Robinson and I did not have the same point of

saw the manifest evidence of those pressures and view about our political parties in Queensland.

tensions which, to a large degree, are part and parBut these differences, whilst they were real, were

cel of the daily work load that we all undertake. never personal. Eric and J had a good personal re-

But for Eric Robinson some of them seemed unlationship, one that started well before he entered

necessary and even unfair. He paid a high price Parliament. We were members of the same Cabi-

for his industry, his personal integrity and his nets of coalition governments. We were part of a

convictions.

team and I had a great respect for his ability, his

capacity and his integrity. I am sure that is felt by

He was essentially a man of great loyalty. He all the members of Cabinet who served with him.

was loyal to the ideal, as he saw it, of what the [ believe that respect is shared also by members of

Liberal Party should stand for and he was loyal to my party.

his Party in his home State of Queensland, where

he fought fiercely against what he saw as any As I have mentioned, I knew Eric Robinson

erosion of its position in political and public life. and his wife, Narelle, on the Gold Coast prior to

When he returned to the back bench after the rehis election in 1972. They were a very popular

cent elections, his vigorous advocacy of his beliefs couple and their home was always open to wel-

became perhaps an every greater force in the life come visitors to the area. Eric was a prominent

of his Party. The determination with which he figure on the Gold Coast which, of course, borders

stood by his convictions and his loyalties, despite my electorate of Richmond. When he became the

great personal cost, is an example to many of his honourable member for McPherson we shared the

colleagues in this Parliament.

handling of many regional problems in what is

probably the fastest growing area in Australia.

Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for One of our joint achievements was the develop-

Trade and Resources)-The death of Eric ment of the CooJangatta airport and the construc-

Robinson in January of this year, only days before tion of a major new terminal, which is now near-

his fifty-second birthday, was a great shock to~all ing completion. J am pleased that this new

of us and is a stark reminder to us all of just how terminal is to be named in Eric Robinson's

uncertain life is. Eric, a strong vigorous pcrsonhonour. It is a memorial to his services to the

ality, without warning was taken from us. It was a people of his electorate and to all Australians, and

demonstration of the toll that political life can to his career as a distinguished Minister in Liberal-

take of those who work to serve this nation. It National Country Party governments. I would

took from this Parliament a man with a dislike oncc again to take this opportunity to extend

tinguished record of service to the nation, to the my sympathy and the sympathy of the members

State and to the region for which he worked so of my party to his wife, Narelle, and the members

hard over many years.

of his family.

Death of Mr Eric Robinson

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATTVES 5

Sir PHILLIP LYNCH (Flinders Minister for Industry and Commerce)-- I rise to associate myself with the motion of condolence that has been moved by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) for my friend, the late Eric Robinson. I believe that to all intents and purposes the Old Testament injunction 'lift up thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not afraid', was Eric's personal and political maxim. For both Queensland and the Gold Coast his voice rang loud and clear in this place. He carried that State's case for additional finance, particularly in the area of road funding. He pressed hard for the Gold Coast and the securing of tourist incentives for the area. Indeed, many government initiatives in tourism were initially fostered by Eric Robinson. He brought to this Parliament the drive and dedication that had served him so well in free enterprise.
Eric Robinson was a man of unquestionable integrity, high principle, singular urbanity and, of course, personal charm. Above all, he was a valued colleague and a very close personal friend. His outstanding contribution to this Parliament is a matter of public record. He occupied the positions of Minister for Finance, Minister for Post and Telecommunications and Minister for the Capital Territory with great distinction. Eric believed in free enterprise. He was a firm believer in the need to get industry geared up and moving again because this was the area where new jobs could be created.
Throughout Eric's parliamentary career, he demonstrated both integrity and courage. As the Prime Minister has indicated, he was a dedicated Liberal and he was totally committed to the philosophy of the Liberal Party of Australia. He was a great Queenslander and family man, a man of principle and firm conviction, and a loyal and gentle man in the best sense in which those words can be used. He held very strong views and expressed them without fear or favour, no matter what conflict those views might have brought him into within his own political organisation, within this Parliament or in the whole body of political controversy in this country. At all times he was his own man. Eric made a very significant contribution to the Liberal Party of Australia over a long period, particularly to the Queensland division. Eric Robinson and I shared so much together. I will miss his friendship, as the Liberal Party and the country will certainly miss his contribution.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON (Lowe)--I had the good luck to be a friend of Eric Robinson. I came to know him from the time when, first as
Treasurer, I began to go to Surfers Paradise each

year to spend part of the Christmas holidays with my wife and later with her and my children. I had great respect, affection and liking for him. I will never forget the kindness that he showed me whenever I felt a need to discuss my problems with somebody who, I knew, would be sensitive to what was said and who would do his best to help to find a solution or who would give me some idea of what ought to be done. He was trustworthy. I know of no person, other than each member of my own family, whom I could trust to a greater extent.
In addition, he had another valuable attribute. I found this when I went to stay with him when I was a Minister, before I bought a small place of my own a mile away from his. He would always be amusing and was anxious to assist any member of parliament who went to his home, no matter what party that person belonged to. I remember a number of occasions when we had dinner at his home and members of the Australian Labor Party were therc as well. I remember the frankness with which conversation developed. The example, I think, is one that could well be followed by all. We do not appear to be able to discuss controversial maUers in confidence. One of his great assets was that he was a husinessman in the retail sales of sporting goods. When I was Treasurer, I preferred to talk to him about trends in the economy than to go to the professional economists. I include the Treasury when I usc that term. Eric knew the market-place.
He was a true liberal. Again I emphasise that he had deep feelings for the disadvantaged. His conversations with me about social welfare matters and about people who were not able to look after themselves were frequent. I am certain that people went to him not only because he thought about each problem but also because his decisions came from the heart. lie was also a very strong party man. I first met him when he was a member of the Executive of the Liberal Party Queensland division. Later he became its President. He was wise enough to realise that if he was to win a seat in parliament he had to have a base in Queensland and in the parliamentary party not only to sustain his authority but also so that he could understand and renect its views. I believe that that was one of the sources of his authority and influence.
He believed in the equality of men and their right to justice. He cared for people and he showed his concern. As part of his philosophy, he also believed in the rule of' law. How many times did I hear him speak up to say that we were all equal before the law and that whether one was a Cabinet Minister or a boss of a big business, there

6 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Death ofMr Eric Robinsoll

must be equality in the eyes of the law and, I believe, also in the eyes of most people in Parlia-
ment. He was a good Minister. One could go to him when he was Minister for Finance and find out the real significance of the money supply situation, what the economic trends were for better or worse and whether our expenditure or revenues were keeping within the Budget estimates. One could always talk to him. He welcomed others approaching him for a discussion as much as he welcomed the opportunity to approach others.
I want to speak now about his family. As I have said, I knew him for a long time. I knew his wife and I knew his wife's mother. I also knew Narelle's two children. Like him, they were very gregarious. They liked to see people in their home. They enjoyed entertaining them and wanted them to go home in a happy frame of mind. I witl never forget the many nights I shared with them, particularly in the last six months of Eric's life. I believe that Narelle, his wife, is one of the three or four most charming and companionable people one could meet. I have never known her to be anything but friendly. She is as anxious to help people as she is eager to entertain them. In the last few weeks she has been an almost constant companion of my wife. In fact, I think Narelle has seen my wife more frequently than I have.
I must refer also to Narelle's mother, Grom. Most of us who have met her would think that she must read every newspaper in Australia. She has an instinct for public affairs. She knows what happens on television and radio. She always participates in a very human way, whether right or wrong, in telling people what she thinks the Government or its Minister should have done, what they had forgotten or where they had gone wrong. She is a channing person. I want to remember her, too. I have said what I wanted to say about those charming people. I will miss Eric. I will also miss seeing Narelle as much as I have in the past when she came here with Eric and shared our companionship. I speak on this occasion with sorrow-a kind of sorrow that will stay with me for some time. It is not easy to forget a person who was loved as much as Eric.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-I support the condolence motion moved by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) concerning Eric Laidlaw Robinson. 1. knew Eric for many years. It was through his interest and guidance that I first became involved in the organisation of the Liberal Party. He gave an enormous amount of time, money and effort to that cause. As has already been said, he believed in private enterprise and he practised and advocated it.

II was from a very strong commercial background that he took an active interest in the Libcral Party. He formed the Surfers Paradise branch of the party in 1963. He became a member of the executive of the Liberal Party as representative of the McPherson area in 1964. He was VicePresidcnt of the Queensland Division of the party in 1966 and its President from 1968 to 1973. During that time he showed complete dedication to the Liberal Party in Queensland and a great sense of organisational skill and development. He pressed the barriers on all corners. He was certainlya controversial figure, but his contribution to the development of the Liberal Party in Queensland is well remembered by its members, particularly those who are present today. I support the condolence motion.
Mr COHEN (Robertson)-I think I am speaking for everyhody on this side of the House when I say that we were all very shocked to hear of the death of Eric Robinson. We were shocked probably because Eric always looked as fit as any man could look. Many of us on this side of the House envied his apparent good health. Again, I think I am speaking for all honourable members on this side of the House when I say that the thing that endeared Eric Robinson to us was that, even though we were political opponents, he never attacked any of us on a personal basis in all the speeches he made in this I rouse. Any attack he may have made was against an idea or a concept. But never was there any raneour, ill humour or vindictiveness directed at a person.
Not long before his death I sat next to him on a plane. The flight was most entertaining because he was a delightful human being. Like other honourable members of this place I was invited to visit Eric and, if necessary, stay with him. Unfortunately I never took up that otTer. He said to me: 'If ever you come to Surfers Paradise I would like you to be my guest '. As I said, I regret that I never took that opportunity. I think Eric Robinson brought to this Parliament the very best principles of Westminster. No higher praise can be given of a parliamentarian. His passing will be a great loss both to this Parliament and to the nation. To his wife '\arelle and family 1 pay my dcepest respects.
Mr HODGES (Petrie) Very fcw, it' any, members or senators in this Parliament, present or past, would have had a closer or more intimate association with Eric Robinson than I did. Coming from the same State, serving together for six and a half of the eight years that Eric was in this Parliament, and serving the same party organisation was certainly a sound foundation on which to build a friendship. I started to become active in
the Queensland Liberal Party organisation in the

Death ofMr Eric Robinson

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 7

middle sixties. Shortly afterwards Eric Robinson was elected President of the Queensland division of the Liberal Party and served in that position for five years from 1968. They were years not without their difficult times, but with a smooth, efficient and friendly approach Eric brought a measure of stability and calm that was to stand the party in good stead in the ensuing years.
I can recall some of those earlier years with Robinson chairing sessions of annual party conventions, when I knew him only to speak to, and can say there were times when I doubted his impartiality and approach. I was soon to learn that Eric Robinson had a particular toughness and resoluteness that he combined with a deal of understanding and tolerance that was essential for the position of a successful party president. As those early years passed by my regard for him, both as a person and as a politician deepened and strengthened. That regard did not diminish or falter at any time right up until his recent untimely death. That is not to say that I agreed with him on all occasions. Indeed, our opinions differed on many issues and on many occasions. There was certainly no hero worship in my attitude or approach to Eric Robinson, but I did admire him greatly for the depth and sincerity of some of his outstanding qualities.
It was in the early sixties that Eric and Narelle established a fine home on the Isle of Capri on Queensland's Gold Coast. He commuted to Brisbane to manage his sports store and business interests and to indulge in his ever-increasing interest in the Liberal Party. Eric established branches of the Liberal Party within the McPherson electorate and he and Narelle worked untiringly to promote the party. On the retirement in 1972 of the Honourable Charles Barnes, the Country Party member for McPherson since 1958, Eric Robinson sought and gained the endorsement for the Liberals. He won the seat after the distribution of preferences in a closely fought tussle with the Country Party. From that time he comfortably retained the seat in 1974, 1975, 1977 and 1980.
Eric Robinson served Liberal and National Country Party coalition governments under our present Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in a number of portfolios. I hope his true worth was fully appreciated by all of us. There were times when I doubted that this was the case: Most members and senators on both sides of the House of this and previous Parliaments in which he served can attest to his helpfulness and kindness. Whether it was a constituent problem, a personal problem or the explanation of a Government policy, Eric Robinson went out of his way to assist.

Nothing was too much trouble. It was a superb innate quality that he possessed. Many men of similar independence in status and affluence would not have extended the charity that poured so naturally from him.
In particular I feel compelled to make reference to Eric Robinson's helpfulness and fatherly attitude towards party colleagues from Queensland. If one cared to research the subject and Queensland members and senators were forthright and honest, I am sure the writings would be interesting and enlightening, although I regret to say~politics being what it is-- some of my Queensland colleagues were less than appreciative of his kindness, understanding, generosity and assistance. I hope that the people to whom I refer are left to ponder their actions and live with their consciences. All members in this chamber, regardless of party affiliation, will argue the comparative degree of complexities and difficulties associated with their parties' politics at a State branch level.
Eric Robinson, as a former State Liberal Party President, party machine man and Cabinet Minister, had a tremendous load to carry in his liaising role between the government and the Queensland Liberal Party organisation. Australians from other States often scoff at Queenslanders for their lack of perception of what goes on in Australian politics. I would hotly dispute their view. Queenslanders are aware but, if anything, are not as emotional as people from some other States. In spite of this the Queensland scene in itself is a complex and difficult one politically. If honourable members think the Liberal and National Country parties have problems, they should ask the Labor Party about the old and new guards and the simmering discontent within that party in Queensland.
In general, the relationships between Liberal Party and National Country Party members and senators from Queensland are good. But when one puts that aside and delves deep into the State National-Liberal Party coalition, the personalities in government and the party organisations, the scene changes dramatically. Eric Robinson had a nightmare path to tread in his endeavours to maintain harmony and a close and successful relationship with this Government. Eric Robinson had to contend with one of the most dictatorial, ruthless, uncompromising, uncharitable and unfair men in Australian politics over the last four or five decades, a man who would stoop to any tactics to bring about his demise, even to giving voting preferences to his arch opponents to bring about Robinson's downfall.

8 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Death ofMr Eric Robinson

Politics is not for softies and Eric Robinson never contended that it was or should be. But the merciless and scathing attacks he endured from those philosophically committed as he was were impossible to explain and, no doubt, took their toll of his health. In any account of liric Robinson's timc in politics the Royal Commission of inquiry into Matters in Relation to Elcctoral Redistribution which dealt with alleged malpractices in Queensland's electoral rcdistribution must rate a sizable chapter. For months on end, Eric Robinson, his family, statT and friends were subjected to an unbelievable level of stress as the case dragged on. Eric Robinson was completely exonerated by the inquiry, but those who knew him well knew that the scars never healed. He was able to hold his head high after that gruelling inquiry. I only wish I could say the same about others.
From my personal viewpoint, Eric Robinson was a great friend. I Ie was one of the beautiful people of this world. He was generous, understanding and unselfish in his thoughts and actions. Eric Robinson frequently put into action what others talk about. In mid-1978 I suffered a serious illness and was hospitalised for several weeks. To relieve the pressure on my wife and family, Eric and Narelle cared for two of my children at their Gold Coast home. For that gesture 1 am extremely gratefuland thankful. [ mention that particular event because it serves to illustrate the 1Inc understanding qualities that Eric Robinson possessed. Last Saturday's by-election win in McPherson by the Liberal candidate Petcr White was in fact a fitting tribute to Eric Robinson. 1 know that Narelle Robinson, who had workcd side by side with Eric over 20 years in politics, is very happy with the result. Eric would have wanted the seat retained by a Liberal. In spite of great personal stress over past wecks, Narelle has worked tirelessly to achieve a Liberal win. I feci confident that that is the way Eric would have wanted it.
The Liberal Party in Queensland and indced throughout the nation has lost a faithful and dedicated servant. The electors of McPherson, whom he served untiringly for eight years, have lost a wonderful member for, although not born to the area, Eric Robinson was a great ambassador for the Gold Coast region. The people of Queensland and Australia have lost a truly great Australian and friend. His unsclfish contributions for the betterment of Australia and Australians may not be known or understood by many but, let there be no mistake, they wcre considerable.
The Parliament has lost an honest and sincere person, an able debater who was not without a

fair measure of humour both in and out of this chamber. The Government, which for the past five years has had the services of Eric Robinson in a number of portfolios, has lost an able and perceptive servant. My family and 1 have lost a true and dear friend. Finally it is to Narelle, Sarah and Simon that my thoughts go. They have lost a wonderful husband and father. Their personal loss far outweighs and overshadows that of any other person. I extend my heartfelt sympathy to them in a loss that will endure for the rest of their lives.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith)-I join with previous speakers in expressing sympathy to Narelle and the other members of the Robinson family in their loss of a husband and father. 1 congratulate the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) for expressing in very elear terms what from time to time many of us believed would have been the thoughts of Eric Robinson himself. From the Opposition's point of view, we very much respected his integrity and we understood his politics. We also understood some of the pressures to which he was subjected, and we recognise that in the course of debate in this place, which is a democratic institution, perhaps we COlltributed to some extent to those pressures, particularly in relation to the Royal Commission of Inquiry on Matters in Relation to Electoral Redistribution in Queensland 1977.
r know that Eric Robinson valued the friend-
ship of all honourable members, and it is a delight to think that that sort of person can be elected to this Parliament. He bore no animosity, but he had a lot of setbacks and a lot of pressures. There is no doubt that they contributed to his death, and we must rccognisc that. In retrospect, we trust that that situation will not continue for others. I think Eric Robinson became a victim of the pressures of politics, perhaps on a more personal basis than should have been allowed. Nevertheless, from an Australian point of view he had a lot to offer, and perhaps hc would have done things differently if he had had the opportunity to do so. To that extent J think we understood him well.
From lhc point of view of the Parliament and its mcmbel's, let us place on record Eric Robinson's contribution to our welfare and advancement, where he played a significant role. He was always interested in what was to happen to a membcr's wifc and family, and he played a leading role which we must recognise and applaud. I say again that it is sad to have to express thesc thoughts at this time. We well remember Eric Robinson when he was in his prime and we have fond remembrances of the things he said. They would have been a tribute to all Australians.

Death ofMr Eric Robinson

24 February 1981 REPRFSE="ITATIVES 9

Mr DOBIE (Cook)-I rise to speak as a lifelong friend of Eric Robinson. Having known him since schooldays, and his wife's family and Narelle as well during that period, I stand to pay tribute to him not as a politician, not as a member of Cabinet, not even as a member of the Liberal Party, but as a friend with whom I had a friendship that was maintained over 40 years. 1 should like to pay tribute to the Prime Minister (M r Malcolm Fraser) and to the right honourable member for Lowe (Sir William McMahon) for the comments they have made about his family. As the Prime Minister so properly said, Eric Robinson's whole life was based upon the strength of the family security that Narelle gave to him. On behalf of the backbenchers on this side of the Parliament, I rise to say that we will miss him, not for any of the grand things that have been said but as a friend who was a lasting friend to people he knew all his life. I mourn him and pass my sympathy again to Narelle, Simon and Sarah.
Mr CROSS (Brisbane)-Many of' us kncw Eric Robinson for a long time, and I think it is appropriate that something be said about the relationship we of the Australian I.abor Party in Queensland had with our late friend. Eric Robinson was one of a number of mcmbers of this Parliament who have been president of the Queensland Liberal Party, and one thinks of the late Senator Sherrington, Alan Hulmc, the former member for Petrie, and the present Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moorc). We recognise that Eric Robinson played a major role in building up the Liberal Party in Queensland. When he succeeded Dr Hartwig as Presidcnt of the Queensland Liberal Party, that party was already committed to an electoral gerrymander. It was Eric Robinson's firm belicf and his fcrvcnt hope that the Liberal Party would achieve what he saw as its rightful place in Queensland.
The last time. I spoke to Eric Robinson in the Commonwealth Parliamentary Offices in Brisbane just before last Christmas he was not looking backwards, despite the reverses of the immediate past; he was looking forward to 19R I and the years ahead. We will always respect him as a very forthright officer of the Liberal Party, a very honest and fair exponent of Liberal Party vicws, a person with whom one could deal in a party sense because his word was his bond. Like his father and his brother, he came to an untimely end, which was unexpected and, of course, greatly regrelled by all of us. When [was defeated in tbe 1975 election he was one of the members of this f louse who took a kindly interest in my well-being. Hc was always approachable, and I know that maIlY of us who knew him in politics, in business and in public

affairs never n;ally saw him as a political opponent so much as a good friend. Members of the Australian Labor Party in Queensland join
with members of this rlouse in extending sym-
pathy to Narclle and other members of the family.
Mr BOUnCHIER (Bendigo)-lt would be remiss of me if I did not join in the remarks which have been made in this debate on the condolence motion concerning my very good friend Eric Robinson. I came to this House in 1972, as did Eric and several other members on this side of the 1louse. In those days many of us had to share rooms and by good fortune, for my part, I was roomed with Eric Robinson. We occupied room U70 up in the back corner of the building. We became very close personal friends and I very much respected him over those years. We did not always see eye to eye on various issues-others have said that was their experience also-but I can assure the Ilouse that in whatever Eric Robinson said and did he was always loyal to the Liberal Party of Australia and his Prime Minister. [n those days, unfortunately, we were in the awful position of being in opposition. Eric and I were involved in one or two little plans which some honourable members know about and which led to changes. 1 am delighted that those changes which we believed at the time were necessary have come about. Whatever other people may have thought, Eric Robinson did help to change the leadership of the Liberal Party and he helped to prove that we had and still have the right man as Prime Minister. He always believed thal. It was what he worked for, despite the views of others.
Eric Robinson was a great family man and [ know how hard Narelle worked for him and with him. As John Hodges properly said, Narelle must be absolutely thrilled to see the results of her work in the recent by-election. She put a lot of effort into the by-election and I am sure that, despite thc great loss that she has suffered, she would feel that Eric would be quite happy that again a Liberal has been elected to the seat of McPherson. As many of us would know, Eric always had a little twinkle in his eye, a little raising of the eyebrow, when he was being perhaps a little humorous. and he was always a most pleasant and delightful character. Even when he was a Minister, he would suggest that I might visit his office. He would lind time for me to join him in a quiet drink after lVe had finished the day's work.
Mr Barry JonesThat is humility.
"VIr BOURCHIER -I do not necd remark,; from a smart-Alick like you. [ well remem bert he occasion when, unfortunately, for reasons that must occasionally occur, he lVas dropped Crom t hc

10 REPRESENTATTVES 24 February 1981

Petitions

ministry. I said to him: 'Well, now we will be able to have a little more social get-together as we should have been able to do over these busy years'. He replied: 'Yes, you can come down any time and have a drink, but, please, no more coups'. J am sure that Eric Robinson would be smiling slightly, with eyebrow raised, if he were listening today to the remarles being made.
Mr KATTER (Kennedy)-In paying tribute to Eric Robinson, 1 wish to mention one of his attributes in particular. We who have been in this place for some little time realise that Ministers fall into two categories-those who look for ways of helping one and those who look for ways of avoiding one. Fortunately, we do not have the latter category on this side of the House. Eric Robinson took delight in bringing to honourable members news which he knew affected their areas. 1 remember well when he called Jim Corbett, me and a few others down to his office to tell us that the satellite was to be a goer and that at long last people in remote areas would see a test pattern and then go on to better things. It is for those reasons and because of the friendship which I had early in my life with his father and subsequently with Eric that I add my tribute to those made here today.
Mr DRUMMOND (Forrest)-l entered the Federal Parliament with Eric Robinson, as others did, in 1972 after the general election. J wish to be associated with those who havc spoken to this motion. He was a great friend to me. He was a man of truth, generosity, loyalty, compassion and humour and I will sorely miss him, as we all will. 1 extend my deepest sympathy to Narelle and her family.
Question resolved in the affirmative, honourable members standing in their places.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-As a mark of respect to the late Eric Robinson, I suggest that the sitting of the House be suspended until 8 o'clock.
Mr SPEAKER-J feel sure that the House will comply with the request of the Prime Minister.
Sitting suspended from 3.11 to 8 p.m.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Travelling Post Office Service
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That we protest most strongly against the Australian Postal Commission's decision to phase out the Travelling Post Office (T.P.O.) in NSW.
The T.P.O. service has given the country people of NSW a reliable and efficient service for many years. To replace this service with a road system would be a backward step which we believe would result in long delays in mail going to and from country centres.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition to retain the T.P.O. service in NSW.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Anthony, Mr Baume, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fife, Mr Free, Mr Hicks, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Morris, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Sainsbury and Mr Sinclair.
Petitions received.
Great Barrier Reef: Oil Exploration
To the honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of citizens of the Commonwealth submits:
That off-shore oil exploration within the Great Barrier Reef Region constitutes a serious threat to the richest and most varied living system on earth.
Your petitioners request that your honourable House will:
I. Prohibit oil exploration within the Great Barrier Reef Region;
2. Declare the entire Great Barrier Reef Region a Marine Park under the Federal Government's Great Barrier Marine Park Act 1975;
3. Provide the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority with the staff and resources for effective management of the Region.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins, Mr Newman, Mr West and Mr Young.
Petitions received.
Medical Records
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we are gravely concerned by the invasion of privacy caused by Government agents seizing patients' medical records:
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should-
Legislate to protect the private and confidential nature of medical records from scrutiny except on the express and informed consent of the patient or an order from a presiding judge.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley, Mr McLean, Mr Moore and Mr Sinclair.
Petitions received.
Funding ofChildren's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:

Petitions

24 February 1981 REPRESENT ATIVES 11

That funding in the area of children's services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the rcal value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 Budget And, further, that annual budget allocations in the area of children's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Anthony, Ml' O'Keefe and MI' Sinclair.
Petitions received.
Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the I louse of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(a) Present income tax laws are unfair to single income families,
(b) All marriages should be recognised as partnerships by allowing partners to divide their joint income for tax purposes,
(e) The family. which is the natural and fundalllental group unit of society. ShOllld be an economic unit in tax laws.
(d) Children are Australia's future and their individual care by a parent at home should not be discouraged hy extra tax.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament will:
Reform income tax laws to allow the joint income of husband and wife to be equally divided hetlVecn them for taxation purposes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Cass, Mr Les McMahon and !VII' Wilson.
Petitions received.
Taxation: Child Care Expcnses
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of Parliament assembled in the House of Representatives. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses cxcmptl'rom income taxation in the same way as other taxpayers can dcduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fife, Mr Mountford and Mr Thomson.
Petitions received.
Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of thc House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products. and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission. because 01' the Commission's terms of reference, secms unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used. or for which animals were subjected to research.

Your pctitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
I.egislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes. cosmctics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(I) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whethcr the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals,
And your pctitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bradfield and Mr Humphreys.
Petitions received.
Service Pensions
To the Jlonourablc thc Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of thc undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showcth that:
WI I ER EAS the Government has recently extended the eligibility for Service Pensions to include memhers of Allied forces. eligibility for merchant seamen remains excessively restrictive.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that:
the Government extend eligibility for Service Pensions to all merchant seamen whose service took them into a theatre of war and that the practice of relying exclusively on forms T 124X and Tl24T to establish eligibility be abandoned.
;\ nd your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by J\.Jr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical henefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements. such as pension and medical benefits. which other war veterans receive. they arc therehy heing discriminated against.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920) Section (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen during World War 2.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pmy.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Aborigines
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the Ilouse or Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The petitioll of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the humble petitioners respectfully believe that the Federal Government has the power conferred on it by the 1967 Referendum to intervene on behalf of Aboriginal people in any conflict with any State or Territory Government.
Your petitioners therefore pray:

12 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Petitions

That the Federal Government will assume its full responsibility for Aboriginal Affairs, and use the powers conferred on it by the people of Australia in the 1967 Referendum to intervene on behalf of Aboriginals in any conflict with any State or Territory Government;
That the Government respond to the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Constitution legal affairs on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders on Queensland reserves which sets out precisely the Commonwealth constitutional and legal position under Section 51;
That in addition the Government fulfil its stated policy of self-determination and self-management for Aboriginal people, by funding all housing, health, education, legal, employment strategy and welfare matters concerning Aboriginal people directly through Aboriginal Community based Community controlled organisations.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris and Mr Ruddock.
Petitions received.
Rate Revenue: Crown Property
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the concentration of Commonwealth and State property in the City of Fremantle constitutes a burden on ratepayers to a degree not experienced by most municipalities in Australia.
That the non-payment of general rates by the Commonwealth and State Government imposes a 39 per cent higher rate in the dollar on Fremantle ratepayers.
That the 1980-81 Western Australian Grants Commission allocation to Fremantle of $460,000 does not adequately compensate for a loss of rate revenue conservatively estimated at $900,000.
That we support the efforts of the Fremantle Council to correct this inequitable treatment of its citizens and to resolve the contradiction whereby land owned by the Crown does not pay rates but property leased by the Crown includes a rate component.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Government give immediate effect to Recommendation 14 of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation Report of May 1978 which calls upon ' . . the Commonwealth Government to recognise explicitly its obligation to compensate municipalities for loss of general rate revenue as a consequence of Commonwealth Government immunity in respect of Crown property' and that Commonwealth statutory Authorities' . . . be required as a matter of course to follow overall Commonwealth Government policy'.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Employment
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully showeth that:
. While an average of over 450,000 Australians are now suffering unemployment at anyone time,

over one million people have been unemployed for one or more weeks during the last year and of these,
62 per cent of women unemployed and 41 per cent of men unemployed received no unemployment benefits, and further that While the poverty line for a family (one income, one child) is $117.90 per week and the average weekly earnings are $243 per week,
the income for these one million unemployed Australians is on average $62 per week for women and $110 per week for men. We the undersigned citizens therefore declare
that unemployment with its attendant consequences of massive poverty is the major domestic, political and human question facing the National Government at this time,
that the central issue for the 1980 Federal elections must be the economy and the creation of jobs so that all Australians who choose may work. We call for-
the right to work guaranteed as a fundamental human right
the restoration of full employment the maintenance of real wages and the creation of acceptable social conditions the maintenance and expansion of the public sector. And your petitioners as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Fisher. Petition received.
Telephone Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Macquarie respectfully showeth:
That we consider the lack of service provided by Telecom Australia in Sydney's 047 telephone zone is not only inconvenient but is affecting families, business concerns and employment in the area.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government direct Telecom Australia to provide an adequate service to subscribers and users in the 047 telephone zone.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free. Petition received.
Kangaroos
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That permitting kangaroos to be commercially exploited when permissible cropping rates are unknown and the means of enforcing controls or protective laws are completely ineffective in this land, is allowing this unique animal to follow the path to rarity or extinction along which all wild animals have gone when subjected to exploitation in similar circumstances.
We, Australians, have the right to see kangaroos in reasonable numbers on the landscape; we find the commercial slaughter of the kangaroo to be abhorrent and unjustified.
We your petitioners therefore humby pray that you will:
(I) Ban the export of products made from kangaroos.

Petitions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 13

(2) Take action to see that State Governments prohihit the commercial shooting of kangaroos.
(3) Enact legislation to give the Commonwealth Government responsibility throughout Australia for all native wildlife and habitat upon which it is dependent [or survival.
by Mr Harris.
Petition received.
Aborigines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the Ilouse of Representatives of Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Whereas before Europeans settled in Australia, the Ahoriginal peoples of Australia had lived on their traditional lands from time immemorial and had in Aboriginal law and customs a clear title to those lands; and
whereas Europeans and other non-Aboriginal people have occupied and used most of the traditional lands of the Ahoriginal peoples against their will and without negotiation, compensation or treaty, and
whereas it has been the practice of nations established in territories previously occupied by indigenous inhabitants to reach a negotiated settlement with those inhahitants; and
whereas that occupation has seriously damaged the traditional way of life of Aboriginal A ustralians and has caused poverty and hardship to be the fate of the great majority of their surviving descendants; and
whereas the surviving descendants of the Aboriginal peoples have expressed a wish to have their rights to land acknowledged, to preserve their link with their Aboriginal ancestors and to maintain their distinctive identity with its own cultural heritage; and
whereas the people of Australia in 1967 voted overwhelmingly that the Commonwealth Parliament should have responsibility for laws relating to Aboriginal Australians; and
whereas the National Ahoriginal Conference unanimously resolved in April 1979 in Canberra to ask the Commonwealth Government to negotiate a Treaty with Aboriginal Australians; and
whereas it is accepted internationally by the United Nations organisation, that each country should work to establish the rights of indigenous peoples to self determination, non-discrimination and the enjoyment of their own culture; and
whereas the Woodward Commission in 1974 established principles by which Aboriginal rights to land should be acknowledged and realised; and
whereas the Senate of the Commonwealth Parliament in February 1975 resolved that Aboriginal Australians should be compensated for the loss of their traditional lands and for the damage to their way of life,
Your petitioners therefore humhly pray that the Commonwealth Government should invite the Aboriginal people of Australia to negotiate a Treaty with the Commonwealth of Australia, and any Treaty should contain provisions relating to the following matlers: (i) The protection of Aboriginal identity, languages, law and culture, (ii) The recognition and restoration of rights to land by applying, throughout Australia, the recommendations of the Woodward Commission, (iii) The conditions governing mining and exploitation of other natural resources on Aboriginal land, (iv) Compensation to Aboriginal Australians for the loss of traditionallands and for damage to those lands and to their traditional way of life, (v) The right of Aboriginal Australians to

control their own affairs and to establish their Own associations for this purpose.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hodges.
Petition received.
Broadcasting and Television
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members or the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectrully showeth:
That because television and radio:
(a) affect our social and moral environment, (b) are family media watched and heard by many children
at all times, and (c) present too much explicit violence and sex,
they therefore need stronger control than other media and the existing standards need stricter enforcement in both national A.B.C., and commercial sectors.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Australian Government will amend the Broadcasting and Television Act, in relation to both national and commercial broadcasters, to legislate:
(a) for adequate and comprehcnsive programs in the best interests of the general public,
(b) for a "Dual System of Regulation" enforced by the Australian Broadcasting Trihunal hy internal regulation and external control.
(c) for an independent consumer hody to represent the best interests of the general puhlic, and
(d) for immediate and effective penalties lo be imposed for breaches of program and advertising standards.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding.
Petition received.
Aborigines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That Aboriginal land rights, religion, sacred sites, and culture are being threatened and denied by the West Australian Government which is denying the Noonkanbah Community the right to consider and negotiate the Amax mining company's proposals by bringing in police to intimidate Aboriginal people and by instructing the Western Australian Museum to allow drilling on sacred sites at Noonkanbah.
Your petitioners thererore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government honours its responsibilities to Aboriginal people according to the spirit of the 1967 Referendum vote giving the Commonwealth Government power to intervene in State affairs where Aboriginal matters are involved; that it takes action to ensure that the Noonkanbah community have the right to engage in full negotiations with the Western Australian Government and Amax Co. without intimidation and with sufficient time and information to consider the proposals and with a Commonwealth Government presence in order to ensure fair-dealing; and that the Commonwealth Government ensure that the administration of the Aboriginal Heritage Act by the Western Australian Museum is not tampered with by the Western Australian Government for political expediency against the spirit or the Act and the wishes of the Aboriginal people who have entrusted their culture, their religious objects and law to the Museum.

14 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Petitions

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding.
Petition received.
Proposed Australian Heritage Tribunal
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned Australian citizens by this petition show that:
People and property are protected by law but the rights of native fiora and fauna are almost unrecognised.
There is censorship of reports of publicly funded environmental investigations.
Government at the various levels and statutory bodies cause unwarranted destruction of our heritage and are mostly protected by law.
Your petitioners request that an Australian Heritage tribunal be set up as a hranch of the Australian Heritage Commission to conduct on-site hearings of threats to our natural heritage.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Mineral Sand Products
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the interim list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed a further mining lease against the advice oj' conservationists.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Social Security Payments
To the Honourable the Speaker and Memhers of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humhle petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showcth that:
We, the people of Flemington, request that work be found for the unemployed, especially for all unemployed school leavers in their first two years after school, and that all social security and welfare payments be adjusted to a guaranteed adequate minimum income above the poverty line.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
hyMrInnes.
Petition received.

Taxation: Donations to Animal Welfare Organisations
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That animal welfare organisations playa vital rolc in the community in caring for animals and lessening the burden on governments and government authorities charged with the task of dealing with neglected or unwanted animals.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that donations made to animal welfare charities be allowed as tax deductions to remove the unjust tax anomaly which discriminates against charitable animal welfare organisations.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Ml' Les Johnson.
Petition received.
Export of Live Animals
To the Honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Australian Government promotes carcass trade and that all future shipments of live animals overseas for slaughter be banned, and thereby stop a repetition of the shocking loss of life through burns or drowning as occurred with the incineration or drowning of 40000 sheep on a ship to abattoirs in the Middle East, or the more recent cruelty to horses being exported for slaughter in Japan.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Barry Jones.
Petition received.
Unemployment Benefits
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the procedures used to determine eligibility for unemployment benefit (Work Test) are considered inappropriate in times of high unemployment.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament take note of the Norgard Review of the Commonwealth Fmpoymenl Service and the Myer Inquiry into the Administration of Unemployment Benefit and make the necessary legislative changes to repeal the amended "Work Test" procedures.
And your petitioners in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent.
Petition received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Memhers of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
1. there is lack of public information about the content and intention of the proposed legislation on Plant Variety Rights;
2. there is concern that the ethical and moral issues of grantingprivate proprietorial rights over genetic resources have not been properly and publicly considered;
3. there is evidence to suggest that such legislation may lead to a reduction in the existing plant diversity;

Petitions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 15

4. there is reason to fear that farmers may be restricted in their activities due to the controls placed on the use and propogation of seed stocks;
5. evidence suggests that Plant Varietal Rights Legislation will lead to higher costs for the farmer, the consumer, the plant-breeder and the tax payer; and
6. evidence suggests that Plant Varietal Rights Legislation will lead to a further increase in foreign control of Australian resources.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament defer introducing the legislation until full and informed public discussion of the issues involved has taken place.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kerin.
Petition received.
Mr Kim Dae J ung
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the question of basic human rights in the Republic of Korea is a matter of widespread and increasing concern. Since the assassination of the late President Pak Chung Hi and the accession to power of the Lt. General Chun Du Hwan the situation, already serious, has deteriorated rapidly.
That the issue is not simply one of basic human rights. The Korean Peninsula is one of the most explosive areas in the world. The collapse of the last vestiges of democracy in the Republic of Korea, the emergence of a military-police regime of unparallelled brutality, has convinced many moderate Korean reformers that peaceful political change is no longer possible. Renewed civil conflict in Korea would bring with it the terrifying prospect of Great Power involvement. Great Power involvement could precipitate a nuclear holocaust.
That Australia has a direct interest in what happens in Korea. The Australian Government, as a matter of urgency, should work positively towards a peaceful, long-term and just settlement of the problems of the Korean Peninsula by
using its good offices in Seoul, Washington, Tokyo and other capitals to secure the release of the South Korean Opposition Leader, Mr Kim Dae Jung, and all other political prisoners, and the withdrawal of charges against them
urging the speedy restoration of democratic political process in the Republic
continually reviewing the economic, political and strategic implications of Australia's extensive trade with the Republic of Korea
suspending Australia's uranium contracts with the Republic of Korea. The character of Lt. Gen. Chun Du Hwan's Government suggests that it might not, given the opportunity, abide by either the letter or the spirit of the Nuclear Weapons Non-Proliferation Treaty, to which Australia is signatory. It has been estimated that within the next five years South Korea could be in a position to construct 36 plutonium bombs annually from the waste products of its civilian nuclear reactors
working positively, both independently and in cooperation with other powers, to bring about conditions conducive to a peaceful, negotiated re-unification of the two halves of the Peninsula
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Killen.
Petition received.

Abortion
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully showeth: that we support your efforts to strengthen our family and community life.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will:
(I) Cease paying out taxpayers' money for unlawful abortion procedures.
(2) Eliminate subsidies for abortion referral centres.
(3) Ensure that Australia's Human Rights Charter will include rights fo1' unborn Australians primarily the right to life.
(4) Introduce further benefits for pregnant women to assist them in continuing with their pregnancy.
(5) Obtain each year from each of the State Attorney, General:
(a) written details as to the reasons for which procedures were carried out under item 6469 of the Medical Benefits Schedule,
(b) Declaration that no procedures in respect of which a claim is made within the Health Insurance Act are unlawful abortions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Dr Klugman.
Petition received.
Pornographic Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we the undersigned, having great concern at the way in which children are now being used in the production of pornography call upon the Government to introduce immediate legislation:
(I) To prevent the sexual exploitation of children by way of photography for commercial purposes;
(2) To penalise parents/guardians who knowingly allow their children to be used in the production of such pornographic or obscene material depicting children:
(3) To make specifically illegal the importation, publication, distribution and sale of such pornographic child-abuse material in any form whatsoever such as magazines, novels, papers or films:
(4) To take immediate police action Lo confiscate and destroy all child pornography in Australia and urgent appropriate legal action against all those involved or profiting from this sordid exploitation of children.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will protect all children and immediately prohibit pornographic child-abuse materials, publications or films.
And your petitioners as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon.
Petition received,
Royal Commission on Human Relationships
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

16 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Petitions

That because of the Report of the Royal Commission on Human Relationships and especially its recommendations:
(a) Have been widely condemned for its support of un-Australian, anti-family, anti-child behaviour and morals such as incest, promiscuity, abortion, pornography, homosexuality, prostitution and brothels, et cetera.
(b) Have been strongly criticised by the medical profession for the absence of any medical practitioner on the Commission or on its staff of 31 persons, and for the Commissioners' action in rejecting Or ignoring relevant medical evidence.
(c) Have been discredited as irresponsible in adopting a new definition of the family, i.e., 'a varying range of people living together in relationships of commitment', which has effectively confused the real meaning and intentions of the Report where it refers to the 'family'.
Therefore the Parliament has a responsibility to the families of Australia not to adopt this controversial Report and its recommendations.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray: That the Australian Parliament will:
(a) Simply receive the Report and not adopt its recommendations,
(b) Set up a Select Parliamentary Committee along the lines of the New Zealand Select Committee to conduct a public inquiry into the ways and means of supporting and strengthening family life and providing adequate protection for children from physical and sexual abuse before as well as after birth in accordance with the UNO Declaration of the Rights of the Child as part of Australia's support for the Year of the Child.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will lake no measures concerning the Royal Commission on Human Relationships Report that will further undermine and weaken marriage, child-care or the family which is the basic unit of our society.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon.
Petition received.
Metric System
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan to obliterate the traditional weights and measures of this country does not have the support of the people.
That the change is causing and will continue to cause, widespread, serious and costly problems;
The compulsory tactics being used to force the change are a violation of all democratic principles.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Metric Conversion Act be repealed to ensure that the people are free to utilise whichever system they prefer and so enable the return to imperial weights and measures wherever the people so desire;
That weather reporting be as it was prior to the passing of the Metric Conversion Act;
That the Australian Government take urgent steps to cause the traditional mile units to be restored to our highways;
That the Australian Government request the State Governments to procure that the imperial and metric systems be taught together in schools.

And your petitioners, as in dutybound, will ever pray.
by Mr Millar.
Petition received.
Health Benefits: Goats' Milk
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Your petitioners ask that Tongala Liquid Goat's Milk be placed back on the free list because not all babies can tolerate the alternative formulas available. The reasons being:
(a) Certain formulas are re-constituted cow's milk.
(b) Sugar and/or sugar additives:
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton.
Petition received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To: The Iionourable Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
1. Note that legislation establishing plant breeders' rights in other countries has had serious adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aiel of artificial fertilizers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to discase and other environmental threats.
2. Recognize that maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic materials from falling into private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardcners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant breeders' rights in Australia.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Scholes.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of New South Wales respectfully showeth.
That due to higher medical and hospital insurances, the Voluntary Health Insurances Contributors are finding that their weekly buying power is greatly reduced. The contributors are actually subsidising the non-contributors. The contributors are greatly disadvantaged by the present taxation

Petitions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 17

system. We therefore call upon the Commonwealth Government to make the Health Insurance Contributions tax-deductible.
Your Petitioners most humbly pray lhat the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled will take immediate steps to bring about the wishes expressed in our Petition.
And your Petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bradfield, Mr Dobie, Mr Les Johnson and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
New Parliament House: Chapel
To the Honourable Speaker and the Members of the Iiouse of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Pclition of the undersigned citizens of Queensland. Australia. respectfully showeth:
That with regard to the design of the new Parliament Iiouse in Canberra and the exclusion of the proposcd chapel in the design, your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Parliament will-
Restore to the specification the inclusion of a chapel which could be used by persons of any religious faith.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fisher.
Petition received.
Development at Hall, Australian Capital Territory
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assemhled: The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of the Village of lIall, surrounding districts. and the Australian Capital Territory respectfully showeth:
That officers of the National Capital [)evelopment Commission gave a commitment to the Village of I-Iall and [)istrict Progress Association committce mcmbers at a special meeting in September 1980 that no furthcr devclopment would take place in the Village of Hall until the plan for the fUlure development of Hall had been discussed in detail with the residents of Hall.
Your Petitioners therefore humhly pray that the Department of the Capital Territory withdraw Block 12, Section 2, Victoria Street. Village of Hall. from the auction sale set for February 12 until such time as the residcnts of Hall have had sufficient time to study in detail and make comments about the "'ational Capital Development Commissiun's plan for the future development of the Village of Hall.
And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Hodgman.
Petition received.
Helensburgh Primary School: Library
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of Australia in Parliament as assembled. The Petition of Parents and Teachers of Helensburgh Primary School, Lukin Street, Hclensburgh, in the State of New S,outh Wales respectfully showcth:
That improvements to grounds and buildings in the following areas are basic needs for the satisfactory education of the children of Helensburgh;
The adequate provision of more playground space. Grading and resurfacing of the present playground area.

The employment of a General Assistant to take earc or grounds.
Building of a new Accommodation Block incorporating Assembly Hall. adequate sick bay area and comhined Infants/Primary Stafi' room. At present lhere arc t\\O demountable classrooms being used by Primary Classes and another will be required in 1981. There is no hall-a double classroom is used for this purposc bUl it totally inadequate.
Provision of a Schools Commission standard library. Reading and withdrawal rooms are needed for class groups and private study purposes.
Building of a new Infants Toilet Block incorporating more sta!ftoilet facilities.
Provision of adequate car park facilities so that stall', parents and visitors do not have to park \'ehicles in adjoining streets.
Refurbishing of existing buildings including,
(i) Enclosing of verandahs on all portables.
(ii) Improved ventilation. provision or fallS etc.
(iii) Provision of store room facilities in all cla"rool1b.
(iv) Sun reflector Aim inslalled on all windows afTected by the afternoon sun.
(v) lockers and hat room facilities ror ,storage of pupils' cases,
(vi) Installation of carpet in all elas,"ooml.
(vii) Provision of new furniture.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound. will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon Prime Minister) -I inform the House that the Minister for Home Affairs and environlllcnt rcsigned his portfolio on 17 February. The Minister for Health (Mr Mackellar) has bccn appoillted Minister for Home Affairs and Envirollment in addition to his existing responsibilitics.
WELFARE FlJNDfNC IN THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Notic.e of Motion
Mrs KELLY (Canbcrra) J give notice that. on the ncxt day orsitling. I shall move:
That in view or the continuing difficullies in providing ongoing funding ror wclrare and community groups in the Australian Capital Territory, it is the opinion of thi, House a broadly based illC]uir) should be established immediately to investigate and report on the provision of welfGre services in lhe Australian Capital Territory.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
TAXATION
or Mr HAYDEN I ask a question of the Primc
Minister. I refer to his repeated promises the past fivc ycars to reduce taxes, especially incumc

18 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Questions Withollt Notice

taxes, and the 'astonishing' fact that, in spite of thc promise" taxes have risen to their highest lcvel ever and that four out of five income tax payers are paying more income tax comparatively than Lhey were five years ago, the good news being with the exception -
Mr SPF:AKER -I ask the honourable gentleman to ask his question.
:VIr HAYDEN-Does the Prime Minister still stand by his 'elusive' promise and does he still stand by his 17 February confession that income taxes are high in Australia by world standards? If so, when wi II his long promised tax relief arrive, in what form will it be and will the middle and modest income earners once again have to foot the bill for any ehange~
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I would have thoughtLhe honourable gentleman had fought the last election.
MONEY SUPPLY
Mr HYDE I ask the Treasurer: Is it a fact that most recent data indicate that the money supply has moved sharply back toward the target announecd by him in his last Budget Speech? If so, is it signifIcant that the return of the money supply towards targeted levels immediately follows the Crovernment's decision to deregulate interest rates? What are the implications for inflation of carlier substantial overrun and the present tighter moncy management?
Mr HOWARD -It is true that some reeent data indicate a much stronger likelihood that the monetary outcome for this year will be within the range laid down in the Budget Speech. When the money supply figures for the month of January are released in the course of the next few days, I expect that they will broadly indicate that trend. I believe that the interest rate changes that followed the announcements I made early in December have made a material contribution towards the improvement in the money supply outlook. It is a factor that one can observe very clearly rf(~m what has happened over the last two months that a willingness to allow a freer operation of market forces in this area has led to a much better monetary outcome.
I take the opportunity in responding to the honourable gentlemen's question to repeat in the clearest possible terms the importance the Government attaches to the maintenance of a firm approach to monetary policy. I choose those words deliberately because the Government remains very much of the view that firmly adhering to responsible monetary objectives will play a major part in continuing to reduce the rate of

inflation in this country. The most recent evidence on intlation indicates that this country is doing a great deal hetter than the domestic critics the Government faces are prepared on occasion to acknowledge, because the inflationary performance of this country continues to stand very well by comparison with other countries. That approach can only be huilt upon and maintained if the Government continues to adhere to a very firm approach to monetary policy.
RESOlJRCE RENT TAX
Mr KEATING-In view of the Government's dccision not to introduce a broad-based indirect tax, will the Prime Minister advise the House whether he still intends to adhere to his election promise not to introduce a resource rent tax? If so, will hc also advise the House whether this means that the Government will not be introducing any other type of tax in the resources area or increasing any existing such tax~ If no sllch measures are to be introduced, will the Prime Minister advise the House how he intends to give effcct to his promise that all Australian families and not just corporations will share in the benefits of resources development?
Mr ;VIALCOLM FRASER-I have nothing to add to what was said during the election period. It is interesting to note that the thrust of the Opposition's questions at the moment obviously shows that it would like the circumstances in which there would be increased taxes, such as capital gains taxes, wealth taxes and all the rest. It stated that during the election period. Even the Leader of the Australian J,abO!' Party in Victoria has said since the election that there ought to be a wealth tax. I would havc thought that the Australian Labor Party had had enough of those arguments.
COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERN\1ENT-SECURITY ARRANGEMENTS
Mr HARRIS - Is the Prime Minister aware of the allegation made in the Press that there can be no guarantees for the safety of heads of states and heads of government during the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting later this year'? Is that allegation correct?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER My attention has been drawn, 1 think on two separate occasions, to reports in relation to this malleI'. It is an important matter, so the facts ought to be known. I was not advised last wcek that the security of the Commonwealth Heads of Government could not be guarantecd. I did not ovcrrule a recommendation that the venue be switched from

Questions Without Notice

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 19

Melbourne to Canberra because no such recommendation was made. In the earlier examination of this matter a number of Ministers tried very hard to create the circumstances in which the conference could bc held in Canberra as
Australia's national capital. r'or a number of
reasons-such as the fact that there would be upwards of 2,000 people entering the country, many of them used to and expecting first-class hotel accommodation Canberra would not be able to accommodate the total numbers required. In addition there is the problem of conference facilities. Therefore the decision was made to hold the conference in Melbourne. The Government is obviously concerned about security, as any government must be in this modern age with the kind of events that have occurred around the world. All appropriate security arrangements have been made and are being made for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.
Both the Commonwealth and Victorian governments are working very closely together on the security arrangements and I know that the Victoria Police are taking their obligations very seriously as one would expect. Thc heads of government will be asked to send their own security advisers to Australia before the meeting to satisfy themselves as to the adequacy of security measures. It is a heavy responsibility on the security authorities and on the Victoria Police but I am conscious of the great deal of attention and effort that is being devoted to this task. The Government is confident that security arrangements of the highest possible order will be in place for the Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne and of course also for the retreat in Canberra. I think that the reports are unfortunate. Thev arc inaccurate. I hope that I have put the ~latter into perspective.
TAXATION
Mr WILLIS- [ refer the Treasurer to his statement yesterday in announcing Cabinet's rejection of his broad-based indirect tax proposal when he said that he was hopeful that significant income tax cuts could still be achieved by reducing government expenditure. J ask: How docs the Treasurer square that statement with the Prime Minister's statement yesterday that it would bc too much to expect significant tax cuts to result from the expenditure review operation of the Lynch committee? Further, how does he rationalise his supposed concern to achieve lower personal taxes with the Prime Minister's statement

yesterday that the Government is firmly C0111mitted to only half tax indexation, thereby implying a continually increasing burden of personal income tax in future years?
Mr HOWARD-I know that the honourable member for Gellibrand is casting around for a few opportunities to attack the Government on the question of taxation, but to suggest, just because the Prime Minister says that the extent of the Government's commitments in an area for the current year relates to half tax indexation, that that automatically means that there will be no scope for personal tax adjustments in some shape or form in the future is to misunderstand the situation totally. I said yesterday, I have said previously and I repeat tonight that the only responsible way to have sustainable reductions in the taxation burden in this country is to control and reduce government spending. That applies irrespective of the mix of taxation.
In the last couple of months the Government has looked at a change in the mix or combination of taxation in our community. It is no secret that there are arguments for and against a change. Of course, in relative terms this country relies more heavily than many other countries on personal taxes. Equally, it has to be said that, as a percentage of gross domestic product, we pay less tax by far than the average for the industrialised countries. We pay far less taxation than those countries held up as socialist ideals by the Opposition, sllch as Sweden and Denmark. Sweden pays 52.2 per cent of gross domestic product by way of taxation against an Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development average of 36 per cent and a percentage in Australia of 28.8; yet the I.abor Opposition berates us on the question of taxation. After assessing the arguments both for and against, the Government decided that 011 balancc the most important thing it should concern itself with in 1981 is continuing to achieve its antiinl1ationaryobjcctive.
That objective has underpinned the economic progress this country has made over the last nve years. Members or the Opposition have refused to recognise that economic progress because it has flown in the race of all their predictions. One is reminded of what the Leader of the Opposition said about the 197R l3udget, the 1979 Budget and the 1980 Budget. lIe said thal those three Budgets would drive Australia into a state of' recession. It is some recession when this country's growth prospects over the next 18 months are regarded by the OECD as mllch better than those of' anv other country in the industrialised area! Faced 'with a difficult choice about the sort of taxation mix that

20 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Questions Without Notice

this country should have, the Government decided yesterday, taking all factors into account and having particular regard to the inflationary consequences of moving to a greater reliance on indirect taxes, that the best decision in economic terms for it to take was the decision which was taken and which I announced yesterday.
KOONGARRA URANIUM PROJECT
Mr TAMBLINGWili the Minister for Trade and Resources advise the House of the present stage in the development of the Koongarra uranium project in the Northern Territory?
Mr ANTHONY--I wish to inform the honourable member for the Northern Territory that before approval of the development of the Koongarra project can take place a number of conditions must be fulfilled. First of all, a conclusion has to be reached between the Aboriginal peoplethe Northern Land Council-and the company concerned about the arrangements. There has also to be completion of the necessary environmental procedures and there has to be compliance with the Government's foreign investment guideline rules. On 22 January this year the Chairman of the Northern Land Council said that the traditional land owners were prepared to authorise formal negotiations with the company as far as the terms and conditions were concerned. I believe the traditional land owners and the Northern Land Council deserve congratulations for making such a positive move.
On the environmental aspect, I inform the House that the then Minister for Home Affairs and Environment wrote to me on 12 February this year. He advised that the object of the environment protection legislation had been met and complied with in relation to the Koongarra project and that there were no environmental objections to approval being given to Koongarra provided it met certain conditions.
On the question of equity participation, as honourable members know, Koongarra is owned by Denison Australia Pty Ltd which is a wholly owned Canadian company. It will be necessary for 75 per cent equity participation. I am sure that many Australian firms and individuals would be willing to participate in this venture which I believe should prove to be successful.
TAXATION
Mr HAYDEN-I ask a question of the Treasurer. Of course, Tam inspired to do so from his answer to a question asked by the honourable member for Gellibrand a few seconds ago. Does the Treasurer recall the 1975 policy speech of the Prime Minister, effectively re-endorsed in 1977, in

which the following statements were made: 'We will reduce the tax burden', 'We will fully index personal income tax for inflation over three years' and 'It will make government more honest with your money'? In view of the fact that none of these things have been done, that taxes in Australia are at their highest level ever and that his comments of a few seconds ago to the effect that taxes here were proportionately lower than taxes in most industrialised nations, is that evidence that in his belief income tax reductions are no longer a worthwhile objective and in fact higher tax levels similar to those applying in other countries, to which he referred, are an objective worthy of striving for? If not, will he state explicitly what is the Government's policy in relation to tax?
Mr HOWARDI state quite explicitly that it remains the objective of this Government, where it is economically possible and responsible to do so, to achieve reductions in taxation. It is not the objective of this Government as it is so clearly the objective of the Opposition, as evidenced by the statements of the Leader of the Opposition and the honourable member for Gellibrand, to increase the size of the public sector and thereby the taxation take in this community. It is the honourable member for Gellibrand who made that famous promise to a meeting of Labor economists. One part of his promise was proved correct. He said: 'Labor is unlikely to gain office in 1980 and by 1983 when we might have a possibility of gaining office we will face a mammoth task in persuading the Australian community to have a larger public sector and to pay the higher taxation needed to finance that public sector'. Those are the words of the alternative Treasurer of this country. They are in black and white. They have never been repudiated.
In case the honourable member for Gellibrand is feeling a little lonely in his addiction to doctrinaire socialism, we have the words of the Leader of the Opposition who in his F. E. Chamberlain memorial lecture said: 'We have had a lot of these deeply dispiriting dogmas lately.' Those deeply dispiriting dogmas were propositions based on lower taxation. They are very strange words indeed from the Leader of the Opposition who seeks to impugn the credentials of this Government so far as tax reform is concerned.
EARTHQUAKES IN SOUTHERN ITALY
Mr TUCKEY-Can the Prime Minister advise what have been the results of the appeal for the victims of the devastating earthquakes in southern Italy? Further, can he inform the House how Australian contributions have been used?

Questions Without Notice

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATJVES 21

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There has been an enormous and a wonderful response to the national appeal that was launched right around Australia. Something like $4m has been collected by the national appeal committee for the Italian earthquake relief fund and all of those people who have worked for that committee within the Italian community and in the wider Australian community. The national committee, of course, has been supported by committees at the State level. The Commonwealth Government encouraged the appeal by allowing tax deductibility for donations made. It also provided half a million dollars and indicated that it would match contributions from State governments with a further dollar for dollar contribution. I am advised that the States' contributions stand at approximately $160,000. Beyond that the Commonwealth Government has shared with the Tasmanian Government half the cost of providing approximately 800 tents to help with immediate relief for people who have lost their homes.
All in all, Australia has provided some very substantial relief. [ believe that that is a great credit to the communities and the committees concerned. The national committee will be largely responsible for determining how the funds are to be used. That will be done in consultation with the Australian and Italian governments. Certainly it is our hope that the funds will be used mostly for longer term, identifiable, permanent projects that will have a continuing and significant benefit for the communities concerned in ltaly.
In addition to these matters, of course, the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs has sought to assist with family reunions, easier entry into Australia and in a number of other ways, thus building upon the very close links many Australians of Italian descent have with their country of origin. I would like to compliment all of those who have been involved in raising a very substantial sum. J am certain that it will be used for very worthwhile causes and will be of continuing benefit to the communities concerned.
GROWTH OF RESOURCE INDUSTRIES
Mr YOUNG-I direct my question to the Prime Minister and refer him to the projected growth of the resource industries during the 1980s and the significant effect that these developments will have upon the future of the economy. In order that the Parliament may better understand and be better informed on the likely impact of this development upon the country, J ask the Prime Minister: Will the Government establish a joint committee of the Parliament to inquire into and report upon all aspects of the development of the

resources and related industries, with power to take information from public and private bodies so that Commonwealth policy may have a more sound basis upon which to maximise long term benefits for the nation?
Mr MALCOLM FRASERThrough the policies of the Commonwealth Government and through the operations of the Foreign Investment Review Board, which is designed to maximise and which has maximised Australian involvement and investment in major resource projects, Australian involvement and shareholding in resource projects certainly are maximised. The objectives or foreign investment policy have been clearly stated by the Treasurer and by the Minister for Trade and Resources on a number of occasions. I would have thought that the benefits from significant resource development would stand clear even for the Australian Labor Party. Quite clearly they include not only the benefits for those who are immediately employed on the projects and the benefits for the Australian shareholders who arc involved, but also many other jobs and much work for subcontractors and Australian firms have to be considered. The fact that this country is now starting to move forward on a strong growth path in a quite different way from that of most other countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development where many economies are stagnant is very significantly as a result of our overall economic policies. The resource management and resource policy are a significant part of that. We know very well that the Australian Labor Party has had a view which would have very significantly impeded, held up, pushed out of this country major resource developments. Members of the Australian Labor Party do not believe in the same kind of partnership as we do. They do not believe in a strongly growing economy, as we do. We on this side of the lIouse believe that a growing economy is essential to rising living standards and essential also in enabling State and Commonwealth governments to have available the resources needed to provide schools or hospitals or government services or one kind or another.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Mr Speaker, let me finish with one sentence. The seriousness or the question can be judged by the kind or noise that has been coming from the Opposition in this after-dinner Question Time.
Mr Sinclair-Mr Speaker, as this is the opening night of the new Parliament, I wonder whether members of the Opposition might he

22 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Questions Without Notice

asked to maintain some reasonable measure of decorum in this place.
Mr Keating-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. We might also ask you whether the Ministry will provide answers relevant to the questions, which would be a welcome change from the practice of the last Parliament.
ADELAIDE AIRPORT
Mr WILSON-Will the Minister for Transport clarify to the House any plans he has for the development of Adelaide Airport as an international airport? Will he also provide estimates of costs, which I sought from him in a letter dated 5 December 1980? Can he assure the House that any examination of the airport needs of Adelaide for the years 2000 and beyond will not prejudice plans for the early upgrading of the present Adelaide Airport so that it can be used as an international gateway? Is the Minister aware of substantial development plans in the tourist industry contingent on an unequivocal commitment to the upgrading of Adelaide Airport to international status?
Mr HUNT-I am well aware of the honourable member's interest in the proposal to provide facilities at Adelaide Airport for international services. The Government has been considering the long term and short term requirements of Adelaide Airport. I know that there have been discussions between the South Australian Government and a number of international airlines, including Qantas Airways Ltd. I understand that Qantas is examining a proposal to provide one international service a week from Adelaide. However, I have not yet received a formal application from Qantas. I expect that there will be an occasion to provide facilities at the Adelaide Airport for the wide-bodied services that arc expected to be available to Adelaide about the middle of next year. In the course of planning facilities for the wide-bodied domestic services, I have asked my Department also to prepare plans for facilities at that airport for limited international services.
I have had discussions with the Minister for Transport in South Australia about the \ongerterm requirements of South Australia. We have set up a Commonwealth-State airfields committee to look at the prospect of an alternative site for the next century. However, I assure the honourable gentleman that the long term plan in no way will prejUdice the possible short term requirements at Adelaide to provide an international service in the not too distant fulure.

DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Mildren proceeding to address a q1lestion to the Millisterfor Com111unications-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman can ask for information but he is not entitled to ask the Minister to state policy. If the honourable gentleman asks for information, the question will be in order.
Mr Mildren continuing to address a question to the Minister for Communications-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will rewrite his question; it is out of order.
FUNDING OF HOSPITALS
Mr FISHER My question is directed to the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security. I refer the Minister to recent changes to Victorian Government legislation relating to the control of bospitals and their committees. The Minister will be aware that from 7 December 1980 such committees are to be State appointed and that this conflicts with Commonwealth Government legislation on nursing home funding. Can the Minister advise what arrangements are being made with that State that will enable Commonwealth-approved projects such as those sponsored by public and district hospitals to continue without delay?
lVIr HUNT-I am aware of some concern in Victoria about legislation passed by the Victorian Parliament to amend provisions affecting the operation of nursing homes and aged persons facilities in that State. It is true that the legislation does conflict with the provisions of the social services Acts which provide funding for projects in that State. I understand that Mr Borthwick and the former Minister for Social Security held a conference on this matter and that the Victorian Minister has suggested that the problem of eligibility under the Acts could be resolved by the appointment of separate committees. I understand that this is the way in which the matter is to be resolved. I believe also that discussions on this matter are taking place at the present time. The Government is well aware of the seriollsness of the situation and will be taking every action necessary to ensure that funds which have been made available to Victoria will not be prejudiced any further.
FLAT RATE INCOME TAX
Ml' HURFORD-My question is directed to the Treasurer. In view of the decision of the Cabinet yesterday to reject the proposed introduction of a broad-based indirect tax, can the Treasurer

Questions Without Notice

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 23

assure the House that the Government will not now consider the introduction of a flat rate income tax? If he can give that assurance, will he outline to the House the Government's objection to such a tax?
Mr HOWARD-I, as the Minister in the Government responsible for taxation matters, have said a number of things about the flat rate concept of taxation. I think my comments were given a fair amount of publicity in recent weeks. In the light of the fairly fulsome comments that I have made, I do not really think that there is a great deal I can add. But in case the honourable member for Adelaide thinks I have paid Parliament less than its proper due in providing explanations of my views on nat rate taxation, may I refer him to an answer J gave in about August or September last yearperhaps it was even earlierI think in answer to the honourable member for Hume, who asked me a question on flat rate taxation. I think the honourable member will find that most of the material that I have referred to in recent weeks is contained in the reply that I gave to my colleague.
QA~TAS AIRWAYS LTO
Mr JULL-J refer the Minister for Transport to the continuing debate regarding the operations of Qantas Airways Ltd in the market place in Australia. Will the Minister indicate whether Qantas will be allowed to operate in a freer market place prior to the aviation review scheduled for later this year? If so, will net fares be able to be legally sold by all carriers with the entry of Qantas into such a freer market place? In the meantime, will the Department of Transport continue to inspect the tickets of international passengers until such time as a freer regime is introduced?
Mr HUNT -For some time the Government has been under pressure from the Australian Federation of Travel Agents and, until the middle of last year, the Board of Qantas to enforce the provisions of regulation 106A to try to stamp out illegal discounting because Qantas, as the Australian flag carrier, had to abide by Australian law. Illegal discounting has placed Qantas in a very difficult trading position on the domestic market. We have been well aware of that difficulty. The Government has a responsibility under international treaties to uphold the provisions of the regulation.
As late as last year approximately 100 of the world's international aviation countries met and supported a motion that the parties to the bilateral agreements which provide for the setting of international air fares should abide by the provisions of the law. I gave fair warning over the last

12 months that the Government would take action to enforce the provisions of the law. Honourable members should remember that the Australian Federation of Travel Agents elnu Qantas wanted the law enforced. The [)erartment of Transport set out to fulfil its resronsibility in this regard. I have had further meetings with the Board of Qantas and with AFTA. As a result of those meetings, I will be reporting to Cabinet in the not too distant future.
KAMPUCHEA
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-[ direct a question to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. I refer to the ract that the Government at long last has derecognised the Pol Pot regime in Kamruchea. Will the Government take the initiative in this region for the first time and ask that a conference bc held between the Association of South East Asian Nations and Vietnam, with Australia as the honest broker, in order to formulate peaceful 1'1'0posals for the future of the Kampuchean reople with a view that such a conference be a forerunner, at Australia's suggestion, to a major conf'crence including all the super powers?
Mr STREET -The Australian Government \ position is that it supports the United Nations rcsolution on Kampuchea which calls for the \\ithdrawal of Vietnamese troops and for a f'ully representative international conferencc to discuss thc matter. I know that represemations along those lines have been made to the Secretary-C,elleral 01' the United Nations by ASEAN and by Australia in support of ASEAN.
Mr Lionel Bowen-What about including Vietnam?
Mr STREET -Obviously, it would be highly desirable for Vietnam to attend. At the momcnt it seems unlikely that it will. I hope it does. I am also aware that there have been some moves I-or a regional conference to discuss certain questions. hut I believe that that would more logically follow a fully representative international conrercnce which called for the withdrawal of troops and for internationally supervised free elections.
Considerable diplomatic activity is still bcing conducted on this matter by the ASEAN countries. Australia hopes that out of that will cmerge a political settlement-we believe that an eventual settlement has to be a political one to the Kampuchean question. The ASFAI\ countries were the original sponsors of the resolution ill the United Nations. Australia believes, quite properly, that as those nations arc the front line States in the area the future conduct of events following that resolution should be left primarily ill their

24 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Questions Without Notice

hands. However, we will give them all the support
we can.
COMMONWEALTH-STATE TAX SHARING ARRANGEMENTS
Mr BURR-My question is directed to the Prime Minister. I ask: Have proposals been received from any of the State governments regarding future tax sharing arrangements? In view of reports that the Tasmanian Govcrnment is now predicting a final deficit for this year twice that originally budgeted for, has that Government made any request for special funding? Does the Prime Minister have any advice for the State governments when preparing their future budgets?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER Tasmania is treated extraordinarily generously by the Commonwealth Government. Payments to it per capita are larger than those to other Statcs and a number of special programs have bcen designed quite specifically to assist Tasmania in rcgard to special problems. I suppose that trade equalisation would be the most significant of these. It is now becoming very clearly understood by all Tasmanians that within the Tasmanian Government administration there is a level of inefficiency which is disturbing. If the honourable gentleman's projections in relation to the Tasmanian Budget are correct, plainly that State's budgetary situation is out of control. I will check the latest correspondence to see whether there are any recent messages from the Tasmanian Premier concerning that State's general budgetary position. I do not think that there have been any such communications or requests.
All the States have put forward a document in which they make some suggestions about the way in which the Commonwealth payments to thc States might be worked out after 30 June, before which date the current arrangements are due for renewal. The document is not definitive. The States have put forward alternatives and options and it is worth noting that originally, in September of last year, the Premiers had a meeting to work out a common position to put to thc Commonwealth. We received the document about 10 days ago. Therefore it took a long while for the States, consulting together, to work out some kind of a common position, but it was not a definitive one. It left open certain options. Obviously, the Commonwealth is now examining the document, but it will also be examining the level of funding that ought to be accorded the States in general revenue terms.
One of the benefits of some recent events in Qucensland is that we are starting to look at the

way in which expenditure per capita has risen within the States and the extent to which taxation could be reduced by State governments themsclves if they even held expenditure level, in real per capita terms, instead of expending moneys on a continually rising plane. 1 do not have the Tasmanian ftgures with me but if my recollection is correct the people of Queensland could have been relieved of some $700111 to $800m in State taxation in 1978-80 if the level of expenditure, in re.al terms, had been held at the level which obtained when the present Government took office.
1 have no doubt that these matters will all be taken into account when the Commonwealth makcs its decisions. State and local governments spend about 50 per cent of all revenues collected. Some is by way of transfer payments from the Commonwealth to the States but they are the end spendcrs of about 50 per cent of all government revenues. Quite plainly, if you take the view, as the Commonwealth does, that tax cuts need to be ftnanccd out of expenditure restraints, then clearly the States have a vcry real role in that regard. I am dclighted to find any State Premier urg-
ing me to introducc tax cuts because r know that
he will contribute accordingly at the next Premiers Conferencc and will ask for less, so that taxes can be rcduccd.
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT
Mr MILDREN -My question, which is addressed to thc Minister for Communications, rcfers to ambiguitics concerning changes to the Broadcasting and Tclcvision Act. Will the Minister refute the suggestion that the changes have been inspired by Mr Rupert Murdoch's attempts to retain control of Melbourne television channel ATV-I O'? Is it intended to water down the public interest provision of thc Act'? Has the Minister undertaken to extcnd any further favours to the media magnate berore hc departs from his post of Ministcr for Communications to a more bucolic pOrLfolio in July')
Mr SI;'\ICLATR -The honourable member might have had a good dinncr. but I am not quite sure of the last refcrcnce in his question. I suggest it is rather disappointing so early in his parliamentary term that the honourable member has fallen foul of this concept of finding the big bogcy man in an Australian who really has distinguished his country in an extraordinary way on the Unitcd Kingdom and New York sccnes. 1think it is quitc extraordinary that the Australian J.abor Party, of which the honourable member is a member, should take such a contrary point of view to its former leader who, in 1972 jf we all rcmember rightly, on more than one occasion secmed to find

General

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 25

that that same gentleman was very much a supporter of his cause. With regard to the balance of the hO'nourable member's question, I say to him that if he or any other member of the Opposition wishes to express any views as to possible changes in the Broadcasting and Television Act, of course, the Government will be very happy to receive them. He will be able to express his own views when the Government's policy is announced and changes are introduced into this House.
Mr D. Eo BERTHELSEN
Mr SPEAKER-For the information of honourable members. I table a report by the Acting Chairman of the Public Service Board relating to action taken by the Board in respect of Mr D. E. Berthelsen. The report has been prepared in response to a resolution of the House of 17 September 1980 following a report from the Committee of Privileges in relation to the alleged discrimination and intimidation of Mr Berthelsen in his public service employment because of evidence given by him before a committee of the Parliament.
COMMONWEALTH OMBUDSMAN Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister) - Pursuant to sub-section 19 (I) of the Ombudsman Act 1976, I present the annual report of the Commonwealth Ombudsman 1979-80.
AUSTRALIAN SHIPPING COMMISSION Mr HUNT (GwydirMinister for
Transport) - Pursuant to section 39 (4) of the Australian Shipping Commission Act 1956, I present the annual report of the Australian Shipping Commission 1979-80.

the Queensland Local Government Grants Commission on financial assistance for local government; the annual report 1980 of the South Australian Local Government Grants Commission: the annual report 1980 of the Victorian Grants Commission and the report on recommendations for grants to councils for 1980-81 by the Western Australian Local Government Grants Commission.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr BOURCHIER (Bendigo)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKERDoes the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr BOURCHIERYes.
Mr SPEAKER - He may proceed.
Mr BOURCHIER-In the Hansard report of 26 November 1980, during a speech presented by the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe). I made a slight interjection which was misquoted in Hansard. I feel it should be corrected because as a result of that misprinting I have been subjected to certain attacks in the Press. The honourable member for Batman was making a plea on behalf of political prisoners in various South American countries. The comment attributed to me by Hansard was 'Where the commies run
them'. In fact r said: 'You do not object to those
countries run by communists'. I was prompted to make that interjection on the foundation that honourable members opposite have a great sense of--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will not argue the point. He has made his correction clear.

AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL RAILWAYS
Mr HUNT (GwydirMinister for Transport)-Pursuant to section 41 of the Australian National Railways Act 1917, ] present the Australian National Railways annual report 1979-80.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (PERSONAL INCOME TAX SHARING) ACT
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)- Pursuant to section 10 of the Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976, ] present the annual report 1980-81 of the Tasmanian State Grants Commission; the report 1980-81 by the New South Wales Local Governments Grants Commission on financial assistance for local government; the fourth report 1980 by

RETIREMENT OF PRINCIPAL PARLIAMENTARY REPORTER
Mr SPEAKER-I wish to draw the attention of the House to the retirement of the Principal Parliamentary Reporter. Last Friday, on 20 February, Mr John Kerr, the Principal Parliamentary Reporter, retired. He began his public service with the New South Wales Department of Lands in 1936. In 1949, he began his reporting career with the Commonwealth Reporting Service in Sydney. He entered parliamentary service in 1950 when he was appointed as a reporter on the Parliamentary Reporting Staff. Mr Kerr progressed through the ra:1ks of Hansard and was appointed Principal Parliamentary Reporter in 1978. In 1942, Mr Kerr enlisted in the Army and served in what is now Papua New Guinea. Upon the cessation of hostilities in the Pacific, he served

26 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Retirement ofPrincipal Reporter

in Australia assisting to gather and prepare evidence for presentation to the War Crimes Tribunal.
In his leisure time, Mr Kerr has been active as an author of both books and plays. Several of his books have been published and some have been ada pted for broadcasting by the Australian Broadcasting Commission. His plays also have been broadcast by the ABC and some have been performed in public in Canberra.
Mr ((err will not be idle in his retirement as he will pursue tertiary studies at the Australian National University and will continue to write books and plays. [ am sure that all honourable members join me in thanking John Kerr for his long and valued service to the Parliament. We wish him and his wife a long and rewarding retirement. His successor as Principal Parliamentary Reporter is Mr James Roberts, whose assistant is Mr John Campbell.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England~Leader of the House) -On behalf of the Government, I wish Mr Kerr and his wife a happy retirement and a pleasant period 01' study at the Australian ?--iational University; but my predominant purpose in rising is to thank him on behalf of us all for the tremendous contribution that he has made to the recording for posterity of some of those speeches which perhaps have not always deserved that distinction.
Mr Kerr is a man of considerable personal distinction, not only as a writer but also as one who has been interested for a long time in the interpretation of character from the study of hands and handwriting. In that respect, he has made a contribution in anothcr field which is fairly unique. 1Ie is certainly one who in many ways has contributed to the diversity of Australian life. We also know that he has contributed in an important way to the functioning of this place. We thank him for that and wish him well in his retirement. I also congratulate Mr Roberts on his appointment and I wish him a long and happy occupancy of his position of Principal Parliamentary Reporter.
Mr UO;\lEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) -Mr Spcaker, the Opposition joins in the remarks made by you and the Leader of the House in wishing Mr John [(err a very happy retirement. He has retired at a relatively early age although he has been with us, as you indicated, for a long time. We recognise the value of Hansard reporting. As stated on many occasions, we recognise the ordeal that the reporters cndure in trying to interpret what we say. As the Lcader of thc House has said, Mr Kerr has shown an intcrest in a variety of matters, not the least of which is the reading of hands

and handwriting. I suppose that must have inhibited some of the orators in this place and made them keep their hands hidden because he was apparently able to interpret their characters and their integrity. Had we known that earlier, perhaps we would have been less expressive.
Mr SPEAKER That is why we kept it a secret.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN -Is that so? I am very interested in the fact that the talents of Hansard staff are not limited simply to the recording of our speeches. 1 noted with interest the reference to the creative ability of Mr Kerr. 1 was particularly interested in the fact that Mr Kerr was responsible for a radio play 'Massacre at Myall Creek'-about our Aboriginal problems. I also noted that earlier in his life he wrote children's stories. That indicates that Mr Kerr is a versatile type of person. Obviously he has a lot of talent because he selected a wife from the Eastern Suburbs of Sydney, which, of course, is one of the better parts of Australia. We wish her well in his retirement.I should also like to welcome :'vir Roberts to the position of Principal Parliamentary Reporter. I hope that he will have a long and successful career in that position.
Mr SPEAKER -J thank the House. I will convey to Mr Kerr the remarks of the Leader of the House and thc Deputy Leadcr or the Opposition.
BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE
The following Bills were returned from the Senate without amendment or requests:
Parliamentary Secretaries Bill 1980. Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation Bill 1980. Wine Grapes Levy Amendment Bill 1980. Wine Research Amendment Bill 1980. Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Bilt 1980. Ministers of State Amendment Bill 1980. Judicial Appointment (Western Samoa) Bill 1980. Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Bi111980. Public Service and Statutory Authorities Amendment Bill 1980. Barley Research Levy Bill 19XO. Barley Research Bill 1980. Dairying Industry Research and Promotion Levy Amendment Bill 1980. Customs Amendment Bill ("0.4) 1980. Customs Tariff Amendment Bill (1':0. 2) 1980. Liquefied Petroleum G[lS (Grants) Amendment Bill 1980. Christmas Island Amendment Bill 1980. Immigration (Unauthorized Arrivals) Amendment Bill 1980. Migration Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980.
ASSENT TO BILLS
Assent to the following Bills reported:
Crimes (Taxation Offences) Bill 19R0. Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Amendment Bill 1980. Homes Savings Grant Amendment Bill 1980. Income Tax Assessment Amendment (No.6) Bill 1980.

Companies and Securities Commission Bill

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATTVES 27

Parliamentary Secretaries Bill 1980. Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation Bill 1980. Wine Grapes Levy Amendment Bill 1980. Wine Research Amendment Bill 1980. Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Bill 1980. Ministers of State Amendment Bill 1980. ludical Appointment (Western Samoa) Bill 1980. Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Bill 1980. Public Service and Statutory Authorities Amendment Bill 1980. Customs Amendment Bill (No.4) 1980. Customs Tariff Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980. Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Bill 1980. Christmas Island Amendment Bill 1980. Migration Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980. Immigration (Unauthorized Arrivals) Amendment Rill 1980. Barley Research BiJl1980. Barley Research Levy Bi111980. Dairying Industry Research and Promotion Levy Amendment Bill 1980.
NATIONAL COMPANIES AND SECURITIES COMMISSION AMENDMENT BILL 1980
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 2 December 1980, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business
and Consumer Affairs)-Mr Speaker, may r have
your indulgence to suggest that the House has a general debate covering this Bill, the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Bill 1980, the Securities Industry Amendment Bill 1980 and the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Bill 1980 as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr SPEAKER-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these four measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (9.3) - This cognate debate is about four amendment Bills concerning the co-operative companies and securities scheme. The amendments relate to the provisions of the National Companies and Securities Commission Act as well as to the three other codes under the co-operative scheme which have already been enacted by this Parliament. These codes are the interpretation code; the acquisition of shares code, which was previously known as the takeovers code; and the securities industry code.
At the outset I indicate that the Opposition will support these Bills but, on behalf of the Opposition, T will be moving an amendment to the

motion that the Bills be now read a second time. This amendment expresscs the Opposition's consistently held vicw that the co-operative scheme is unsatisfactory, representing as it docs an abdication of the Commonwcalth's responsibility to legislatc at the national level. I should also indicate that, although the Opposition will support the passage of these Bills, the fact that we are debating thcm tonight in this Parliament is an indictment of the Governmcnt for its complacency. This Parliament has been waiting and, more importantly, thc Australian public and the i':ational Companies and Securities Commission have been waiting for far too long for the legislation to be brought into effcct. The principal legislation to which these amendments relate was detailed in this House on 16 April last year, which, by anybody's judgment, is a fair while ago. Ten months latcr we arc discussing amendments which were first introduced last August -horses, which have birthdays in August, are almost six months oldcr by now-and we still do not have a national companies and securities code operating in Australia, despite the fact that the whole area of' national companies and sccurities law was Ilrst put before the Parliament by the Labor Government in 1975 and by the Labor Opposition in 1976.
The delays which this package or legislation has suffered must be virtually unprecedented in the history of this Parliament, but the Government clearly is not concerned. The delays arc by no means over yet because after these amendments pass through the Parliament they will still necd to be given effect through application laws to be passed by each State of the Commonwealth. That is an indication of how cumbersome this schemc is. The members of thc Opposition have consistently warned of these dclays. Fnough time has passed and so little action has occurrcd that we can now claim that we have been provcn right. One must not forget, of coursc, that the final drart of the companies Bill is yet to be introduced into the Parliament. We will not be dcbating thal in this session. On the basis of this Government's record we will be lucky to see its provisions in effect before well into 1982.
It is worth remembering that the need for uniformity in companies and securitics legislation has long been recognised. The founding fathers, darc I say, included the corporation's power section 51 (xx)-in the Federal Constitution. In 1959 the objective of uniformity was again reallirmed by a meeting of Commonwealth and State Attorneys General. In the 1960s and 1970s we saw the lirst attempt at co-operation with the establishment of the Standing Committee of the Company Law

28 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Companies and Securities Commission Bill

Advisory Committee, known as the Eggleston Committee, and the Senate Select Committee on Securities and Exchange under the chairmanship of Senator Peter Rae. All these expensive, expert and exhaustive efforts over a period of more than 20 years have been treated nonchalantly, almost in a cavalier fashion, by this Government. Over this period we have seen at least two major boombust cycles in the Australian share markets which have done enormous damage to the efficiency and the credibility of the securities industry and, as a result, to the Australian economy. We are now well into a third boom. We are still waiting for an effective body of law to regulate companies and securities in Australia.

the MIM company --in order to protect Australian companies from Australian companies. That seems to mc to be rather strange. The Premier of Queensland has been responsible for handing over to international interests- --the Iwasaki organisation-large tracts of freehold land on the Australian coastline, yet the same gentleman is almost paranoid about any interference in the affairs of a Queensland based company by another Australian company. It appears that Mr Bjelke-Petersen is very_ concerned about seeing' that the lines which our founding fathers drew on the maps should be an impenetrable barrier for any sort of commercial improvement in Australia's situation.

This neglect by the Government is having increasingly unsatisfactory effects. In recent months we have witnessed the development of a strain of parochial independence in a number of States, most notably Queensland, which is the State of the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore). This potentially threatens the whole notion of a uniform companies and securities law in Australia. I would like to relate what the Queensland Government has done. It has intervened to prevent what it calls southern takeover bids for Evans Deakins Industries and Walkers Ltd. This intervention was successful. These two companies are now in the final stages of a merger. But it is not a matter of whether the takeovers in these cases were a good or bad thing.
There are reasons for believing that there has been an excessive number of takeovers in Australia. Perhaps it might be said there has also been an excessive centralisation of corporate control in the financial capitals of Sydney and Melbourne. But these were not necessarily the considerations of the Queensland Government. No assessment of the costs and benefits of the takeovers in terms of the public interest, the national interest and the interest of maintaining effective competition in the market place was undertaken. The Government's only concern was the protection of local managers. This has now had the effect of protecting, through precedent, all managers in Queensland from any threat of takeover. This cannot achieve anything more than a reduction in the efficiency of industry in that State.
The simple irony of this, of course, is that the xenophobic Premier of Queensland, who springs so anxiously to the defence of Australian owned and Queensland based companies from takeovers by other Australian owned companies in other States, has formed an alliance with a company which is 49 per cent American owned-that is,

The point is that if the national Government had a responsible takeovers and mergers law and it was administered by an independent body, such as the Trade Practices Commission, according to clear guidelines set down by statute the legitimate concerns of the Queensland Government, if any of its concerns were legitimate, would have been satisfied. The same applies, of course, to the actual conduct of the takeover bids which should be regulated by a national acquisition of shares law which ensures that all parties to the bid are able to make reasonable judgment about its merits.
By failing to make provision for those national forms of regulation, the Fraser Government has caused the further fragmentation and restriction of Australian industry and corporate life that we have been struggling against since before Federation. I am sorry to say that there will be many more examples of this fragmentation. Already the Victorian Government has begun its inquiry into newspaper ownership, following the shock it received from the News Group bid for the Herald and Weekly Times group. Once again, this is a matter properly dealt with by Commonwealth law, as indeed it almost certainly was until the Government watered down the Trade Practices Act in 1977. But this too looks like becoming an area where the States impose controls which damage our efforts at uniformity.
The securities industry is also suffering from the procrastination of the Government and from the enormous delays which the co-operative approach to companies and securities legislation entails. The recent resources boom, and the strength of the stock exchange indices over the past two years I see the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs is smiling at that, being an old stockbroker-have at last re-established the exchanges as a vehicle for raising capital for development. This follows a long period of dispute

Companies and Securities Commission Bill

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 29

after the fiasco of phoney floats which characterised the boom in the late 1960s. It is a tragedy that adequate and uniform regulation has not yet been achieved in the securities industry to stop some of the nefarious practices which can so easily destroy the Australian corporate image and the efficacy of the stock exchange as a means of raising local capital for our development.
I refer to a particular case that highlights what I am saying. In recent months we have seen an example of the type of sharp practice to which I have referred which we in the Opposition view in a very alarming light. I refer to the Negri River Corporation whose shares are presently being traded on Australian stock exchanges. This speculative fioat has been the subject of some Press coverage since my colleague, Senator Evans, the shadow Attorney-General, raised the matter in the Senate on 5 December last.
The Negri River Corporation is presently the subject of an investigation by the New South Wales Corporate Affairs Commission, as well it might be. The facts as presently known surrounding the issue by this company of its prospectus are very disturbing and to my mind highlight the inadequacies of the present regime of corporate control, and in fact the total sham of the selfregulatory powers Australian stock exchanges presently cling to. The facts surrounding this float as I know them once again raise the spectre of manipulation of the share buying public in the circumstances of a share market boom when people attempted, by virtue of easy profits to be made, to take their money out of building societies, savings
banks and so. on to invest in some speculative undertakings. According to information which I have in my possession, the prospectus for the Negri River Corporation issued on 4 November 1980 did not contain the report of a consulting geologist, Dr Peter Solomon, a man, I might add, who is not unknown to the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender). This report suggested quite conclusively that the two leases owned by the Negri River Corporation were most unlikely to yield diamonds and in fact were not worthy of future exploration.
By not including this report in the prospectus, the promoters of the company were clearly in a much better informed position than the sharebuying public. They were in a position to form a
judgment about the prospects of the exploration leases which other prospective shareholders were unable to assess. It is therefore disturbing that the three promoters of the company have been allocated directly or indirectly 3,500,000 shares,
or half the total issued capital of the company. It is also of concern that at least one of these people,

Sir Asher Joel, has reputedly sold sufficient of his holdings to enable him to recover his initial investment plus an unknown amount of profit. This action was made possible by the fact that the promoters' shares issued privately by the company at 20c per share have traded on the stock exchange with the public issue at up to $2 each based, ot' course, on a market which has been denied significant information in relation to the valuc or otherwise of the company's assets.
The Solomon report was commissioned in mid 1979 by the original lease holders, Messrs l3eith, Lance and Cooper. Beith later passed his 15 per cent leaseholding in trust to an Asher Joel company, Design and Construction of Mt Isa. After the Ashton diamond strike in the Kimberleys, an area remotely connected geographically with the Negri River leases, the Negri River leases of course assumed a new importance. The new promoters quickly organised another geological survey. This report of Profcssor Vaisey, the consulting geologist, is very cautious with the words 'could have' and 'would have' recurring
throughout. There is no reason to doubt the bona fides of this report, but the investor appeal of its findings would have been much reduced by the inclusion of the similarly cautious, but negative report of Dr Peter Solomon.
None of the three present promoters that is Joel, Lance and Cooper is a director of the company. Their role in the promotion of the company is relevant to whether their possession of the Solomon report can be attributed to the company and can therefore be said to have been fraudulently or negligently omitted from the prospectus. In any event, thcir knowledge of existence of the report and its contents provide in my judgment almost overwhelming evidence of insider trading of the worst kind. Therefore, I foreshadow that the Opposition will move in the Senate in the next couple of days to have the whole sorry Negri River Corporation affair referred to the Senate Standing Committee on Con-
stitutional and Legal Affairs where the truth behind this shadowy speculative issue might be uncovered.
Graham Beith, the original shareholder, upon
hearing of the float to the public last December minus the Solomon report went to the listing committee of the Melbourne Stock Exchange to complain of what he considered to be a fraudulent prospectus. In Seith's words, he was told: 'These people are establishment, Sir Asher Joel, and Sir Davis Hughcsnothing can be done'. Further, he was told: 'Be smart, take your money and run'.
Fortunately he did not run and perhaps the Senate Committee if it picks up the reference will

30 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 19R1

Companies and Securities Commission Bill

justify Beith's high-principled stand. He was in fact allotted 15,000 shares in the float but to his eternal credit he refused to trade in them. The fact that promoters can cloak a spectacular noat with the respectability of well known and titled directors, albeit that these directors might not be fully aware of all the murky facts, and thus obtain a listing, is a matter of great concern.
Our national corporate image is at stake. Wc cannot afford another stock exchange scandal of the dimensions of the late 1960s. I am sure the Minister would agree with me. The namcs Minsec, Poseidon and Tasminex still haunt our mcmories. We must not allow another rc-run of this sorry period. Negri River Corporation might yet prove to be a sound investment. For thc investors' sakes I hope so. However, I seriously doubt this will be the case. If we had the sort of national body which the Labor Party envisaged in 1974 managing our securities industry things might be different. I am sure of one thinggiven the sinister allegations made surrounding this floatand that is that given proper national control these Negri River Corporation shares would have becn suspended from trading until all the facts wcre known. This has not happened. Thcy arc still trading on the Australian stock exchanges which is a matter of enormous concern to me. The Opposition sincerely hopes that when the National Companies and Securities Commission has its full powers-admittedly limited as they might be-the overwhelming decent body of sharc traders in Australia will be ablc to polish their now tarnished prestige and set about restoring our national securities image. I am sure the Minister will also agree with that.
1 turn now to the specific provisions of these four Bills. A number of the provisions are of a machinery or relatively inconsequential nature. As a whole, they represent some tidying up of the principal Acts. However, some of the provisions are also substantive and I will comment briefly on some of them. The Opposition has no objection to the provisions contained in the National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Bill. The independence of Statc AuditorsGeneral should ensure that the provisions of clause 6 do not result in any difficulties.
In respect of the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Bill, the Opposition wclcomes the Government's decision to includc the provisions at clause 18. This clause provides that an offeror in its part A or part C statement should indicate its plans for the continuation of the business of the target company, including the future employment of the company's staff. This stylc of provision has been sought by the Opposition and

was contained in the abortive Labor Bills of 1975. J might add that it is included in the London and American codes for securities. We in the Opposition consider that this is the very least that can be done on behalf of the employees of companies who are the targets of takeovers. [t is to be hoped that the decision of the Government to include this provision will be only a first step towards a more general recognition of the rights of employces under company law and, indeed, the law in gencral.
At this stage, I think it is reasonable to point out that my colleagues, the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) and the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford), have consistently pushed for this provision to be included in thesc Bills since they were first introduced into the
f fouse. r am sure that those honourable members
will bc pleased that these rather humanitarian provisions have been included by the Minister's Department. The only other comment I wish to make on this Bill is that it provides further extcnsions of the discretionary powers of the National Companies and Securities Commission ~-for cxample, in giving consent to profit forecasts or asset valuations and to the variation of takeover olTcrs. I am aware of the benefits of flexibility which such provisions allow. But it must be noted that these provisions also substantially increase the burden of responsibility imposed upon the Commission. It is to be hoped that this transfer of responsibility from the legislature to the Commission will not prove to be an abdication of rcsponsibility. These provisions deal with matters of real concern and a rubber stamp approach should not be adopted by the Commission. J am pretty confident that it will not be adopted.
If we turn to the Securities Industries Amendment Bill, we find that further adjustments to the powers of the National Companies and Securities Commission are proposed. 1 earlier indicated that although the Opposition will not oppose these Bills it is not entirely happy with some of the changes made by this Bill. We support the Bill because we do not want to see any further delays in its implementation. In some cases the powers of the Commission to obtain information are reduced; the grounds for defence to a prosecution relating to false or misleading information are ex-
tcnded, proven copies, rather than the originals of books, will be allowed in evidence, and information may be required of a person only if that person is able to provide it. However reasonablc these provisions may appear to be, it is always possible that they can work to hinder unduly thc powers of the Commission. It is to be hoped that
the Ministerial Council wil1 be willing to amend

Companies and Securities Commission Bill

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 31

them quickly if the need arises. Of course, the Bill also provides for the extension of the powers of the National Companies and Securities Commission, in dealing in securities, to require a director, secretary or executive officer to disclose information and to ask questions pertinent to ascertaining the nature and extent of relevant interests. The Opposition supports these provisions which were sought by the Commission. In its view the existing legislation gives it inadequate power to perform its intended functions. The Opposition also has no objection to the clarifications made in the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Bill 1980.
Finally, I reiterate that the Opposition supports the Bills, not because it believes that the cooperative companies and securities scheme will work satisfactorily but because it recognises more clearly than does the Government the urgent need for some action in these areas. I will detail what the Opposition believes the co-operative scheme does. Firstly, it abdicates the responsibility for companies and securities regulation given to the Commonwealth by the Constitution and clearly shown by the Rae Committee, the Senate Select Committee on Securities and Exchange, to require action. Secondly, it places uniformity before reform in an area where reform is desperately needed. Thirdly, it represents a slow and tedious process which, in an ever-changing world, will never match the real needs of the day. Accordingly, I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing the Bill, the House:
(a) expresses its concern at the Government's abdication of its responsibility to make national laws for corporations and the securities industry pursuant to the Commonwealth's own constitutional powers, and in accordance with the recommendations of the Senate Select Committee on Securities and Exchange in 1974 (the Rae Report);
(b) notes that the legislative scheme of which this Bill is a part places uniformity before reform, and creates both the danger and the likelihood that lowest common denominator standards will prevail;
(c) expresses its concern at the lack of effective accountability of the National Companies and Securities Commission, to either the Government or the Parliament of the Commonwealth, or to any other single elected Government or Parliament;
(d) notes that amendments to close loopholes in company law are continually necessary, but, while acknowledging that pursuant to the Formal Agreement, any proposed amendment may need to be the subject of consultation with the Ministerial Council before final acceptance by the Government, nonetheless insists upon this Parliament's right to properly scrutinise and amend all legislation put before it by the Executive, and

(e) calls upon the Government in the event of the breakdown for any reason of the scheme embodied in the Bill, to immediately proceed to the introduction of Commonwealth legislation for the national regulation of the acquisition of shares'.
J believe that amendment will be seconded by the honourable member for Griffith (Mr Humphreys). I would like to pay some form of quiet tribute to the Minister for his co-operation in presenting this Bill and also to his stafT who have been very co-operative in their efforts to brief the Opposition. We appreciate the gestures of the Minister and his staff.
Mr Humphreys-I second the amendment and reserve my right to speak at a later hour of this day.
Mr DEAN (Herbert) (9.25)- The four Bills we are considering in this joint debate seek to amend substantive legislation dealing with companies and securities passed last year in the main by the Thirty-first Parliament. The most notable of these amending Bills is the Securities Industry Amendment Bill which will give wider investigative powers to the National Companies and Securities Commission. The rest of the amendments are relatively minor and, rather than detail them, it may be salutory if we consider in this new Thirty-second Parliament where we are at present with regard to the co-operative legislative scheme and what remains to be done. In doing so, I will refer firstly to the unique co-operative and uniform approach to the legislative package that these Bills in part amend. Secondly, we should remind ourselves of the major innovations of the new companies and securities legislation. Thirdly, we should note the important legislation yet to come which will complete Australia's latest nationwide attempt to provide a sensible framework within which much of her industry and COIllmerce will carryon business.
The need for uniformity particularly, though 0y no means exclusively, in the business area has long been recognised. However, it has proven difficult to achieve. An important step was taken in 1961 and 1962 when all State parliaments passed uniform companies Acts. The terms of the new legislation had been settled by the standing COIllmittees of State and Commonwealth Attorneys-General. Unfortunately, the Acts did not remain uniform for long. Differences of substance are infrequent and many differences occur only in expression and organisation. Unfortunately, changes have often been legislated at different times which, at the least, is confusing and adds to the confusion of even minor differences. In addition, South Australia and Tasmania did not have securities industry legislation.

32 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Companies and Securities Commission Bill

Furthermore, some States have taken unilateral action to protect parochial interests. An example of that is the South Australian case with its Santos legislation. I should add that the new scheme still may not prevent this from happening but at least great progress has been made towards achieving uniformity and ensuring uniformity in the future.
In the early 1970s, fearing the possibility of the Commonwealth legislating to cover companies and securities, New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia formed the Interstate Corporate Affairs Commission. The four member States still were unable to achieve complete uniformity in their Acts, notwithstanding this step. In December 1978 the Commonwealth and all six States executed a formal agreement which is the basis of the legislative package already passed and the Bills still to come. The agreement contains four essential elements. Firstly, it formalises the Ministerial Council which is comprised of one Minister representing each State and the Commonwealth. The Council must rea.ch unanimous agreement on all initial legislation but subsequent amendments require only majority approval. Secondly, there is agreement to establish the National Companies and Securities Commission. The NCSC, subject to direction by the Ministerial Council, will administer the legislation under the scheme. It has various powers including powers to hold hearings, summon witnesses and delegate most of its powers and functions to State and Territory corporate affairs officers.
Thirdly, the formal agreement provides for maximum use of existing State and Territory corporate affairs offices. Although the legislation gives all powers and functions to the NCSC, the use of existing offices will ensure a decentralised administration of the scheme. They will carry out their functions much as they always have, with steps being taken, however, to ensure a uniform approach from State to State. The fourth element is a legislative framework which involves the States adopting the scheme legislation in force in the Australian Capital Territory. The Australian Capital Territory will be the first to pass all this legislation, which will then be adopted by the States and the other Territories. Subsequent amendments to the Australian Capital Territory's legislation, of course, will apply automatically in the other jurisdictions participating in the scheme.
The scheme provided for in the formal agreement thus addresses itself to three problem areas noted by the Senate Select Committee on Securities and Exchange, which was chaired by Senator Rae. They were: Lack of national uniformity in

the law; lack of national uniformity in administrative practices; and lack of national uniformity in the quality of administration. The Rae Committee reported in 1974 on Australian securities markets and their regulation. The formal agreement provides that the co-operative scheme legislation should be substantially in conformity with the Interstate Corporate Affairs Commission legislation. Some changes, of course, have been agreed to, but the Ministerial Council has deferred a number of other modifications so as to get the co-operative scheme in operation as soon as possible. It is anticipated that there will be a large task of reform of companies and securities legislation to follow, and for this task the formal agreement establishes a Companies and Securities Law Review Committee.
In deciding upon the co-operative approach to the scheme, the Commonwealth could have considered a number of different ways of achieving uniform legislation. It could have taken on itself the passing of legislation declared to apply nationwide. Apart from any possible constitutional problems, this approach undoubtedly would be seen by some States as riding roughshod over their powers and functions, and that is something to be avoided if at all possible. It is this course, as evidenced in the speech of the honourable member for Parramatta (MrJohn Brown) and in the Australian Labor Party's amendment that the Australian Labor Party would have this Parliament follow. That is why, of course, the amendment proposed by the Labor Party is not supportable. It is not the intention of this Government to ride roughshod over the States. Certainly it would not be my view, coming from a State as well as belonging to the national Parliament, that we should attempt to do so. Rather, in my view the cooperative approach is to be preferred.
The second way in which the Commonwealth could have approached the issue was to have legislated for interstate corporate activity. However, this would have added another complicated set of laws to various State laws and lessened rather than enhanced the possibilities of achieving unanimity. The Commonwealth, I suppose, could have opted to stay out of the field altogether, except insofar as it has responsibilities for the Territories, but Commonwealth participation is obviously desirable. The honourable member for Parramatta, when he was trying to argue the point for a total Commonwealth approach, regardless of the States, raised one apparent red herring in the debate when he referred to the Negri River affair. Interestingly enough, this is a matter which, is entirely within the powers of the State's Corporate Affairs Commission, and one wonders why the

Companies and Securities Commission Bill

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 33

New South Wales Labor Government apparently has done nothing about it. Why that matter has to be dragged into this debate is a little beyond me. We are left with the co-operative scheme which has been devised. I agree that it is not without its difficulties. I agree that in practice it might not work out as well as is presently hoped. Neverthe-
less, r am personally satisfied that it is the prefer-
able approach to take. We must live with its weaknesses and, above all, try to make it work.
I turn now to the legislation that has already been passed, some of which these Bills seek to amend. The National Companies and Securities Commission Act was passed in November 1979 and proclaimed on I February 1980. Members were subsequently appointed to the Commission, hut the Commission will not be in a position to assume its full functions until the substantive Commonwealth legislation under the scheme has been proclaimed and adopting legislation passed in each State. The other substantive legislation which followed included the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act, the Companies (Acquisition of Shares Pees) Act, the Securities Industry Act, the Securities Industry (Fees) Act, and the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act. When regulations pursuant to these Acts are approved by parties to the scheme the Acts will be proclaimed. This will make the way clear for the States to pass laws adopting the Commonwealth legislation as their own.
Apart from the formation of the Ministerial Council and the setting up of the NCSC, perhaps the most significant and indeed controversial innovation in the package is the setting down of a code for takeovers, which is enacted in the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act. Whilst Australian company law traditionally has been based on British models, the Australian takeovers code is a departure from the British law in this area. The United Kingdom approach to the regulation of takeovers was to formulate a code of good practice known as the City Code on Takeovers. It is an attempt at self-regulation. It docs not have the force of law but rather is made up of general principles and rules which should be adhered to in the conduct of takeovers and mergers. The Panel on Takeovers and Mergers which administers the City Code may hold hearings, which arc quite informal proceedings, and in the event of any breach the ultimate sanction of the code is to withdraw the facilities of the market from the disobedient corporation. Some people have seen this sort of self-regulation as preferable
to an Australian code, or the code that has now been enacted, mainly because it is more flexible

and adaptable to the rapidly changing corporate world and the quite acceptable practices it might from time to time adopt. The problem in Australia is that we do not have one centrally located market. A city code type of approach would have to be working in different places geographically far apart. I think that, with some justification, the Government decided in favour of a more formal legislated code.
The basic thrust of the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act is to prohibit acquisitions of betwecn 20 per cent and 90 per cent of the shares in a company unless one of three methods is followed: A gradual acquisition of shares at the rate of 3 pCI' cent every six months; a formal takeover bid based largely on the procedure set down in the current companies Acts; or an unconditional bid for one month on the floor of the stock exchange. There are certain types of transactions exempted from this procedure. However, the Act is quite detailed in its requirements, in contrast to the informal language of the London City Code. As I have indicated, our takeovers provisions are probably the most controversial part of the co-operative scheme legislation. A number of commentators have suggested a number of areas of doubtful interpretation or where the provisions may simply not work. J do not propose to canvass the main points of that debate here. As with the legislative package as a whole, there is sound argument for getting the code going as soon as possible, recognising that in all likelihood there will be a need for reform as we gain experience from its operation.
It remains for me to consider what is still to be done to complete the co-operative scheme. I could foreshadow a number of Bills yet to be introduced hut, rather than going into that detail, [ shall
confine myself to the one major piece of legislation to be enacted the new Companies Bill. Whilst this Bill is based largely on existing State legislation, it will have a number of important modifications. The most significant of these will be that an Australian company incorporated in a State or Territory can achieve nationwide recognition without the need for lodging company documents in the other States or Territories. Overseas corporations will similarly have to seek registration in only one place. [ need not spell out the advantages of that to industry and commerce and to the legal and accounting professions.
Once all the scheme legislation is in place the substantive law on companies and securities will be contained largely in three main pieces of legislation the Companies Act itself, the Securi-
ties Industry Act, and the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act. Administering all three Acts

34 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Companies and Securities Commission Bill

will be the National Companies and Securities again, we are supposed to be on the edge of a re-

Commission which, as I have mentioned, will be sources boom. The previous resourcesboom led to

subject to direction by the Ministerial CounciL the setting up of the Rae Committee because of all

Australia should then have at last uniform legisthe malpractices which occurred at that time.

lation with some important innovations, particularly the code on takeovers and mergers. We will have taken a unique co-operative approach to companies and securities law which, for all its weaknesses, should best cater for all the interests to be found in our federation of States. Indeed, it is not putting it too highly to say that, irrespective of whether this co-operative scheme wholly succeeds in its present form, it will prove to be one of the most positive steps ever taken towards providing the framework within which corporate enterprise can prosper and advance Australia.

I am not saying that the coming resources boom can be equated with what occurred in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Quite frankly, the coming boom will be of a different form. In this case we know which resources are there to be developed. There will not be as much accent on exploration. I do not think that as many companies will be floated as were floated then. The big problem will be finance, infrastructure and general company formation. It will relate to known resources or to some degree of knowledge of resources. Even so, the Australian Labor Party still adheres to the

Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (9.40)-What we are claim that there is a need for national company

debating tonight are really amendments to five legislation to protect the investors. For a long time

Bills which were debated in April last year. On we have held this opposition to the co-operative

that occasion we did not have a full debate on the scheme.

issue considering the level of complexity and the sheer volume of the Bills at that time. For example, the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Bill at that time comprised some 64 clauses and some 84 pages and honourable members were expected to cover that and the four other related Bills in 20 minutes. Be that as it may, we now have before us some further amendments to those Bills which are now Acts. The Opposition appreciates that there will be a need for continuing amendments to be made in a complex area such as this.

It is quite clear that we in this Parliament do have the power to have national legislation. As I said, the concept of co-operative federalism does not lend itself to speedy amendments of the type with which we are dealing. These amendments were1ntroouced before the previous Parliament was dissolved and only now are they being debated. That surely is evidence of the fact that we cannot have speedy amendments. These Bills before us apply only to the Australian Capital Territory. Proposals for the amendments will have to go to the six State governments after this

It is the very need for continuing amendments legislation is passed. The legislative framework

that provokes and leads us to believe that we need for all this legislation is the so-called legislative de-

companies and securities law which can be vice whereby legislative uniformity recognises

amended speedily. The problem with the cothat States concede no power. But the States have

operative legislating set up we have at present is to refer any constitutional power in order that the

that we simply cannot make speedy amendments. Commonwealth Parliament may enact a national

The reasons for that are well known and the Optakeover code, for example. Of course, that

position's case on that is well known. It is not for power is afforded by section 51 (XX) of the

purely idealogical reasons that we want a national Constitution.

approach to the regulation of companies in this country; our desire is based on more pragmatic grounds: We want a system that works.

The only authority for the proposition that that section of the Constitution does not empower the Commonwealth to enact a takeover code is the

The honourable member for Herbert (Mr case of Huddart Parker v. Moorehead, which was

Dean) referred to the Rae Committee, which based on the reserved powers doctrine since

delivered its report in 1974. Nothing which this exploded by the High Court in the engineers case.

Government has done since then has had much to Further, since the concrete pipes case, on any gen-

do with the recommendations of the Rae Comerally accepted view of the scope of section

mittee. What the Rae Committee pointed out and 51 (XX) a Bill such as the one presently under

showed with great clarity was that the existing consideration could not be limited in the manner

law was inadequate. What the Rae Committee envisaged on constitutional grounds alone. I will

tried to do in its recommendations was to protect not go through all the legal constitutional powers

the investors and not simply to protect the because there is no need to refer to other cases; it

sharebroking industry. It is the investors that this is quite clear that the Federal Parliament does

Parliament should be concerned about. Once have the power to enact national legislation. At

Companies and Securities Commission Bill

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 35

the time of the Labor Government from 1972 to 1975, we did introduce Bills for that purpose.
] think we need also to re-enforce the legal point that the system of co-operative federalism requires that each of the seven legislatures has to confer the relative powers of adjudication upon its own supreme court. Again, if this legislation is challenged by the States we will need to have a complex system of laws devised by the courts in the various States. ] guess the judgments they bring down will be uniform also, but again that means delay. This is a long procedure whereby we can gain some sort of uniformity in terms of the adjudication of the law by the courts in the States. Again, that is a reason to say that it is terribly hard to make speedy amendments to this legislation under the co-operative system. I am pleased to see that the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) said this in his second reading speech:
. . . there is substantial and visible progress towards the completion of the co-operative companies and securities scheme.
We are pleased to see that there is good agreement between the seven governments involved now. But each of the State governments still can act as a rogue. Each State still has power to act independently. We have seen moves in the Queensland Parliament to stop takeovers by the dreaded people of the south. Luckily, wiser heads have prevailed there and, on the last information J have, they do not plan to proceed with the legislation. Even so, the opportunity exists for any State to act as a rogue in that way for a stupid ideological reason such as that which the Queenslafld Government was contemplating.
The Minister said that there are areas which need more attention. There is a need to finalise the content of the regulations which will be acquired under the Acts. There is a need to settle the form and content of the companies code which was introduced on 27 August 1980. Then, of course, each State will have to pass a series of Bills after we pass these Bills through this Parliament. What we will have will be a national companies and securities commission (State provisions) Bill in each of the States. Then, of course, we will have an application oflaws Bill for each of the four codes in each State. What we are talking about is four codes. The State Bills other than the companies (acquisition of laws) Bill have been cleared by the Ministerial Council for introduction into individual State parliaments, the Minister informs us. However, the Minister states that the 'introduction and passage of the State Bills will depend on the programs of individual State parliam~nts'. When all that is done the national

commission will have to proceed with its administrative arrangements for the administration of the scheme. What I am trying to say and to emphasise is that a co-operative scheme does not lend itself to speedy amendment.
Last time. I spoke on the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Bill 1referred to the need to bring down to 10 per cent the threshhold for a takeover to be registered. J still wish to record my belief that 10 per cent should be the threshhold level. A minute ago I referred to the four codes. The honourable member for Herbert said that eventually, when all this legislation is passed, we will have three areas of legislation, three areas oflaw.
Mr Dean-Major areas oflaw.
Mr KERIN-He mentioned three major areas of law. I concede that that is a move towards uniformity, but we are yet to have the companies law itself. The Minister in his speech said that that legislation will be introduced this session and I guess that legislation will be debated. But, again, it is a heck of a long time since the need for a uniform companies law in this country was seen to exist. It simply goes on and on. ] can see the need for amendments which will take at least six months to go through all the parliaments, even to go through this Parliament, when one considers the time taken in elections and in recesses. I still do not think that the State governments have the capacity that the Commonwealth has to deal with these matters. I think that the Opposition is very much justified in the position it takes on these matters. Opposition members know that the Constitution certainly gives us the necessary power. We believe that the legislation should be national legislation. For those reasons and for quite a few others, 1 support the amendment moved by my colleague, the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown). The amendment states:
That all words after "That" be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
"whilst not opposing the Bill. the House:
(a) expresses its concern at the Government's abdication of its responsibility to make national laws for corporations and the securities industry pursuant to the Commonwealth's own constitutional powers, and in accOl'dance with the recommendations of the Senate Select Committee on Securities and Exchange in 1974 (the Rae Report);
(b) notes that the legislative scheme of which this Bill is a part places uniformity before reform, and creates both the danger and the likelihood that lowest common denominator standards will prevail;
(c) expresses its concern at the lack of effective accountability of the National Companies and Securities Commission, to either the Government or the Parliament of

36 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Companies and Securities Commission Bill

the Commonwealth, or to any other single elected Government or Parliament;
(d) notes that amendments to close loopholes in company law are continually necessary, but, while acknowledging that pursuant to the Formal Agreement, any proposed amendment may need to be the subject of consultation with the Ministerial Council before final acceptance by the Government, nonetheless insists upon this Parliament's right to properly scrutinise and amend all legislation put before it by the Executive, and
(e) calls upon the Government in the event of the breakdown for any reason of the scheme embodied in the Bill, to immediately proceed to the introduction of Commonwealth legislation for the national regulation of the acquisition of shares".
Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) (9.51)-1 can and will be brief, but I think that one or two things should be said in answer to the criticisms that have been made by the Opposition of the Bills presently before the House. The first is that what the House is looking at, has been looking at and will be looking at is the single most complex and comprehensive scheme of legislation that has ever gone through this House, so that when there is talk of delay and unnecessary time that has to be borne in mind. It is quite unreal to contrast this kind of legislation with any other legislation by reason of the very width of the fields that it covers.
Secondly, it has been said by the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) and other Opposition members that what should have been put before this House was a scheme resting upon the corporations and trading powers of the Commonwealth. Two things may be said of that. From time to time the Labor Party has been in power in this country and it did not seek to do that until 1974. It sought to do that in 1974 and the Bill which came before the House lapsed when the Labor Government went out of office in 1975. This in itself gives some indication of the complexity of the matters that this kind of legislation covers. More than that, there is a problem as to whether all the legislation-I speak now of the entire package-would be within our power. If it is not, some of it would be the subject of challenge. If, on the other hand, it proceeds on a cooperative basis, the prospects of a successful challenge are very much less.
The honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) referred to the fact that the State supreme courts would have to adjudicate at some time upon the validity of various parts of the legislation. 1 am not quite sure how that would arise but if it did arise it would be adjudicated upon no less quickly than would be the case if it went through the Federal courts because any question of the constitutional validity of the legislation

must in any event go to the High Court. With all respect to the criticisms that have been made, 1 would have thought that this complex group of Bills, taken in conjunction with the other legislation which has been before the House and which will be before the House, would be embraced by the Opposition as an example of co-operative federalism. It must be recalled that essentially all the State governments regardless of their political complexions, had to agree to what is before the House. The very fact that agreement could be reached on matters of such immense importance-that is, the regulation of the securities industry, the setting up of companies, the regulation of trading activities and the regulation of a whole host of company and security activities-is a great sign that federalism can work co-operatively in a field such as this and I hope, in other fields as welL
1 will spend one or two minutes commenting briefly upon the three major criticisms made by the honourable member for Parramatta. Firstly, he said that this legislation was an abdication of responsibility. For the reasons I have put it is not. To take the other route would invite constant constitutional challenges of the kind that we have seen, for example, in respect of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act. Secondly, the honourable member said that the legislation put uniformity beyond reform. He referred to the provisions relating to takeovers. When I started practice in 1961 there were two sections dealing with takeovers in the then uniform legislation. I think I am right in saying that in the legislation which has come before this House there are 64 clauses and a number of schedules of great detail dealing with takeovers. What does this show? It shows that times have become very much more complex, that the legislation has become very much more complex and, more than that, that reforms have been implemented to meet abuses which have been perceived. Of course, there will be further abuses and the need to pass further legislation. There can be no doubt about that. What is before this House represents a comprehensive attempt to reform many areas of the law on a co-operative basis.
The honourable member for Parramatta instanced clause 18 of the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment BilL I agree entirely with what he had to say about clause 5 and clause 5A which are to be inserted in Part A and Part C of the Schedule to the principal Act and relate to statements made by offerors. That is an example of the kind of reform which can be produced by co-operation. He might also have referred to the fact that in the same clause provision is now made for a statement of intentions by offeror companies

Prince of Wales: Betrothal

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 37

of what they will do with the business of the target

PRINCE OF WALES: BETROTHAL

company, that is, whether they will strip the assets or keep it running. That is one more instance of the kind of reform which is before the House.

Ministerial Statement Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)--by leave-The monarchy is inter-

Lastly, the honourable member for Parramatta said that the legislation was slow and tedious and that it would not match the needs of today. I do not disagree with the proposition that it will be slow but legislation of this kind, when it is first before the House, will necessarily be slow because of
the complexity of the problems that it has to confront. The honourable member said that it will not meet the needs of the day. As I understood

woven in Australian life in a very real and vital way. The Crown is part of our constitutional processes of government. Feeling for the royal family is deep-seated in the emotions of many Australians and we all share and enjoy the public occasions which add colour to our contemporary scene. Each of us can look back on events in our own lifetime affecting the Royal family and they stand out in our memory.

him, he simply asserted that that is so. He referred to a company in New South Wales, I suppose in that context. As he knows, that company is under special investigation under provisions which will

Tonight is such an occasion. Her Majesty the Queen announced from Buckingham Palace just a moment or two ago the engagement of His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales to Lady Diana

be in the co-operative legislation and which, I assure him, are widespread enough to meet the
needs of any company investigation. I have had to
act on two occasions as a special investigator in New South Wales under those provisions. They have been substantially re-enacted in the legis-

Spencer. The announcement has been conveyed to His Excellency the Governor-General and to the Australian Government. On behalf of the Government, and all Australians, I welcome the announcement with great pleasure and extend congratulations and good wishes to Prince

lation now before the Parliament. The honourable member commended the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore). Of course, I agree with him on that.

Charles and Lady Diana.
I am not able to say that the announcement has caught the Australian people entirely unaware or unprepared. The media has assisted us in, at

I will sum up by saying that the ditTerence is really one of emphasis. On the one hand it is said: 'Let us put through a national Bill'. On the other
hand the Government has taken the view that co-

limes, graphic detail. But thus prepared I can say with even greater assurance that we applaud the announcement and look forward with excitement to the pageantry of a Royal wedding.

operative legislation is preferable by reason of the probkms that have to be confronted, the desire to obtain the co-operation or the State authorities and the desire to avoid endless constitutional con-
frontation by those who might be adversely affected by the legislation. If I had to make a choice I would certainly opt for the safer route rather than that which would simply invite endless legal quibbles as to the powers of the Parliament to do what it hopes to do and which would exclude co-operation with the States. We are, after all, operating under a Federal system.

Australian people hold Prince Charles in special regard. From the completion of his schooling here as a young man, and his subsequent five visits to Australia, we have come to recognise and applaud his sense of humour and his dedication, his outgoing personality and his concern for people. He has spoken many times of his affection for Australia and Australians. We have a great affection for him, in which his wife-to-be will now share.
Prince Charles will be visiting Australia again later this year and he will be given a warm wel-

Amendment negatived.

come. I do not know when we might have the great pleasure of welcoming Lady Diana to

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

Australia, but whenever that is I am certain that

the welcome will be equally warm, equally

Bill read a second time.

affectionate.

Third Reading Leave granted for third rcading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.

The Crown gives us a focal point in our development as a nation and links us with our history and our origins. The significance of the monarchy
is not diminishing. It is not fading in Australian consciousness. The Queen and her family are part of a living and relevant institution, which in
Australia is very much tied to our own institutions

38 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Prince o/Wales: Betrothal

and emotions. We all share with Her Majesty the Queen and Prince Philip, and other members of the Royal family, the joy of this particular occasion and to them also we extend our good wishes.
I shall be conveying our sentiments to Prince Charles and Lady Diana, and to Her Majesty the Queen, on behalf of all Australians. In this I am sure that I shall have the wholehearted support of the members of this House.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-by leave-On behalf of the Opposition I wish to join in the congratulations and related sentiments which have been expressed by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). His Royal Highness, thrice a knight already, is a man of steady judgement who, at the age of 32, has clearly avoided being rushed into matrimony. Among heirs to the British throne, only his great uncle, once Edward VIII, later Duke of Windsor, took longer to embrace matrimony. Prince Charles is unique in the Royal family in that he was educated for a time in Australia at Timbertop and his bride to be has had Australian rural connections through her mother. It seems particularly appropriate that the precisely detailed and authoritative leak on the Royal marriage should have come from that eminent Victorian Mr, but soon to be Lord, Rupert Murdoch.
The last Bonny Prince Charlie was disqualified both by religion and marriage from accession to the British throne. The Act of Succession of 1702, as the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) established in a recent question on notice, is still in force. That Act requires the heir to the throne to marry a protestant. I am sure that there will be many who will be relieved to know that there will be no constitutional crisis, that the historic barriers presented by that legislation will not impede the union of our contemporary Prince Charles and his bride.
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-by leave-I am sure that I speak for every member of the National Country Party, and indeed for people throughout the nation, in saying how delighted we are at the announcement by Her Majesty the Queen of the engagement of His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales and Lady Diana Spencer. Those of us who have had the pleasure of meeting Prince Charles over the years have come to know him as a man of great charm and individuality, a man who has clearly shown that he has the qualities that fit him for the great and responsible tasks that lie ahead of him.

Prince Charles and the woman who will become his wife have ahead of them a life which will impose upon them immense demands and heavy responsibilities. They will occupy a position that imposes heavy penalties, especially on their personal life, but at the same time they are offered the affection and trust of many millions throughout the world. Prince Charles, at some time in the future I am sure, will accept the increased burden of a much heavier kind of leadership. His wife will have to share that burden and the responsibilities that go with it. As Prince Charles and Lady Diana set out on this demanding course together we offer them our congratulations; we offer them our good wishes for their happiness together; we offer them the firm pledge of our loyalty and support in the great tasks and duties that they will undertake together; and we express confidence that their lives and their service to the nations that they will one day be called upon to lead will be patterned to a large extent on the distinguished and gracious example set them by Her Majesty the Queen and His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh.
COMPANIES (ACQUISITION OF SHARES) AMENDMENT BILL 1980
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 2 December 1980, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.
SECURITIES INDUSTRY AMENDMENT BILL 1980
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 2 December 1980, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.

Adjournment

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 39

COMPANIES AND SECURITIES (INTERPRETATION AND
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) AMENDMENT BILL 1980
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 2 December 1980, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.
ADJOURNMENT
Korean Military Citation-Drought-Sydney East Hills Railway-Pollution of Georges River-Toxic Waste Disposal
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr KENT (Hotham) (10.12)-1 want to draw the attention of the House and the Australian people to a matter that, because of representations made to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen), is well known to them. It is the case of Squadron Leader Ken Blight, a constituent of mine who fought in the Korean War as a fighter pilot in our Seventy-seventh Squadron. He has been fighting since he retired to have the Australian Government allow all those who arc entitled to do so to wear the emblem of the citation made by the first President of the Republic of Korea, Syngman Rhee. I agree that the passing of the late President was not exactly a great loss to humanity, nor is the current Prcsidcnt of that country an ardent supporter of democracy, but that is beside the point.
The 42 pilots including the commanding officer of the Seventy-seventh Squadron, Wing Commander Spense, who gave their lives did not question the rationale of the adventurist and interventionist policies of the Liberal Government. They did not know that because of the inane policies of the then Government, their supreme sacrifice would be for the maintenance of a regimc in South Korea just as oppressive as the one in the north against which they were 6ghting. Lil.llc did they know that in 1980 ovcr 1,000 Illen and women would be shot and bayoneted in the Kwangju massacre by the troops of General President Chun Doo Whan. The South Korean Leader

of the Opposition was nearly put to death recently, and only international pressure saved his life. To describe the tryanny of the South Korean regime I wish to quote from a letter written by Senator Chipp, a former buddy of the Prime Minister, to the South Korean Ambassador. It is dated 9 February 1981, and states:
Your reply to my telegram filled me with the deepest and coldest contempt hoth for you and your wretched government. Kim's life may have been spared but he is condemned to a living death in a freezing prison cell.
I take comfort only from the fact that while you may have broken his health you wili never break his spirit. His commitment to democracy is a shining ideal which will live on long after the petty tyrant Chun is forgotten.
Your most arrogant and hypocritical letter is all that could be expected from a tyrant's lackey.
I think that even honourable members opposite and the Ministcr for Education (Mr Fife), who is at the table, will have enough intelligence to undcrstand, in hindsight, how futile were their policies when they slavishly followed American expansionist policies in Asia and backed their stupidity with the lives of our servicemen. Having said all this, I cannot see why Squadron leader Blight and his men should not be allowed to wear the emblem of the citation awarded to them. They served faithfully and fought valiantly, and it is no fault of theirs that the Prime Minister and the Minister for Defence are ashamed-or should be-of the policies of their Party. They are trying to hide behind technicalities such as that the Queen will not approve the emblem. I do not know what the Queen has to do with our military adventurism. Certainly she had the good sense to keep out of our involvement in Vietnam, which was another classic example of the futile sacrifice of the lives of our soldiers on the altar of reaction and conservatism. It is somewhat of an irony that I, a supporter of peace and co-operation between nations, have to ask the Minister for Defence and the Prime Minister-two bellicose gentleman to approve the wearing of the emblem by people who served this nation. In part, the citation says:
This squadron entered the Korean War . . . flying Mustang aircraft, it earned the highest reputation for itself
. . and it won the admiration and friendship of all units it supported
Thc citation was signed by Syngman Rhee. I call on the Prime Minister and the Minister for Defence to stop passing the buck and afford recognition where recognition is due.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (10.16)-ln the short time available to me tonight, I wish to mention the devastating drought which has encompassed the whole of New South Wales and a major portion of Queensland. There is no doubt that this has been the worst drought this part of the world

40 REPRESENTATIVES 24 Fcbruary 1981

Adjournment

has experienced. It is quite cvident that this Government, along with the State governments, must give greater consideration to the construction of more dams on our river systems. Although there have been excellent rains in the Hunter Valley, the north-west of New South Walcs and in Queensland, no water has run into the dams. The Glenbawn Dam on the Hunter River has received no water although there have been good rains in the Hunter Valley. Its level is at 10 per cent eapacity. The Keepit Dam on the Namoi River is at the same level and no water is running into it. It is evident that we have to work out a plan with the State governments to see that more dams are constructed so we can take care of future droughts.
In regard to the Keepit Dam, the State Government and the Federal Governmcnt intend to build a supporting dam above Kcepit on the Manilla River. The Federal Governmcnt and the State Government of New South Wales havc cach put in $500,000. When this dam is built, it will be of great benefit to farmers on the Namoi River system and it will help supply watcr to the cotton growers at Wee Waa who rely on water from this river system. These areas will go into the winter with a shortage of water and unless further rain falls they will experience very serious pastoral conditions. Farmers are facing drastic financial conditions because the failure of the wheat erop right through the north-west of New South Wales has meant that the farmers are entering 1981 without any cash flow. The wool clip will be cut in half because the dry weather has affected the production of wool. There have been severe sheep and cattle losses in the area. Let us hope that the Primary Industry Bank of Australia and the Commonwealth Development Bank are given funds so the farmers can carryon production this year. I stress again that we must at all costs provide funds for the establishment of more dams not only in New South Wales and Queensland but also right across Australia, because Australia is the driest continent. The Hunter River 110ws into the sea at Newcastle and the Namoi River, which is part of another system, joins the Barwon River at Walgett, which goes on into the Darling River and finally into the Murray River.
We could also give consideration to the establishment of more weirs on these rivers. In the last few years we have put two weirs on the Namoi River below Narrabri which have helped to conserve water for the farmers in that area. I feel that should provide more weirs on the Hunter River. The Government of New South Wales has plans to build a dam at Glennies Creek which will supplement the Hunter River as well as a dam on the Goulburn River at a place ealled Kerrabee. These

dams will cost a considerable amount, but, when established, they will help to provide water for the great power station at Liddel, which is necessary for the cooling system. That power station has had great problems in maintaining sufficient
water for its cooling system. rask the Government
to look at these problems as they arc urgent and the solution to them is necessary for the development of our country.
Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (10.21)- Tonight I speak on a matter of very great importance to the people in my electorate, particularly those who use the State railway system to travel to and from their places of employment on a daily basis. I refer to the East Hills railway link. This rail link extends about 34 kilomctres from East Hills to the City of Sydney and services constituents in the south-western areas of Sydney. It has a dual line from Tempe to Riverwood, which is about 17 kilometres, and a single track from Riverwood to East Hills, which is a further 11 kilometres. For this reason the service is notoriously bad for its irregularity and unreliability. The line is hard hit by any signal failure or fault occurring in the system. Ylany of the trains must terminate at Riverwood. Of the 47 trains operating between 7 a.m. and 6 p.m. into the city, 15 must start at Riverwood because of this single track. Because of these inadequacies many of my constituents choose not to use the service but rather to use their own motor vehicles instead, which of course causes a drain on petrol resources, impeding the roads to esscntial trade and commercial vehicles, and is also a cause of poll ution.
Despite these problems, the daily average usage of the railway for the five railway stations between East Hills and Riverwood is in the order of 9,000 persons excluding school children on free educational passes. With additional persons using the system from Riverwood to the city, it can be seen that the rail link is very heavily utilised at present.
I also point out that the population estimates for the Menai Development project, just across the Georges River, indicate that for a further 17,000 peoplc the East Hills railway line will be the closest means of public transport to the city. Already there arc plans for a bus service to operate from Menai to Padstow station to connect with the railway line. It can readily be seen therefore that the rail link will be unable to cope with such increases in demand when that population growth occurs in the near future.
The history of this matter is as follows: In 1974-75, the then Federal Labor Government

Adjournment

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 41

promised the construction of a rail link connectwhich runs from Botany Bay for, I suppose, some

ing East Hills with Glenfield on the main southern 15 miles into the Liverpool area and provides a

line. [t involved the amplification and consequent recreational facility for a very large number of

improvement of the service into Sydney. This Sydneysiders. I recently had the opportunity to

project was approved as part of the 1974-75 visit the upper reaches with a number of local

Urban Public Transport Improvement Program government representatives and State members of

and would have involved expenditure amounting Parliament, to see the extent of infestation by a

to over $21m. That amount would be funded over weed that has suddenly emerged and has run wild

four years, two-thirds from Federal funding and in a most unusual and unprecedented way. Some

one-third from State funding. Plans were drawn nine or ten months ago there was no evidence of

up; an environmental impact statement was this weed, which is known as salvinai molesta, in

completed; and the expectations of the people in the Georges River area. On this recent inspection,

my area were aroused. It is now 1981 and they are we were able to observe the weed, which had

still waiting. The development did not proceed spread out like a cow pasture. It was so thick that

due mainly to the former State Liberal-Country the Army barges in which we were travelling were

Party Government and its mismanagement of the hardly able to proceed. Even with the barges mov-

transport system generally and because of serious ing at a slow pace, the weed would come over the

difficulties with the Eastern Suburbs railway in front and choke up the motors. It is apparent that

particular. The funds for the project could not be the weed will rot and cause a very serious pol-

used in the year they were provided and they were lution hazard in the area. Respected authorities

diverted to other programs.

have contended that this infestation represents a

Whilst I do not believe that the completion of the whole of this original project between Riverwood and Glenfield is necessary at present to meet the demands, action is required most urgently to improve the existing installation by the duplication of the line between Riverwood

health threat because typhoid or hepatitis could result from the very serious contamination that is in evidence. There is also the prospect that serious flooding might occur as the water which normally flows downstream, especially at times of heavy rain, is unable to do so.

and East Hills. The estimated cost involved in carrying out the amplification of this rail link between East Hills and Riverwood is in the order of $20m at today's prices. However this cost is beyond the present resources of the New South Wales Government because of cutbacks in capital payments from the Federal Government, particularly during the current financial year. Capital payments this year from the Federal Government to the State of New South Wales total $815m, compared with the amount paid four years ago of $880m, which represents a 7 per cent reduction before allowing for price rises of almost 50 per cent during that period. If the original proposal in respect of funding of this rail amplification was adhered to, at today's prices the Federal Government would be responsible for approximately $13.3m and the State Government would be responsible for $6m.

Another alarming aspect is that some of this weed has already jumped into the salt-water part of the Georges River and appears to be surviving. Honourable members can imagine the concern felt on the part of the famous oyster industry in the Georges River when it is faced, as it could be, with yet another threat. There is already the threat of contamination from oil spillage from ships in Botany Bay. The Metropolitan Water Sewerage and Drainage Board appears to identify itself as having some responsibility for this problem because it has erected booms across parts of the River. Some people on the inspecting party were cynical enough to contend that the Board had laid these booms to prevent the public observing from the road the extent of the infestation. I must admit that the booms were located in such a position as to give that impression. 1would hate to think that any public authority would reach such

I therefore submit that additional funds should a cynical stage.

be provided to the Government of New South Wales to enable the amplification of the East Hills railway line between Riverwood and East Hills so that adequate rail services can be made available to the residents in the electoral division of Banks.

The aldermen of Liverpool and other local government representatives were alarmed to know that this infestation had reached such serious proportions. They were unable to observe the weed from the roadways and other traditional

Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes) (10.26)-1 travelling points. One has to get into an Army

especially draw the attention of the Minister for barge and go into this otherwise inaccessible area

Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) to the to see this contamination. Spraying has been

deteriorating state of the upper reaches of the undertaken. Again, we are very concerned about

Georges River in Sydney. It is a very great river whether any adverse effects will accrue from the

42 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Adjournment

spray. I do not suppose it is the type of spray used in Vietnam, but one cannot be indifferent to these matters these days. The community is anxious to know what spray is being used and whether it represents a hazard to bird life, fish life and marine life, particularly the oyster industry.
1 ask the Minister for Science and Technology to take an interest in this matter. 1 hope that the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation will be able to study the weed salvinai molesta. It could well be an exotic weed that is washed through the sewer. Contamination from sewage is providing nutrients which are keeping this weed alive and causing it to flourish. Regrettably, some of that contamination comes from the Holsworthy military establishment and the Bankstown Airport. The Commonwealth Government clearly has a responsibility to interest itself in this matter and to help rid this river of this unfortunate contamination, which is causing such widespread concern in the suburbs that surround the Georges River in Sydney.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (10.31)-1 want to raise a matter which is of concern to my electorate. It is a relatively parochial matter but it is also one of national consideration. Recently the Victorian Government determined that a toxic waste storage area would be established. The Victorian Environment Protection Authority, after considering a number of sites, announced that on political grounds-I emphasise that point-it had chosen a site in the area of the Avalon airfield almost adjacent to the Werribee sewerage farm. Last Thursday night a large number of residents of the township of Lara-well in excess of 600 residents-turned out to indicate to the EPA that the site chosen was not acceptable. Victorian Government Ministers declined to attend the meeting on the ground that ultimately they would be judging the report of the EPA. Therefore, they did not consider that they should be present to hear the views of the community. I think that was straight out cowardice on the part of Victorian Government Ministers. They have avoided a conflict and they have passed to a public servant the responsibility of making a political judgment on their behalf. Whether or not the toxic waste storage area is established on that site ultimately will be determined by Cabinet, but it will be done in an ivory tower atmosphere because it will have avoided the responsibility of facing up to the views of the community concerned.
Most people would accept that a toxic waste storage area has to be established somewhere, but a site near Heathcote was examined and ultimately dropped for political reasons. When the site was announced as being suitable, the EPA

indicated very clearly that it was satisfied that the site chosen was safe. It was dropped ultimately for political reasons. The choosing of a site on the western side of Port Phillip Bay seems to be in line with the whole environmental approach of the Victorian Government. Nothing goes on the eastern side where the residences of the more affluent and more influential Victorian citizens are situated. Certainly the Newport power station, which is on the western side of the bay, would not have been commenced had it been suggested that it be built at Brighton. The Werribee sewerage farm, which is a major pollutant of Port Phillip Bay, is being added to surreptitiously and the Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works gradually is gaining control of all access land so that there is very little chance of the general public being able to establish what is going on in this area.
I understand that a Federal inquiry is taking place into the disposal of toxic waste and that that inquiry is due to report some time before the middle of this year. I am concerned about this problem. I think all of us as responsible citizens recognise that it is a problem. The means of disposal should be determined on a national basis. Disposal should not take place in an area where it is likely that seepage from any accidental breakdown in the system-the system is completely unproven despite statements to the contrary-can cause damage not only to individuals but also to an area of enclosed waters which it is almost impossible to cleanse over a short or long period. In the early 1970s a report was brought down which indicated that for several miles around the Werribee sewage farm the waters of Port Phillip Bay were, in fact, poisoned by seepage from that area. It is intended to add to that problem by this establishment on political grounds.
1 think the Federal Government ought to indicate to the Victorian Government that a national consideration is involved and that the amount of toxic waste probably would lend itself to a national solution. The whole nation should look at the problem. I certainly think it is cowardly of the Victorian Government to dump this waste in an area where it thinks it is politically safe.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable gentleman's time has expired.
Motion (by Mr Fife) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
House adjourned at lO.37p.m.
NOTICES
The following notices were given:

Papers

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 43

Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
ELECTION PETITIONS
Copies of the following election petitions were tabled by the Clerk:
Election Petitions filed by Elizabeth Ann Symonds, Steve Cummings, Ernest Thomas Page, Richard Townsend Gun, Leonard Joseph Keogh, Andrew John Cuy, Eamon John Lindsay. Ruth Cullen, David Hugh Patch, Barry Douglas Simon. John Francis Cotter and Yvonne Muriel Renee McComb and forwarded, under section 196 of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918, by the Registrar of the High Court, sitting as the Court of Disputed Returns.
REPLY TO A REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Parliamentary Library
Dr Blewett asked Mr Speaker-
(I) Does the paper 'Parliamentary Research Service' issued in November 1980 by Mr H. G. Weir, Parliamentary Librarian, state that all written papers are catalogued and available on request but the origin of the request is not revealed.
(2) Does this indicate a change in policy. if so, who authorised the change.
(3) Has the policy of the Parliamentary Library hitherto been that any paper prepared for the use of an individual Senator or Member will not be released to another client without the consent of that Senator or Member.
(4) Are most papers prepared by the Research Service now typed on word processing units which store the text of the paper on discs.
(5) Does the policy outlined in the paper 'Parliamentary Research Services' mean that the text of papers prepared on word processors would be available for release without the knowledge of the group which prepared the paper.
(6) Will he give an assurance that no paper prepared by the Research Service will be released to a person other than the original client without the original client's consent except where (a) the original client is no longer a Member ofParliament or (b) the paper has already been substantially revealed through some other public source, such as the media, or by the original client.
Mr SPEAKER-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) No.
(3) No. As a matter of courtesy, some Senior Research Specialists have consulted clients before papers have been released to others. As only published or publishable information is provided, access to materials in possession of the Parliamentary Library is available to all Senators and Members. Information which has been previously supplied may be incorporated in answers to other requests provided the confidentiality of clients is preserved. Of course that confidentiality covers all aspects including the name of the Member. Standard professional practice requires that papers cited in speeches or publications should be available for reference.
(4) Yes.

(5) No.
(6) No. See answer to 3 above.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 24 February 1981:
By command of His Excellency the Governor-General: Insurance Act-Erratum slip for the Annual Report of the Insurance Commissioner, for year 1979-80. TreatiesTexts ofWhich have been signed for Australia(1) Agreement concerning the voluntary contributions to be given for the execution of the project to preserve and develop the Monumental Site of Moenjodaro, Paris, 15 April 1980; signed for Australia in Paris, 18 September 1980 and entered into force that day. (2) Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, done in Canberra on 20 May 1980; and signed for Australia in Canberra II September 1980. (Not yet entered into force). (3) Subsidiary Agreement between Australia and Japan concerning Japanese Tuna Long-Line Fishing, signed in Canberra on 30 October 1980, and entered into force on 1 November 1980. (4) Agreement between Australia and the Republic of France for a transitional arrangement with respect to toll conversion and enrichment of Australian Uranium in France; Notes signed and exchanged in Paris on 30 October 1980: and entered into force on that date. (5) Arrangement between Australia and Japan on Co-operation in Research and Development in Science and Technology. signed in Canberra on 27 November 1980 and entered into force that day. (6) Agreement between Australia and Papua New Guinea relating to Air Services, signed in Canberra on 8 December 1980 and entered into force that day. (7) Agreement concerning nuclear transfers between Australia and the Republic of France, signed in Paris on 7 January 198 I (The Agreement will not enter into force until diplomatic notes have been exchanged in accordance with Article XVI). To which Australia has become a party by notification or acceptance(8) Additions to Schedule I of the Australian Tariff Concessions annexed as a schedule to the Protocol Supplementary to the Geneva (1979) Protocol to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade: note certifying the Additions was deposited with the Secretary-General to GATT on 3 October 1980; the additions entered into force on 3I March 1980. (9) Agreement between Australia and the United States of America concerning Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy. signed in Canberra on 5 July 1979 and entered into force on 16 January
1981. To which the Government is contemplating
ratifying(10) Agreement between Australia and Japan for
the Protection of Migratory Birds and Birds in Danger of Extinction and their Environment, signed in Tokyo on 6 February 1974.
Pursuant to statute:

44 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Papers

Air Force Act- -Regulation -Statutory Rules 1980, No. 361.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 356.
Australian Citizenship Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 339.
Australian National University Act-StatutesNo. 144-Enrolment, Courses and Degrees Amendment No. 12.
No. I45-Academic and Ceremonial Dress Amendment No.8.
Bankruptcy Act-Rules-Statutory Rules 1980, Nos. 385, 386.
Barley Research Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 395.
Bounty (Agricultural Tractors) Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1980, No. 379.
Bounty (Pencillin) Act -Regulations-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 378.
Canned Fruits l.evy Act- -Regulations-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 393.
Christmas Island Act-
Ordinances-
1980No.8-Standard Time and Daylight Saving Time.
No.9-Interpretation (Amendment). 1981--No.I-ImmigrationRepeal. Regulations-1980-No. I (Workers' Compensation Ordinance). Regulations-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 371. Commonwealth Banks Act-Appointment certificate-D.A. West.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 13.
Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1981, No.7.
Conciliation and Arbitration Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 363.
Customs Act --Rcgulations- -Statutory Rules 1980, Nos. 358,368,372,376,377,380,381,382,383.
Customs Act and thc Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1980, Nos. 392, 400.
Dairying Industry Research and Promotion Levy ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 394.
Defence ActDeterminations-
1980-
No. 26-PostAlIowance. No. 27-Higher Duties Allowance-Service with
the Papua New Guinea Defence Force. No. 28-Cadet Forces Allowance. No. 29-DistrictAllowance. No. 3D-Antarctic Allowance. No. 31-Transport Allowance. 1981No. I-Married Trainee's Allowance. No.2-The Schedule to Determination 0113
Trainee l.eader's Allowance. Regulations-Statutory Rules 1980, Nos. 340, 360. Defence Act, Naval Defence Act and Air Force ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 342, 362. Defence Amendment Act Interim DeterminationStatutory Rules1980-Nos. 349, 350, 351, 352, 353, 354, 355, 367, 406,
407,
1981-Nos. 11,12.
Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 341.
Distillation Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 375.
Excise Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 374.

Export Expansion Grants Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 397.
Export Market Development Grants Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1980, No. 396.
Fisheries Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 369.
Health Insurance Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1980, Nos. 389, 390.
Historic Shipwrecks Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 391.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No.6. Lands Acquisition ActLand acquired for defence purposes at Singleton, NSW. Statements (2) of land acquired by agreement authorised under sub-section 7 (1).
National Health Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 338.
Naval Defence Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1980, Nos. 359, 398.
Navigation ActRegulationsMarine Orders No.1 (Parts I and 44).
Statutory Rules 1980-Nos. 345, 346, 347. 1981-Nos. 2, 3.
Ombudsman Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 348.
Overseas Students Charge Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1980, No. 399.
Patents Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No.1. Parliamentary Secretaries Act-Regulations-Statutory
Rules 1980, No. 370. Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act-Regulations-
Statutory Rules 1980, No. 357.
Pipeline Authority Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No.8.
Postal Services Act-Australian Postal Commission By-IawsPostal1980-Amendment ]\"0.3. 1981-- Amendment No.1.
Postal (StafT) 1981 Amendment No.1. Public Service Act-
Appointmcnts-- Dcpartl11entAboriginal AITairs G. A. Miller.
Trade and Resources-R. A. Perry. Veterans' Affairs-R. J. Bear, R. H. Millard. Regulations-Statutory Rules1980 Nos. 344, 364, 401, 402, 403, 404, 405. 1981-No.9. Public Service Arbitration Act-Public Service ArbitratorDeterminations accompanied by statements regarding possible inconsistency with the Law-
1980-
No. 473-Electrical Trades Union of Australia-t
No. 474 Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and Joiners of Australia.
No. 475 Transport Workers' Union of Australia.
No. 476 . Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others.
No. 447Federated Liquor and Allied Industries Employees Union of Australia.
No. 478--E1cctrical Trades Union of Australia. t
No. 479-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers). t
No. 480-Federal Firefighters' Union.

Papers

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 45

No. 481-Transport Workers' Union of Australia.
No. 482-Electrical Trades Union of Australia.
No. 483-Federated Storemen and Packers Union of Australia and others.
No. 484-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others.
No. 485-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
Nos. 468 and 487-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others.
No. 488-Civil Air Operations Officers' Association of Australia.
No. 489-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others.t
No. 490-0verseas Telecommunications Commission (Australia).
No. 491-Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association, Commonwealth Public Service and others.
No. 492-Association of Architects, Engineers, Surveyors and Draughtsmen of Australia.
No. 493-Association of Professional Engineers, Australia.
No. 494-Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service.
Nos. 495 and 496-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others.t
No. 497-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others.
No. 498-Transport Workers' Union of Australia.
Nos. 499 and 500-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
No. 501 and 502-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights' Union and others.
No. 504-Australian Workers' Union. No. 50S-Federated Ship Painters and
Dockers' Union of Australia.t No. 506-Australasian Society of Engineers
and others. t Nos. 507 and 508-Meat Inspectors' Associ-
ation, Commonwealth Public Service. (t Not accompanied by statement). Quarantine ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 10. Remuneration Tribunals ActRemuneration Tribunal-Determination-

1980 j 14-Director of War Graves and holders of public office on another body.
1981jl-Commonwealth Teaching Service Commissioner and holder of public office on another body.
Seat of Government (Administration) ActOrdinances1980No. 43-Corporate Affairs Commission. No. 44-Seat of Government (Administration) (Amendment) . No. 45-Health Professions Boards (Elections). No. 46-Dentists Registration (Amendment). No. 47-Medical Practitioners Registration (Amendment). No. 48Nurses Registration (Amendment). No. 49-0ptometrists (Amendment). No. 50-Pharmacy (Amendment). No. 51-Physiotherapists Registration (Amendment). No. 52-Veterinary Surgeons Registration (Amendment). No. 53-Companies (Amendment) (No.2). No. 54-Remuneration (Amendment) (No.2). 1981-Pool Betting (Amendment). Regulations1980Nos. 16, 17 (Health Commission Ordinance) . 1981Nos. 1,2 (Motor Omnibus Services Ordinance). No.3 (Companies Ordinance).
Spirits Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1980, Nos. 373,384.
States Grants (Petroleum Products) Act-Amendment of the schedules to the subsidy schemes in relation to the States of New South Wales, South Australia and Queensland, dated 15 December 1980, and Western Australia, dated 27 January 1981.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act-Statement of particulars of direction given by Minister under subsection 31 (2).
Student Assistance ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1980, Nos. 343, 365, 366, 387, 388.
Superannuation Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, Nos. 4, 5, 14.
Telecommunications ActAustralian Telecommunications Commission-By-lawsTelecommunications (Charging Zones and Charging Districts)-Amendment No.7 Telecommunications (General)-Amendment No. 27

46 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
(Question No.1)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) What steps have been taken to ratify the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women which Australia signed in Copenhagen on 17 July 1980.
(2) Which countries have ratified so far.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Australian Government is committed to equality of opportunity, freedom from discrimination and equal status for women. In keeping with this commitment Australia signed the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women during the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women in Copenhagen. In doing so, the Government recognised the importance of the Convention in terms of the political, legal, economic and social advancement of women internationally.
My colleague, the Minister for Home Affairs and the Environment, is currently engaging in a series of consultations with other Ministers and with the States about ratification of the Convention. At the meeting of Ministers on Human Rights, held in Alice Springs on 5-6 November, the Commonwealth and State Governments agreed to work actively towards ratification.
(2) As at 1 December 1980 the following countries had ratified the Convention:
Barbados, People's Republic of China, Republic of Cuba, People's Republic of Poland, Dominica, German Democratic Republic, Portugal, Sweden, Guyana.
Complaints against Police
(Question No.9)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
Further to his answer to question No. 5317 (Hansard, 23 April 1980, page 2227) will legislation be enacted regarding complaints against police, following recommendations made to the Government by both the Australian Law Reform Commission and the Administrative Review Council; if so, when.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Draft legislation on the investigation of complaints against police is being considered by the Government and it is expected that a Bill will be introduced into the Parliament in the 1981 Autumn Sittings. As the Prime Minister indicated in his answer to question No. 5317 (Hansard, 23 April 1980, page 2227) pending legislative action administrative steps have been taken establishing an Internal Investigation Division within the Australian Federal Police, and the Ombudsman and the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police have established administrative procedures for the investigation of complaints against police where the Ombudsman is involved.

Licensing of Newspapers
(Question No. 10)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to recent media reports regarding the non-renewal of yearly licences for two Chinese language newspapers in Singapore.
(2) In view of recent broad public debate about increasing concentration of Australian press ownership, has he or his Department made any investigation of the Singaporean legislation governing licensing of newspapers.
(3) Is he able to state which countries require newspapers to be licensed and what is the frequency of licence renewal in each case.
(4) Did his predecessor or the Postal and Telecommunications Department make any investigation in (a) 1978 and (b) 1979 of constitutional and legal considerations which would govern licensing of newspapers in Australia; if so, will he release details of that investigation as an aid to informed public debate.
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I draw the honourable member's attention to the fact that the Commonwealth holds no direct powers under the Constitution in respect of the print media. Consequently, the answer to all four questions is no.
Women in Public Service
(Question No. IS)
Mr Holding asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) How many women were in permanent positions in the Australian Public Service within the (a) First Division, (b) Second Division, (c) Third Division and (d) Fourth Division as at 30 June each year from 1975 to 1980.
(2) What percentage of the total number of permanent employees in each case referred to in part (1) were women.
(3) What permanent positions (by Department) were filled by women in the (a) First Division and (b) Second Division as at (i) 30 June 1975 and (ii) 30 June 1980.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The following information has been provided by the Public Service Board.
(1) and (2) The following table shows the number of women employed in permanent positions in the Second, Third and Fourth Divisions of the Australian Public Service and the percentage of officers who were women at 30 June each year from 1975 to 1980. There were no women in First Division positions.

Division
1975* 1976

Second

Third

Fourth

No. %

No.

%

No.

%

7 0.4 14,284 18.6 37,370 29.8

10 0.8 11,634 19.6 24,950 44.9

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 47

Division

Second

Third

Fourth

1977

14 1.2 11,740 19.9 25,939 46.5

1978

17 1.4 12,718 20.9 27,311 47.4

1979

21 1.8 13,841 22.4 27,458 47.7

1980

22 1.8 14,533 22.9 28,119 48.8

'Subsequent years exclude the personnel of the Australian Telecommunications Commission and the Australian Postal Commission.
(3) The following Second Division positions were occupied by women at 30 June 1975:
Attorney-General's-Assistant Deputy Crown Solicitor, Deputy Director
Education-Assistant Secretary Health-Assistant Director-General Labour and Immigration-Assistant Secretary Social Security-Assistant Commissioner Special Minister of Stale National Library of Australia-Director
The following Second Division positions were occupied by women at 30 June 1980;
Aboriginal Affairs-Assistant Secretary Administrative Services-Assistant Secretary Attorney-General's-Assistant Deputy Crown Solicitor, Registrar Business and Consumer Affairs Industries Assistance Commission-Assistant Commissioner Education-Assistant Secretary Finance-Assistant Secretary Foreign Affairs-Assistant Secretary Australian Development Assistance Bureau-Assistant Secretary Health-Assistant Director-General Capital Territory Health Commission Director of Special Health Services Home Affairs-Assistant Secretary National Library-Director Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Assistant Secretary Industrial Relations Assistant Secretary Prime Minister and Cabinet First Assistant Secretary Public Service Board2 Assistant Commissioner Social Security2 Assistant Director-General, 1 Assistant Secretary Treasury Australian Bureau of Statistics-Assistant Statistician
Administrative Review Council
(Question No. 22)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
Further to the Attorney-General's answer to question No. 5319 (Hansard, 22 May 1980, page 3197), what has been the Government's decision on the remaining rccommendations of the Administrative Review Council which wer~ still under consideration at that time.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The remaining recommendations are still under consideration, together with a number of further recommendations of the Council (see the Council's 4th Annual Report, Chapter 7).

Administrative Review Council
(Question No. 23)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
Has the Government appointed extra staff to the Secretariate of the Administrative Review Council as recommended by the Council in paragraph 22 of its 4th Annual Report; if so, how many extra staff have been appointed and what are their (a) designations; and (b) salaries; if not, why not.
Mr VinerThe Attorney-General has supplied the following answer to the honourable member's question:
No extra staff have been appointed having regard to the Government's policy of restraint in the growth of the Public Service.
High Court of Australia
(Question No, 24)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, 011 26 November 1980:
(1) Further to the Attorney-General's answer to Question 5364 (Hansard 22 May, 1980, page 3200), has the Attorney General's Department kept more precise records since that date on the (a) time and (b) costs incurred by the Australian Government, occasioned by official overseas travel of the Chief Justice and Justices of the High Court of Australia, whether for the purpose of attending the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, or for any other purpose.
(2) If so, was (a) the Chief Justice or (b) any other Justice of the High Court absent from Australia since 22 May 1980, in connection with his duties as a member of the Judicial Committee of the British Privy Council; if so (i) for how many days in each case, and (ii) what was the cost to the Australian Government.
(3) If more precise records arc still not being kept, will the Attorney-General now cause the Attorney-Genera!'s Department to do so; if not, why not.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's questions:
(1) Records relating to the High Court of Australia have been maintained by the Court since the proclamation on 21 April 1980 of the High Court of Australia Act 1979.
(2) The Chief Justice, Sir Garfield Barwick, was absent overseas from 3 July to 24 August 1980. He sat as a mcmber of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council for one week and was involved in preliminary work and the preparation of judgments for a total of two weeks. Following this period in the United Kingdom, Sir Garfield attended the Commonwealth Law Conference in Lagos, Nigeria. The total cost of the visit was $30,114.58, of which $12,595 was contributed by the Nigerian Government. The bulk of the remaining $17,519.58 will be a charge to the Commonwealth. There are items totalling approximately $2,500 which will be paid by Sir Garfield. The precise amount cannot he determined until the Australian High Commission in Singapore provides advice as to the apportionment of costs met by it in respect of the Chief Justice's stopover there. No other Justice has had official overseas travel since 22 May 1980.
(3) See (I) above.

48 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Social Security Appeals
(Question No. 25)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
How many decisions by the Director-General of Social Security on appeals or reviews have varied from the recommendations of a Social Security Appeals Tribunal for each year since 10 February 1975.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The numbers of appeals which Social Security Appeals Tribunals had recommended should be upheld but which were dismissed either by the Director-General of the Department of Social Security, or by a delegate of the Director-General, were:
Year ended 30 June 1978-496 Year ended 30 June 1979-211 Year ended 30 June 1980-73
Statistics prior to 1July 1977 are not available.
Social Security Appeals
(Question No. 26)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the Report on Social Security Appeals made by the Administrative Review Council (ARC) to the Attorney-General in June 1980, and the criticisms of Social Security Appeals Tribunals in paragraph 112 of the ARC 4th Annual Report; if so, have any changes taken place in the administration of appeals by the Department of Social Security; if so, what changes.
(2) How many appeals have been lodged with the Department of Social Security in 1980 up to 25 November.
(3) Were any of the appeals lodged in 1980 related to (a) the work test and (b) de facto relationships; if so, how many in each case.
(4) Did any of the appeals result in a reversal of the original decisions; if so, how many.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) My attention has been drawn to the comments on social security appeals in the 1980 Annual Report of the Administrative Review Council, and to the Council's statement therein that it had made its report on this matter to the Attorney-Generalin June 1980.
As the honourable member will be aware, the former Minister for Social Security announced significant amendments to the social security appeals system on 9 September 1980. With .effect from that date, departmental clients dissatisfied with decisions involving medical assessments may have their case reviewed by a Social Security Appeals Tribunal (SSAT). As a result of this initiative, additional rights may also be created which enable the client to seek review by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT).

In addition, regulations have now been made which empower the AAT to review any decision of the Director General or his delegate affirming, varying or annulling a decision of a departmental officer where that officer's decision has been reviewed by an SSAT. There is also provision for decisions to be reviewed by the AAT where the Director General has issued a certificate enabling a direct appeal without prior review by an SSAT.
(2) 5,063 appeals were received by the Department up to 30 September 1980. This is the latest available information.
(3) Yes, however statistics are not maintained on a basis which would provide full details in relation to such categories. Statistics collected relate to the type of pension or benefit.
(4) For the year 1980, up to 30 September, Social Security Appeals Tribunals recommended that 921 appeals be fully or partly upheld, while 1,262 appeals were conceded by the Department before they had been referred to the Tribunals for their consideration.
These figures include appeals which were lodged before 1 January 1980 but finalised since 1 January. Similarly some appeals lodged between I January 1980 and 30 September 1980 would not have been finalised by 30 September.
Pharmaceutical Industry
(Question No. 28)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Is he able to state what were the top 50 pharmaceutical companies, by sales, for each yearfrom 1969-70 to 1979-80.
(2) What (a) World Health Organisation and other international and (b) Australian Commonwealth or State codes of manufacturing practice or statutory requirements govern the manufacture of ethical and proprietary drugs for human consumption in Australia.
(3) How are these codes or statutory requirements applied to drugs manufactured overseas and imported for sale in Australia.
(4) Is he able to say what programs exist for the training of drug company representatives; if so, (a) what are the programs, (b) who conducts them, (c) what is their duration and (d) how is their effectiveness evaluated.
(5) What Commonwealth and/or State Government marketing codes or statutory requirements exist in Australia for both ethical and proprietary pharmaceuticals.
(6) What Commonwealth and/or State Government inquiries have been conducted into the pharmaceutical industry in Australia since 1953, including those inquiries which have examined only part of the pharmaceutical industry in the wider context of any other inquiry.
Mr MacKellarThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I do not have information regarding the total sales of pharmaceutical companies. However, the tables below show the top 50 manufacturers of items supplied as pharmaceutical benefits (those which can be identified as their firm's brand, but excluding 'unbranded' prescriptions) for the years 1976/77 to 1978/79 inclusive. Such tables were not produced prior to the year 1976/77. Data to produce a table for 1979/80 are not yet available.
These tables do not in any way reflect sales by manufacturers of pharmaceuticals supplied by public hospitals, on private prescriptions, through the Veterans' Affairs Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, over-the-counter by retail chemists, etc.

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 RFPRESENTATIV ES 49

(2) Compliance with the provisions of a document, the Australian Code of Good Manufacturing Practice, is used by State Governments as the criterion for granting of licences to manufacture pharmaceutical products. This document is based upon the recommendations of the World Health Organization. Similar national codes are employed in other countries. The Australian code is negotiated by Commonwealth and State Health Department inspectors and representatives of the pharmaceutical industry.
(3) There are no inspections carried out under the Australian Code of Good Manufacturing Practice in overseas countries. However, products manufactured overseas and imported for sale in Australia are required to comply with standards laid down under the Therapeutic Goods Act. [n addition, under the provisions of the Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations, companies are required to provide to my Department data to establish the quality of the product being imported. These data include information on the chemistry of the drug and details of manufacturing procedures and quality control testing carried out during the manufacturing process. These data are evaluated by officers of my Department prior to approval being granted for importation into Australia.
(4) Drug company representatives can receive training from within the company, from a special course of one year's duration conducted by the Australian Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association (APMA) and from other specialist organisations. Company training, which is normally continuous and as required by new or special products, provides knowledge in the pharmacology of company products and the technical aspects of bioavailability, bioequivalence and product details. The APMA trainiug course covers industry knowledge. anatomy and physiology, microbiology, disease states and pharmacology. Written examinations are conducted. The effectiveness of the training programs is assessed by surveys carried out by senior company executives visiting medical practitioners in the field and by surveys to obtain the reaction of medical practitioners to drug company representatives as a total group.
(5) There are no Commonwealth and/or State Government marketing codes as such. There are, however, statutory requirements relating to the marketing of both ethical and proprietary pharmaceuticals under the legislation administered by the various State and Territory health authorities. In addition, under the Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regultions, the Director-General of Health must be satisfied as to the quality, safety and efficacy of products imported into Australia before granting approval for their importation into and distribution within Australia.
(6) Inquiries conducted into the pharmaceutical industry or portions of the industry with which my Department has been directly involved are:
Senate Select Committee on Medical and Hospital Costs (Reports dated 1969 and 1970)
Select Committee of the House of Representatives on Pharmaceutical Benefits in Australia (report 1972)
Joint Parliamentary Committee on Prices: Import Prices Inquiry: Price Effects of Currency charges (Report No.1 November 1973)
Senate Standing Committee on Social Welfare
Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Industry Inquiry (Report August 1979)
I am aware that the Industries Assistance Commission has conducted some inquiries into tarilT matters involving the pharmaceutical industry. The honourable memher could direct inquiries about these to the Minister I'or Business and Consumer Affairs. I do not have information regarding any inquiries conducted by State Governments.

PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFITS TOP 50 MANUFACTURERS IN [)ESCENDING
COST ORDER

Position

Manufacturer /s

1976-77 Financial Veal'

I

Merck, Sharp and Dohme-Frosst Charles E.

2

Ciba-Geigy Pharmaceuticals

3

Roche-Sauter

4

Burroughs Wellcome-Calmic

5

Beecham

6

Fisons

7

Allen and Hanhurys-Glaxo

8

I.e. I.

9

Hoeehst

10

Squibb

11

Sando/

12

i\ bbotl Laboratories

13

Sehcring AG., Berlin

14

Boots

15

Commonwealth Serum laboratories

16

Wyeth

17

Lcder1c

18

[)ista Products-Lilly (Australia)

19

Pflzer-G.P.

20

Mead Johnson-Bristol

21

May and Bakcr

22

Parke Davis

23

Boehringer Ingclhcim

24

Astra

25

Searle

26

Warner

27

Upjohn

28

Schering (USA)

29

Smith, Kline and French

30

Sigma

31

Rcekitts

32

Protea

33

Syntex

34

Organon

35

Fawns and McAllan

36

Gist-Brocades

37

Winthrop

38

Riker I"aboratories

39

Ethnor

40

Faulding

41

AlIcrgan

42

Merrell

43

Bayer

44

Nicholas

4S

Knoll

46

Pharmaeia

47

Cooper

4g

Roussel

49

Knoll A.G. Germany

50

Ayerst

1977-78 Financial Year

1

Merck, Sharp & Dohme-Frosst Charles F.

2

Ciba-Geigy (incl. Zyma)

3

Burroughs Wellcome

4

l.e.I.

5

Roche-Sauter

6

Beecham

7

Allen & Hanburys-Glaxo (incl. Evans)

8

Sandoz

9

Squibb

]0

Fisons

11

Parke Davis-Warner

12

Haechst

50 REPR ESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questio/ls

Position
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39
40
41 42 43
44
45 46 47 48 49 50
I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
28
29

M a n u f a c t u r e r Is
Boots (incl. Lancet) Schering A.G. Berlin Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Abbott (incl. Ross) Eli Lilly (incl. Dista) Wyeth Pfixer-G.P. Lederle Mead Johnson-Bristol Astra May and Baker Boehringer Ingelheim Searle Schering Corp (USA )-Essex Upjohn Smith, Kline and French Reckitts Protea-Difrex Sigma Syntex Novo Organon Fawns and McAllan-Rotary-Pfrimmcr Faulding Riker-Toppin US.V.-Knoll-Berk-W.B. Pharm Ethnor Winthrop Allergan Gist-Brocades Pharmacia Merrell KnollA.G. Bayer Roussel RobinsA.H. Ayerst Nicholas
1978-79 Financial Year
Merck, Sharp and Dohme-Frosst, Charles E. Ciba-Geigy (incl. Zyma) Burroughs Wellcomc I.e.I. Beecham Roche-Sauter Allen and Hanburys-Glaxo Sandoz Squibb Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Parke Davis-Warner Boots (incl. Lancet) Fisons Hocchst Abbott-Ross (incl. Hollister) Schering, A.G., Berlin Pfizer-G.P. Astra Wyeth Dista-Eli Lilly Lederle Mead Johnson-Bristol Smith, Kline and French Boehringer Ingelheim Reckitts May and Baker Searle Schering Corp. (USA.) Upjohn

Position
30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39
40
41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50

Manufacturer Is
Novo Syntex Protea-Difrex Sigma Fawns and McAllan-RotarY-Pfrimmer Organon Faulding, F. H. Riker-Toppin Ethnor Bayer Winthrop US.V.-Knoll-Berk-W.B. Allergan Pharmacia Knoll, A.G., Germany Roussel ;Vlerrel!, W. M. Ayerst Gist-Brocades Robins, A. H. Cooper

Ex-servicemen of World War II
(Question No. 44)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) What benefits are not available to ex-servicemen of World War II who, through no fault of their own, did not serve outside Australia.
(2) Is it a fact that many of these ex-servicemen suffer physical disabilities (a) wholly or (b) partially allributable to war service.
(3) Are ex-servicemen treated differently in relation to war-induced conditions if they did not serve overseas; if so, in what ways.
(4) Does the Government propose to lake action to ensure that all ex-servicemen are treated on an equal basis: if so, what action.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Velerans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Many veterans who served only in Australia did not serve in a theatre of war and therefore are not eligible for a service pension which is granted as compensation for the indefinable and intangible effects of service in a theatre of war. Some veterans who served outside Australia also do not qualify for a service pension.
(2) Yes.
(3) Compensation by way of a disability pension is paid where the incapacity or death has arisen out of or is attributable to war service Or for a member of the forces who was employed on active service whose death has resulted from any occurrence that happened during the period of service. Many veterans who served only in Australia during World War II did not have active service. Service within Australia is defined as active service only when it was-
(i) in such areas as are prescribed as combat areas for the purposes of this Act, during such periods as are prescribed, and under such conditions as are prescribed;
(ii) at any place at which the member has been injured or has contracted disease as a result of enemy action;

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 51

(iii) in actual combat against the enemy; or (iv) in such circumstances as. in the opinion of the Re-
patriation Commission, should be deemed to be actual combat against the enemy.
and therefore are not eligible for compensation in relation to disabilities that result from occurrences.
(4) The existing compensation provisions are considered adequate.
Banning of Unsafe Goods
(Question No. 49)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) How many goods have been banned under the Trade Practices Act since the introduction of provisions empowering the declaration of consumer product safety standards and the banning of the sale of unsafe goods.
(2) What were the goods involved.
(3) What goods have been banned from Australia under the Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations for safety reasons in the past five years.
Mr Moore~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Since the introduction of provisions under the Trade Practices Act 1974 empowering the Minister for Business and Consumer affairs to ban the sale of unsafe goods and to declare consumer product safety standards, twelve goods or classes of goods have been banned as unsafe. Ten consumer product safety standards have been declared and consequently goods not meeting these safety standards are also banned from sale.
(2) Goods or classes of goods that have been banned as unsafe goods are:
The Saunders 'Falcon' hunting sling and other hunting slings, catapults and slingshots incorporating a wristbracing device;
The 'Bowen' knife belt and similar belts incorporating a concealed blade;
Metal drink dispensers or containers which leach excessive levels of toxic metals such as zinc, mercury, copper, antimony, lead and arsenic;
Confectionary bottles for children known as 'whistle bottles' fitted with a top or stopper in the form of a whistle;
Novelty balloon making kits containing acetone, polyvinyl acetate and/or benzene;
Children's toys and playthings coated with paints or other materials containing excessive levels of toxic metals such as lead, arsenic, antimony, cadmium, selenium, mercury, chromium, and barium;
Batons for non-agricultural use fitted with devices which discharge an electric shock exceeding l,OOO volts;
Attache cases fitted with anti-theft divices which discharge an electric shock exceeding l,OOO volts;
Snake bite kits and first-aid kits that include instructions which recommend the following possibly dangerous methods of first -aid treatment for snake bite:
the cutting or excising of the bitten area; and the use of arterial tourniquets. A 'Chicco' brand baby's teething ring which presents a choking hazard; A 'tommee Tippee' brand baby's rattle with a dangerously narrow handle; and Certain baby's soothers without safety shields and with whistles.

Consumer product safety standards have been declared under the Trade Practices Act for the following products:
Buoyancy aids used primarily by young children as floatation devices; the goods are required to carry a label warning that they are not life saving devices.
Candles, so that they are designed in such a manner that they do not re-light spontaneously.
Apparel, yarns and textile fabrics such that they shall not contain the flame retardant TRIS, which may be carcinogenic.
Airpots, so that these goods carry a label warning that they may leak hot fluids and should be kept upright at all times.
Children's night garments, so that these goods conform to prescribed flammability requirements.
Motor vehicle child restraints, so that they are designed to minimise the risk of bodily injury to child passengers.
Pedal bicycles, so thai minimum safety standards are required for the frames, steering systems. wheels and pedals.
Reflectors for pedal bicycles, so that they conform to adequate photometric requirements.
Portable fire extinguishers, so that they meet minimum performance tests and are labelled with appropriate operating instructions.
Protective helmets for motor cyclists, so that they comply with specifications designed to minimise the risk of serious head injury.
(3) The following goods. some of which have also been banned under the consumer product safety provisions of the Trade Practices Act. have been banned from import into Australia under the Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations for safety reasons in the past five years:
Polychlorinated terphenyls and other polyphenyls and goods containing those chemicals;
Television sets not meeting certain electrical goods specifications;
Candlesticks and other candle holders which may ignite or melt:
Non-standard helmets worn by motor vehicle users; A 'Taser Public Defender' brand weapon and similar weapons discharging an electric shock; Pencils coated with paint or other substances containing excessive levels of toxic metals; Children's paint brushes coated with paint or other substances containing excessive levels of toxic metals; Hunting slings, catapults and slingshots incorporating a wrist-bracing device; The 'Bowen' knife belt and similar belts incorporating a concealed blade; Metal drink dispensers or containers which leach excessive levels of toxic metals; Confectionary bottles for children known as 'whistle bottles' fitted with a top or stopper in the form of a whistle; Novelty balloon making kits containing acetone, polyvinyl acetate and/or benzene; Children's toys and playthings coated with paints or other materials containing excessive levels of toxic metals; Batons for non-agricultural use fitted with devices which discharge an electric shock exceeding 1000 volts; Attache cases fitted with anti-theft devices which discharge an electric shock exceeding 1000 volts; Snake bite kits and first aid kits that include instructions which recommend possibly dangerous methods for treatment of snake bite; A 'Chicco' brand baby's teething ring, a 'Tommee Tippee' baby's rattle and baby's soothers of certain models and designs which are potential choking hazards; Self re-lighting novelty candles; Apparel, yarns and textile fabrics containing TRIS flame retardant;

52 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Children's night garments that do not meet prescribed flammability requirements.
New South Wales spending on behalf of Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 55)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) What estimates, if any, are available of the proportion of New South Wales State, local and semi-governmental authority spending incurred on behalf of residents of the Australian Capital Territory.
(2) What negotiations have been undert.aken with New South Wales authorities to ensure that residents and ratepayers of the ACT are treated equitably with NSW residents and ratepayers in the region.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) None.
(2) There have been no negotiations with State authorities on the subject of the equitable treatment of ACT and NSW residents and ratepayers in the region.

Repatriation Hospitals
(Question No. 57)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Are figures available on increased waiting times for non-urgent admission of veterans and their dependants to repatriation hospitals; if so, what have been the waiting times for each year since 1970.
(2) What are the figures for bed (a) availability and (b) occupancy for (i) veterans, (ii) veterans' dependants and (iii) others, for the same years.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Information is not kept in the form requested by the honourable member. However, waiting times for certain forms of elective surgery at Repatriation General Hospital, Concord, for a number of dates between 1 August 1974 and November 1979, are set out in the table below.

REPATRIATION GENERAL HOSPITAL, CONCORD WAITING TIMES FOR ELECTIVE SURGERY (IN WEEKS)
(between 1.8.74 and 1.11.79)
Speciality

Vascular
n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. 14 11 11 4 5 14 II 5 10 6
7
6 5 9 4 8 7

Neuro-

GynaeVaricose General Ortho-

Ent

Eye surgery Urology

cology

veins surgery paedics

Date

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

10

II

12

8

20

8

20

6

23

5

23

4

J3

48

18

11

10

6

12

6

8

1

8

9

8

10

8

12

10

8

9

10

6

12

9

7

3

8

4

8

4

9

4

9

6

0

4

n.a.

12

4

11

I. 8.74

0

4

n.a.

8

4

8

2. 9.74

0

4

n.a.

8

3

9

2.10.74

0

4

4

10

3

9

18.11.74

0

4

4

16

4

4

4.12.74

0

4

3

12

3

5

I. 3.75

0

4

0

8

2

4

16. 4.75

0

5

5

11

6

10

I. 8.75

2

5

5

10

6

5

I. 9.75

0

4

3

8

7

5

1.10.75

2

5

3

15

7

6

1.1 1.75

0

6

2

12

8

11

1.12.75

0

6

5

14

6

11

I. 1.76

3

8

12

19

6

6

I. 2.76

2

6

8

26

8

9

I. 4.76

4

6

4

16

8

9

I. 7.76

4

6

2

10

8

14

1.11. 76

5

6

4

12

8

9

I. 2.77

8

6

4

10

8

9

I. 5.77

4

8

4

12

8

9

I. 8.77

4

6

4

22

12

15

1.11.77

3

6

3

19

8

10

I. 2.78

3

6

4

10

5

10

I. 5.78

4

6

4

8

7

8

I. 8.78

4

5

2

12

4

10

1.1 1.78

3

6

3

18

5

12

I. 1.79

3

7

3

9

4

11

I. 5.79

3

11

3

8

5

12

I. 8.79

3

12

5

9

6

14

1.1 1.79

n.a. = Figures not available. (2) The information requested by the honourable member is as follows:

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESE"ITA TIVES 53

Year

Daily average
ncds
available

Daily average beds occupied Total Veterans Depandants

Others

1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75
1975-76 1976-77 1977-78
1978-79 1979-80

3,139 3,058 2,961
2,985 2,871
2,739 2,630 2,678
2,611 2,572

2,503 2,453
2,373 2,498 2,377
2,137 2,043 2,021 1,976
2,010

(Note 1) (Note 1)
1,807 1,843 1,752 1,530
1,390 1,299
l,219 1,223

444

122

430

225

397

228

343

264

309

344

294

428

284

473

278

509

Note 1: Breakdown not available.

Vietnam Veterans
(Question No. 58)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' An'airs, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to (a) a Bionetics Laboratory report released by the National Cancer Institute of the United States of America Department of Health, Education and Welfare in 1969, (b) a report of the Herbicide Assessment Commission of thc American Association for the cAdvancement of Science on findings in Vietnam in 1970, (c) a report in the Saigon newspaper Tin Sang of 26 June 1969, concerning deformed fetuses in Tan Hoi, (d) a rcport of the National Research Council of the United Slates National Academy of Sciences after investigation in Vietnam describing respiratory, gastro-intestinal, skin, eye, pyrexial and central nervous symptoms including fatigue, headaches and dissiness associated with herbicides, (e) a World Health Organisation paper published in August 1977 listing skin, cardiovascular urinary tract, respiratory, sensory and depressive disorders due to dioxin and symptoms delayed about 2 years in exposed scientists including personality, gastrointestinal and sleep disorders, hirsutism and hyper-cholesterolemia, and uue to 2, 4-D weakness, rapid fatigue, vertigo, diarrhoea, fever, cardiovascular and liver disorders and possibly other neurological symptoms, (f) a 1953 report in the journal Cancer of skin and internal cancers, (g) an August 1974 report of a survey of retired employees of Dow and Allied Chemical Companies showing a sevenfold increilse in lung cancer and sixfold increase in lymphatic system malignancies among those who had worked with arsenic and (h) reports of scvere weight loss, hemorrhages, stomach ulcers, lymphatic atrophy, immunodepression, liver and enzyme damage, corneal keratosis, fetal deaths, birth defects and chick edema disease in animals and chloracne, porphyria, liver and conjunctival damage and birth defects in humans exposed to tetrachlorodibenzodioxin.
(2) Is the Minister able to say whether 2,4,5-1' plant workers in the USA and the Federal Republic ofCcrmany developed liver and central nervous system damage, chronic fatigue and depression.
(3) Will the Minister direct the repatriation authorities, where necessary by regulation or legislation, to recognise as possibly war caused in Vietnam veterans' chronic skin, organic nervous, hypertrophic corneal, liver, gastrointestinal, reticuloendothelial, ensyme, liver, porphyric and reactive personality and emotional disorders not otherwise explained, unless and until contrary evidence is asscmbleu, or the claimanl can be shown not to have been in contact with herbicides or their derivatives or contaminants.

(4) Will the Minister seek to have legislation introduced to allow miscarriages and birth defects in spouses or offspring of Vietnam veterans exposed to herbicides, etc., to be compensated for as war-caused as soon as evidence is obtained thaI such exposures may cause such disorders in experimental animals similarly exposed.
Mr ThomsonThe Minister for Veterans' An'airs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) (a) As far as I am aware this report was never released
ror publication.
(b) Yes, if this report is the one reported in the Uniled States Congressional Record-Senate 1972.
(c) A copy of the Saigon Newspaper Tlli Sang, for 26 June 1969, is not available. However, the newspaper article is dis-
cussed in John Lewallen's book Ecology 0/Devastatiol1.
(d) and (e) Yes.
(f) Yes, if this is the report entitled MUltiple Arsenical Cancers a/Skin and Internal Organs.
(g) I am aware of a report of November 1974 from the Dow Chemical Company, A sevenfold increase in the incidence or lung cancer followed exposure in excess of eight years. Exposure of less than one year resulted in an increase or less than three fold, Lymphatic system malignancies occurred more frequently than expected in a ratio of 6:2.8.
(h) Reports which mention all but one of the ahove conditions-corneal keratosis-as being due to exposure to tetraehlorodibenzodioxin, have been drawn to my attention.
(2) This question presumably refers to the accidents al the Monsanto Chemical Company in Nitro, West Virginia, US in 1949, and at the Badische Anilin und Soda Fabrik (BASP) factory in Ludwingshafen, Federal Republic of Germany in November 1953. Some workers were reported to have developed the conditions mentioned in the question.
(3) The Australian Repatriation system is one of the most accessible in the world. It provides a three tier systcm of independent statutory authorities for determining claims and appeals, These authorities, when considering a claim or appeal, are required to fully consider the merits of a particular case and to take into consideration all the available evidence, including any medical opinion expressed. They are required to grant a claim, or allow an appeal, unless they arc salisfied heyond reasonable doubt that there are insufficient grounds for so doing. The independence of the authorities means that it is not possible for the Minister, or any other person. to intluence their decisions and I would not seek to direct them as to what decisions to make.

54 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

(4) If any relationship is estahlished, hy the epidemiological study, between contact with herbicides and other toxic chemicals in Vietnam and miscarriages in the wives of veterans and birth defects in their children, the Government will then consider the position,
Insurance Agents and Brokers
(Questiou No. 61)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Following the tabling in the Parliament of the Law Reform Commission Report on Insurance Agents and Brokers on 16 September 1980, did the need for this report stem from a reference by the then Attorney-General on 9 September 1976.
(2) During the period from the reference to the Commission to the tabling of its report, were the ultimate recommendations the result of repeatcd discussions and consultations with all interested parties throughout Australia.
(3) Has his Department asked the industry and the States for their comments on the recommendations of this report.
(4) Has he fixed a deadline by which time his Department can evaluate the reaction of the industry and the States; if not, why not.
(5) When will he be in a position to (a) report to the House and (b) bring in this much needed legislative reform.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Law Reform Commission's Report on Insurance Agents and Brokers arose out of a reference from the Attorney-General on 9 September 1976, requiring the Commission to report upon the adequacy of the law governing contracts of insurance. The Commission decided to report in two stages, with the first report dealing with responsibility for, and occupational regulation of, insurance intermediaries. I understand that the Commission is proceeding to a second report dealing with the remaining matters raised by the reference.
(2) I refer the honourable member to the Commission's report regarding discussions and consultations undertaken by the Commission.
(3) My Department has written to insurance industry organisations, members of the Insurance Consultative Committees and officials nominated by the State Governments and an official of the Northern Territory, inviting comments on the Commission's recommendations and in particular on those relating to the regulation ofinsurance brokers.
(4) My Department will be evaluating reactions as soon as practicable. The timing will depend in part on when responses from in terested parties are received, and their nature.
(5) See (4).
Consumer Credit Legislation
(Question No. 68)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 26 November, 1980:
(1) Is the Attorney-General able to say whether laws regulating consumer credit in Australia (except those of South Australia) are in need of reform and rationalisation.
(2) Has the Attorney-General's attention been drawn to the model consumer credit legislation tabled in the Victorian Parliament in 1978.
(3) Is there a need to enact Commonwealth consumer credit legislation based on the Victorian model referred to in

part (2); if so, will the Attorney-General enact legislation of the same kind for the Australian Capital Territory.
(4) Is the Attorney-General able to say why the model legislation has not been enacted by the various Australian legislatures despite the enactment of similar legislation in. (a) South Australia in 1972 and (b) the United Kingdom in 1974.
(5) Will the Attorney-General consider the possihility of seeking the enactment of the necessary legislation for the whole of Australia by the Commonwealth Parliament, having regard to the Constitutional powers possessed hy that Parliament, including the power to legislate with respect to trading and financial corporations under Section 51 (xx) of the Constitution.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has supplied the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) All Australian Governments have long recognised the need for reform of the laIVS regulating consumer credit in Australia.
(2) and (3) The Victorian Bills were pilot Bills introduced into that Parliament, hy arrangement in the Standing Committee of Attorneys-(Jeneral, to enable the detailed provisions to be studied and commented on by the public. The Commonwealth Government has been actively involved in the development of the proposals having regard to their impl ications [or the Trade Practices Act and the laws governing consumer credit in the ACT.
(4) The final form of the model legislation has not yet been settled in the Standing Committee ofAttorneys-General.
(5) No.
Adelaide Airport: International Flights
(Question No. 70)
Mr Jacobi asked thc Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(l) Has his attention been drawn to a front page article in the Adelaide News of Monday, 20 October 1980 which claimed that international Qantas flights would land at Adelaide Airport, SA.
(2) Is there any substance to this report, taking into account the widespread concern of constituents living adjacent to Adelaide Airport.
(3) Have any approaches been made to the Government to allow internationalllights into and out of Adelaide, if so, (a) who made the approaches and (b) under what circumstances will such flights be permitted.
Mr Hunt-The answer to thc honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) The report is inaccurate in a number of aspects, and the position is as follows:
There are no finn plans to introduce international air services to Adelaide. Plans are being made to upgrade Adelaide airport, hut this upgrading is aimed at increasing the airport's capacity to handle domestic operations. These plans include the introduction of an improved, racetracktype baggage handling system. This system will not be compatible with Customs clearance requirements for international haggage handling and will be limited to domestic use only. There is no intention of installing a carousel-type baggage handling system at the Adelaide airport terminal building, as was suggested in the report.
(3) There have been a number of representations to the Government from interested individuals and organisations

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 55

supporting the introduction of regular international air services to Adelaide.
The Government has not, however, received any application from international airlines to operate regular air services to Adelaide.
Site for Airport for Adelaide
(Question No. 71)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Further to the answer to part (7) of question No. 5107 (Hansard, 4 March 1980, pages 631-2), has a site yet been decided on for the location of a future airport for Adelaide; if so, (a) what site has been chosen and (b) when will the land be purchased.
(2) Ifno site has been decided upon, (a) what is the current position regarding the examination of possible sites and (b) when can a decision be expected.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) (a) 1 recently discussed the question of a future airport for Adelaide with Mr Wilson, the South Australian Minister for Transport. We agreed that this matter would be most expeditiously handled by a South Australian Airfields Committee with both Commonwealth and State members. I expect that this Committee wiII commence activities early in 1981.
(b) An early resolution to the question of a new airport site is not expected.
Imports of Animals and Animal Products
(Question No. 72)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Were regulations made on 21 April 1979 under the Quarantine Act which introduced charges for the inspection ofimports of animals and animal products.
(2) Do the regulations provide for exemptions for live animals, but not for preserved specimens, used for research purposes; if so, are museums and universities now being charged a minimum of $5 for each imported package of preserved specimens, even though they are of a research nature.
(3) Is he able to say whether these charges are proving a liability to research work within museums and university departments.
(4) Is he also able to say whether some experts in universities and museums in Australia are being unjustly penalised for the gratuitous services they provide in identifying specimens for overseas researchers and institutions.
(5) Will he seek to have these regulations amended so that museums and universities are exempted from the payment of fees on the importation of preserved animal specimens which are clearly of a research nature.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The regulations provide exemptions in relation to animals, animal products or goods where-
(a) they are exported from or into Australia
(i) by the Commonwealth; (ii) by an authority of the Commonwealth;

(iii) by a government department of a State or Territory dealing with agriculture, livestock or fisheries;
(iv) by the Government of an overseas country; (v) by a diplomatic representative of an overseas
country; or (vi) by a university or institute for the purpose of ani-
mal breeding and selection;
(b) they are carried as part of personal luggage of a passenger or a member of the crew on a ship or aircraft; or
(c) they are sent through the post in a parcel addressed to a person who is not a person engaged in the business of importing goods of the kind in which the goods are included.
All other importations are subject to inspection fees.
(3) I am advised by my Department that it has not received any reports indicating that these fees are proving to be a liability to research work within museums and universities.
(4) I am similarly advised that my Department has not received any representations to indicate that these fees are unjustly penalising universities or museums performing gratuitous services for overseas researchers and institutions.
(5) The schedule of fees, and the exemptions listed above, are reviewed periodically within my Department. Representations received from importing organisations are taken into account during these reviews.
Therapeutic Substances
(Question No. 74)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) What is the Government's attitude in regard to ingredi. ent labelling of food, drugs and cosmetics. and what progress has been made in implementing its attitude.
(2) Is there a central register of products or substances which are used under the Therapeutic Substances Act; if so, can the public gain access to it.
(3) If such a register is publicly available, where can the public gain access to it.
(4) If there is no register, could one be established, in the publicinterest; if so, when.
(5) Is the drug acetylethyl tetramethyl tetralin (AETT) used in cosmetics in Australia.
Mr MacKellarThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) With respect to ingredient labelling of food, the National Health and Medical Research Council (NH & MRC) in June 1978 recommended to States and Territories, for adoption into legislation, amendments to the Standard for Labelling to require the declaration of ingredients in descending order of proportion in the label of packaged foods. These amendments have been adopted into food regulations in South Australia and Western Australia and are in the process of adoption in other States and Territories.
A General Labelling Standard for Therapeutic Goods is at an advanced stage of preparation. When completed, it will be promulgated as an Order under the Therapeutic Goods Act. The Standard will require pharmaceuticals which are subject to the Act to be labelled, amongst other things, with the name of each active substance in the product together with its quantity or proportion in the goods.
The matter of ingredient labelling of cosmetics is currently receiving the attention of the NH & MRC.

56 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to QuestiollS

(2) to (4) Amendments to the Therapeutic Goods Act are contemplated. It is anticipated that these will allow the establishment of and the gathering of information for, a National Product Register of Therapeutic Goods for Human Use. The Register, which will be computerised, is planned to hold qualitative and quantitative information on each active substance and qualitative details only of the excipients in all pharmaceuticals on the Australian market. When compiled the public may gain access to any of the relevant details outlined above by approaching my Department.
(5) The chemical acetylethyl tetramethyl tetralin (AETT) is not used in cosmetics in Australia. Prior to 1977 it was used as a synthetic musk fragrance. In 1977 it was banned by the International Fragrance Association after it was discovered to possess toxic properties.
Laboratory Animals
(Question No. 75)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to claims that overseas workers in the field have expressed surprise that statistics are unobtainable in Australia, either at the Federal or State level, of the number of animals used in laboratories, their species, the purpose for which they were used, from where they were obtained, whether they were anaesthetised during any procedures or euthanised at the termination of any test or experiment.
(2) Is he aware that these statistics are available in some detail in other advanced countries.
(3) Will he ask his Department to advise how this deficiency can best be rectified at the Federal level.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (3) Control of use of animals in laboratory experiments is a matter for the State and Northern Territory Governments. In the Australian Capital Territory, I can, as Minister for Health, authorise persons to perform vivisections and experiments on animals and specify conditions under which such activities are permitted to be carried out. Vivisections and experiments on animals are allowed to be performed only at the Australian National University, the National Biological Standards Laboratory, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization and in the Capital Territory Health Commission's hospitals. All these organisations maintain records of animal experiments. The cost of maintaining a Territory-wide statistical collection would not be justified, but if the honourable member would like statistics on any particular aspect of animal experimentation within the ACT, I would be happy to obtain them for him.
The honourable member may be unaware that the National Health and Medical Research Council and the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization published a joint document entitled Code ofpractice for the care and use ofanimals in research in Australia in 1979. Adherence to the code of practice is a standard condition attaching to Council grants.
Price Discrimination
(Question No. 77)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
Has the Government made predatory price discrimination in the oil industry illegal; if so, will the Government now

extend the same protection to small business men in the general retail industry.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Section 20 of the Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Act prohibits a company from discriminating in the price at which it supplies motor fuel to its franchisees or in any discounts, allowances, rebates or credits given or allowed to franchisees in respect of that fuel.
There are exceptions to the prohibition. The exceptions recognise that a lower price may be justifiable in terms of actual cost savings, that an oil company may need to meet competition from another supplier who has offered to supply at a lower price to the franchisee, that in some market conditions oil companies need to give price support to their franchisees to enable them to meet retail competition and that some States or Territories may fix maximum wholesale prices for sales within their jurisdictions. In addition, the prohibition does not apply to sales of motor fuel to franchisees for bulk retailsale.
The price discrimination provisions of the Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Act were drafted with the particular problems of the petroleum industry in mind. It would not be appropriate to give these provisions general application to all industries.
Section 49 of the Trade Practices Act prohibits certain kinds of anti-competitive price discrimination which may constitute predatory price discrimination. That prohibition is not limited to particular industries; it applies to conduct by all corporations and other persons who are subject to the Trade Practices Act.
Section 46 of the Trade Practices Act may also operate to prohibit conduct involving predatory pricing where it is engaged in by a corporation which is in a position substantially to control a market.
Television Signal Quality
(Question No. 78)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Further to the answer to question No. 4845 (Hansard. 15 November 1979, page 3154), what standard of television signal (a) qualitatively and (b) comparatively is provided by the Canadian system of direct broadcasting satellites utilising low-powered transponders.
(2) In varying types of Australian climate, including (a) northern (i) wet and (ii) dry seasons, (b) day, (c) night, (d) very hot weather, (e) cold weather and (f) monsoonal rains, how does the signal compare qualitatively with the standard ofsignal currently enjoyed by the average urban Australian.
(3) If any or all of this information is not available, what is the Canadian experience of DBS television signal quality in varying weather types, especially weather types approaching those referred to in part (2).
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Until technical planning of the Australian Communications Satellite system is completed, it is not possible to make the detailed comparison requested.
However, the combination of higher power transponders covering a larger geographic area is expected to provide people in all parts of Australia with signals at least as good as those being received in the Canadian experiments.

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 57

(2) and (3) In most parts of Australia, the signal received via satellite will be at least as acceptable as the signals received in most urban areas.
The only climatic situation in which performance may be significantly affected is during short periods of unusually heavy rainfall.
Communications Equipment
(Question No. 83)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Is he able to say what are the considerable difficulties to which his predecessor referred in the House of Representatives Estimates Committee A hearings on 29 August 1980 concerning application of the Customs Amendments Act to prevent the importation of communications equipment the use of which is illegal (Hansard, page 55).
(2) For what reasons must specific rather than general prohibitions apply on the manufacture or importation of communications equipment, the use of which is illegal.
(3) Could a general prohibition be applied to the manufacture or importation of equipment which could not be licensed under the Wireless Telegraphy Act; if not, why not.
(4) What other Acts other than the Customs Amendment Act are available for the prohibition of manufacture or importation of communications equipment, the use of which is illegal.
(5) Can each Act referred to in part (4) be applied to this situation; if so, how.
Mr Sinclail'- The answer to the honourable member'" question is as follows:
(1 ) The difficulties referred to arise from the need for Regulations under the Customs Act to specify precisely the equipment to be controlled and the criteria to be used to restrict imports. This was not a straight forward matter because the existing Wireless TelegraphY Act provides no formal definition of the Citizens Band Radio Service (CBRS) and makes no provision for legally recognisable equipment standards which could be invoked in Customs Regulations. The CBRS, particularly in the 27 MHz band, uses frequencies very close to other similar radio services such as the 27 MHz Harbour Mobile Radio Service. The equipment to be controlled, viz CB radios having unapproved frequencies, closely resembles equipment used in some of these other services. In the absence of existing definitions, it has been a difficult drafting exercise to distinguish CB equipment operating on incorrect frequencies from handphones or harbour mobile equipment which is very similar and operates on adjacent frequencies.
These difficulties have been compounded by recent negotiations with suppliers of harbour mobile equipment which has led to an expansion of the number of frequencies to be included in such equipment, including frequencies closer to the CBRS frequencies. Consequently, the final form of the regulation has required further drafting changes to ensure that legitimate harbour mobile equipment will not be caught up in the import restrictions proposed for CB equipment. This process has recently been completed.
(2) It is Government policy that the regulation of industry should not depend on the discretionary decisioI18 of Ministers or public officials. For example, Regulations prohibiting the

importation of radio equipment unless the consent of the Minister is obtained, are not usually acceptable. Objective definitions, standards and criteria must be incorporated in the Regulations, and these Regulations must identify the particular goods to be controlled.
(3) A link between import or manufacturing controls and licensing requirements could be established only by equipment standards common to all areas of regulation. Present equipment approval procedures which precede the licensing of radio services under the Wireless Telegraphy Act work effectively in the context of licensing and regulatory controls on radio use. However, the Attorney-General's Department has advised that they are not able to be used as the basis for an import restriction. Existing equipment standards were not designed for this purpose.
(4) and (5) This has been investigated and it has been found that there are, in practice, no other means available than the Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations.
New radiocommunication legislation is currently being prepared which will address itself to these matters and make it possible for controls on the manufacture and importation of illegal equipment to be established on the basis of published technical standards and new equipment type approval requirements.
Communications: Staff Ceilings
(Question No. 84)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 26 November I 980:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the admission by Mr E. E. Payne, Deputy Secretary of the former Department of Post and Telecommunications at the House of Representatives Estimates Committee A hearings on 29 August 1980 that with the staff that the Department had, they could not possibly go around and check on people to see whether they had licensed or unlicensed radio receivers (Hansard, page 55).
(2) Is this statement damaging to the concept of staff ceilings?
Ml' Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) The point of Mr Payne's statement was that controls on receivers are an appropriate area for deregulation. Consequently his statement is not inconsistent with the concept of staff ceilings.
Industrial Research and Development Lncentives
(Question No. 90)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
Will he publish (a) wholly (b) in part or (c) in precis form, the results of surveys referred to in paragraph 12 of the 1978-79 Annual Report of the Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives Board; if so, when.
Mr ThomsonThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The surveys have been published. They are (a) the Australian Bureau of Statistics Survey on Research and Experimental Development, Private Enterprises, 1976-77. (b) Project SCORE, Research and Development in Australia, 1973-74, Volumes 1 and 2 (Department of Science, Canberra, Australia, 1976) and (c) Science and Technology in Australia 1977-78, Vol. 1.A (Australian Science and Technology Council, Canberra 1978).

58 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Industrial Research and Development Incentives
(Question 1\0. 91)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) How many (a) project and (b) commencement grant applications were received by the Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives Board during 1979-80.
(2) How many of these applications in each category remained unprocessed at the end of 1979-80.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives Board received (a) 483 project and (b) 975 commencement grant applications during 1979-80.
(2) (a) Fifty-seven project and (b) 208 commencement grant applications remained unprocessed at the end of 1979-80.
Invalid Pension
(Question No. 97)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) By what criteria is 85 per cent disability established when determining a person's eligibility for the invalid pension.
(2) In making a determination does the Department of Social Security take into account the changing nature of the unemployment situation.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) The Social Services Act requires a person to be permanently blind or permanently incapacitated for work to the extent of at least 85 per cent to qualify for an invalid pension. The level of incapacity for work is a matter [or medical assessment and is carried out in accordance with recognised medical procedures and using established criteria. Broadly, the assessment of a person's capacity (or incapacity) for work involves

an evaluation by a Commonwealth Medical Officer of the person's present and future capacity to engage in any field of employment which might be considered suitabie for the person to undertake. In addition to assessing the person's degree of medical impairment, such factors as age, sex and education are relevant in assessing the degree of incapacity [or work.
(2) No. The existing legislation does not allow social and environmental factors which are external to the claimant, such as the state of the labour market, to be taken into account in reaching a decision as to whether a person is permanently incapacitated for work.
Non-government Schools
(Question No. 98)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Which non-government schools in the Electoral Division of Swan have received capital grants and what amounts were received in the years-Cal 1978, (b) 1979 and (c) 1980 to 25 November.
(2) Have any capital funds been allocated for nongovernment schools in the Electoral Division of Swan for construction in 1981; if so, (a) for what schools and (b) what amounts have been allocated.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(\) and (2) Capital grants offered to non-government schools in the Electoral Division of Swan under the Schools Commission's Capital Grants Program in 1980, 1981 and 1982 are set out in the following table. It should be noted that the Government has not yet allocated the additional $25 million capital funds for non-government schools announced as an election policy commitment.
Payments for the years 1978 and 1979 are set out in the reports which were tabled in the House of Representatives on the dates listed below-
Report-States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1977-21 August 1979
Report-States Grants (Schools ASSistance) Act 1978-26 November 1980.

ELECTORAL DIVISION OF SWAN-CAPITAL GRANTS OFFERED TO NON-GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS

Grants by years in which payable

Schools

1980

1981

1982 Remarks

Bassendean Bayswater Carlisle Cloverdale Como
Guildford
Midland
Midvale Perth South
RedclitIe

St Michael's St Columba's Holy Name Notre Dame Penrhos College St Pius X Foothills Guildford Education Centre Guild[ord Grammar La Salle Collcge St Brigid's St Anthony's St Columba's Wesley College St Maria Goretti's

$

$

$

27,950

1,000 1,900
1,000 20,000 12,000 3,700

179,385

24,000
120,615 One project-total grant $300,000

2,500 31,000 8,000
500 500

Three projects as shown

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 59

Rivervale Victoria Park
Victoria Park East

Schools
St Augustine's St Joachim's College St Joachim's Primary . . Seventh Day Adventist Primary Seventh Day Adventist Secondary Minbalup Activity Centre Our Lady Help of Christians
Primary . . . . . Our Lady Help of Christians
Secondary Xavier College

Grants by years in which payable

1980

1981

$

$

1,000

1,000

1,400

1982 Remarks $

3,600

Launceston General Hospital
(Question No. 100)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Is the present division of the Launceston, Tasmania, General Hospital between two sites likely to continue as a result of governmental indecision over stage II of the original hospital project; if so, will this add significantly to running costs, and lead to general inefficiencies of operation.
(2) Has any commitment yet been made to the modified stage II proposals for the hospital.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Commonwealth Government is committed to costshare the construction of Stage 1 of the new Launceston General Hospital with Tasmania on a 50/50 basis.
The Launceston General Hospital is the major hospital in the north-eastern region of Tasmania and part of the agreement to cost-share the construction of Stage I of the new hospital was the undertaking of a joint review by my Department and the Tasmanian Department of Health Services to assess the hospital bed needs for the region. The review has not yet been completed.
No estimates have been made of the running costs of a fully integrated Stage II development for the hospital, either as originally planned or in a modified form. Valid comparisons of operating costs between such an institution and the existing Launceston General Hospital are therefore not possible.
(2) There has been no commitment by the Commonwealth.
Polling Officials
(Question No. 102)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) What procedure is followed by the Australian Electoral Office in appointing polling officials.
(2) Is it a common practice for the divisional offices of the Australian Electoral Office to recruit polling officials from the ranks of Commonwealth Public Servants, including officers of the Commonwealth Employment Service.
(3) Does the Australian Electoral Office advertise through the Commonwealth Employment Service for polling officials from among the unemployed; if not, why not.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable .nember's question is as follows:

(I) The Australian Electoral Office depends heavily on the knowledge and experience of its polling officials. This experience, which in the case of many officials has been gained over a number of elections, is essential to the efficient and successful conduct of each election. Clearly, such 'know how' is not likely to be available from large numbers of inexperienced staff. For this reason the normal practice is to retain the services of efficient, experienced officials from election to election. Since the Office must be prepared at all times to conduct an election, possibly at short notice, Divisional Returning Officers periodically, between elections, review the list of poIling staff employed at the previous election to identify those not likely to be available on the occasion of the next election and those whose efficiency on the job does not warrant their continued employment and efforts are made to recruit suitable alternative staff.
(2) It is because of this need for suitable staff who will be available when needed in the future that the Australian Electoral Office seeks its recruits in such areas as the Commonwealth and State Public Services, the teaching services, banks, insurance companies and appropriate areas of commercial organisations.
If there is any emphasis on a particular area of employment it could be in the use of teaching staff, particularly in country areas. This flows from the fact that many polling places are located in schools and the employment of staff from those schools as polling officials facilitates arrangements for setting up and operating of the polling booths in those premises.
(3) Given the need for the Australian Electoral Office to have the bulk of its casual polling staff requirements planned in advance of the election there normally are comparatively few vacancies when an election is announced. Given the immense amount of administrative detail in conducting an election, recruitment well ahead is the only efficient arrangement.
Despite these efforts to forward plan staffing needs some vacancies inevitably do occur close to the election and all available avenues, including the Commonwealth Employment Service, are canvassed in an effort to find suitable replacements.
Commonwealth Pathology Laboratories
(Question No. 105)
Mr Jull asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) In which centres in Australia has the Commonwealth Government established pathology laboratories.
(2) Are private laboratories also in existence in some of these centres; if so, in which ones.

60 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) Are figures available as to the profitability of the Commonwealth Pathology Laboratories; if so, what was the profit or loss for each centre for each of the years 1977-78 to 1979-80.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Commonwealth Pathology Laboratories are currently operated by my Department in the following 12 centres in Australia:
Queensland Cairns (established 1928) Rockhampton (established 1924) Toowoomba (established 1923) Townsville (established 1922)
New South Wales Albury (established 1948) Lismore (established 1924) Tamworth (established 1948)
Victoria Bendigo (established 1922)
Tasmania Hobart (established 1939) I.aunceston (established 1929)
South Australia Port Pirie (established 1924)
Western Australia Kalgoorlie (established 1925)
In addition, the Capital Territory Health Commission operates a pathology laboratory service at Canberra.

(2) Private pathology laboratories are currently established in II of the above centres, viz.: Cairns, Rockhampton, Toowoomba, Townsville, Lismore, Albury (based at Wodonga), Bendigo, Hobart, Launceston, Kalgoorlie and Canberra.
(3) Income and expenditure figures for the individual Commonwealth laboratories are available on a full-year basis for 1978-79 and 1979-80. Comparable income figures are not available for 1977-78 as charges for Commonwealth laboratory services were not introduced until I November 1977.
In relation to the laboratories' income it is pointed out that this is conditioned by the fact that most services are provided frcc of charge and, where charges are made they are at the benefit level only, as follows:
(a) nO charges are made for services to pensioners, and disadvantaged persons and their dependents or for services to standard ward patients of recognised hospitals or for testing of Red Cross blood donors (this group makes up approximately two-thirds of all patients registered by the laboratories);
(b) other categories of patients are charged at the combined medical benefit level of the appropriate schedule fee approved for use by Government laboratories. (These charges are conSiderably less than the schedule fees approved for use by private pathology practitioners );
Details of operating costs for each of the Commonwealth laboratories, income generated from accounts raised and the number of patients charged (expressed also as a percentage of total patients registered) for 1978-79 and 1979-80 are:

Laboratory centre
Cairns Rockhampton Toowoomba Townsville Albury l.ismore Tamworth Bendigo Hobart Launceston Port Pirie Kalgoorlie Canberra
All laboratories

Operating costs

1978-79 1979-80

$'000
1,115 865
1,208
1,145 568
989 692 626 414
460 164 310 3,001

$'000
1,241 966
1,355
1,267 699
1,118
776 683 462
520 165
333 3,227

11,557

12,812

Income received

1978-79 1979-80

$'000
222 9
378
89 190 368
361
171 51
121 37
59 1,148

$'000
237 8
327 95 240
352 352 158 86
140 40 58
957

3,204

3,050

Number of patients charged

1978-79 1979-80

'000

'000

25

23

1

I

33

26

10

10

27

28

55

56

40

41

28

22

9

9

13

12

5

5

II

12

138

71

395

316

Percentage of total patients charged
1978-79 1979-80
------

21

20

2

1

39

31

9

8

56

55

56

57

58

54

43

44

23

21

30

26

67

62

43

51

63

52

41

34

I understand that the Department of Veterans' Affairs also operates pathology laboratories within their repatriation hospitals, details of which could be obtained from my collcague, the Minister for Veterans' Affairs.
Urban and Regional Development: Gladstone
(Question No. 106)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Arc (a) capital works funds for Queensland $200 million less than last year and (b) infrastructural backlogs in roads and transport maintenance increasing.

(2) Did the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation urge, in 1978, area-based co-ordination of the public sector to meet the needs of Gladstone, Queensland; if so, what has been done to implement this recommendation.
(3) has regional rating and town planning assistance been given to Gladstone; if so, what assistance.
(4) Did the Minister recognise disparities between metropolitan and other regions and stress the case for co-operation of all levels of government in urban and regional development to the Australian Institute of Urban Studies on 16 October J980, and offer to act when market forces, States and local government fail to cope.

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 61

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) (a) Allocation by the Commonwealth of capital funds to Queensland increased in 1980-81 by $52.9Im or 6.3 per cent over the previous year. This is represented by:
an increase in general purpose capital funds of$8.25m; a decline in specific purpose capital payments of $14.77m; and an increase in semi-government and local authority borrowings of $59.43m.
(b) Specific purpose capital payments to Queensland for roads and transport purposes amount to $144.9m this financial year, an increase of $17.8m or about 14 per cent on the previous year. Under the States Grants (Roads) Act 1977, Queensland is also required to spend $75.8m on roads this financial year. State Governments are, of course, free to allocate further funds to areas they judge to be of high priority. The Commonwealth provides general funds under the personal income tax sharing arrangements which are available for the States to allocate according to their own priorities.
(2) and (3) No.
(4) I refer the honourable member to a copy of the speech given on my behalf to the Australian Institute of Urban Studies on 16 October 1980, held in the Parliamentary Library. In particular, I refer the honourable member to page 5, penultimate paragraph, page 6 (paragraphs 2 and 3) and pages 10 and 11- 'Managing the Existing Resources Better'.
Pathology Tests
(Question No. 107)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Did he claim, as reported in the Australian on 25 September 1980, that essential pathology tests have not been refused medical benefit funding.
(2) Did he also state on 26 September 1980 that medical benefits were paid for pathology tests associated with abortion and that doctors were ordering unnecessary tests.
(3) Did his Department direct a private pathologist on 4 September 1980 that routine tests for cancer or sexually transmitted diseases before therapeutic abortion are health screening services and coded to suppress payment of medical benefits.
(4) Were private health funds advised similarly in August 1980.
(5) Are full benefit refunds payable to Medicheck and the Shepherd Foundation for in excess of 20 screening tests.
(6) Is gonorrhoea likely to cause sterility if undiagnosed and untreated before surgical abortion and present in symptomless form in some one in every 100 Australian women.
(7) Do many gynaecological authorities recommend routine cancer smears for all gynecological patients.
(8) Is cervical cancer, diagnosed by such smears, an indication for treatment (a) other than or (b) supplementary to therapeutic abortion.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) I refer the honourable member to my news release of 23 September 1980 for my statements on this matter.
(3) My Department received a query from a private pathologist concerning a number of outstanding bulk billed claims for medical benefits submitted by him for pathology services

associated with termination of pregnancy. In response my Department advised the pathologist on 4 September 1980 that the claims had been processed in accordance with the terms of the Health Insurance Act which places a restriction on the payment of medical benefits for services which are considered to be of a health screening nature.
Computer programs are used by my Department to assess and calculate medical benefits payments for bulk billed claims. The term 'coded to suppress payment of medical benefits'is a reference to a procedure used during such computer processing of claims to prevent payment of benefits for services which do not automatically attract benefits (that is, benefits are not payable unless the services are medically necessary) .
(4) All registered health funds were advised during August and September 1980 that payment of medical benefits would be restricted for some pathology tests associated with termination of pregnancy where those tests were not considered to be medically necessary.
(5) Full medical benefits are payable under Schedule Item 994 for the multiphasic screening service provided by Medicheck and the Shepherd Foundation. Hem 994 covers the performance of 10 or more medical services.
The Medicheck Referral Centre, Sydney, and the Shepherd Foundation, Melbourne, are presently exempted from the I July 1978 amendment to the Health Insurance Act which provided, in general, that medical benefits would no longer be paid for health screening services. This exemption was granted as a temporary measure to allow evaluation of health screening services, and was subject to the condition that the two organisations conduct specific research studies for the purpose of establishing the value of screening services.
(6) The source of the honourable member's figure of one woman in a hundred with symptomless gonorrhoea is not known. It is believed that the Australian incidence is considerably less than that. I understand that untreated gonorrhoea does itself cause sterility quite unrelated to surgical abortion procedures.
(7) and (8) I am advised that some gynaecology and cancer authorities recommend a cervical smear every two or three years. No authority is known to recommend routine smears with all gynaecology procedures. A definite positive cervical cancer, diagnosed by such smears, is an indication for treatment other than and supplementary to any therapeutic abortion.
Family Planning Services
(Question No.1 08)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Is it a fact that the Government is freezing the subsidy to family planning organisations which I introduced as Minister for Health.
(2) Did the Family Planning Association of Queensland open all of its six branch centres between March 1973 and August 1975, but none since.
(3) Did annual attendance at the association's seven centres increase from 178 in 1971-72 to 17,877, more than a hundredfold, four years later.
(4) Have total attendances since then increased less than threefold.
(5) Are family planning services a major requirement for a reduction in abortion rates.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

62 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) The Family Planning Program appropriation was maintained at $750,000 from 1976-77 to 1979-80, and, increased to $7XO,000 for the 1980-81 financial year. Notwithstanding the Commonwealth Government's budget strategy of continuing financial restraint it has been possible over this period to increase the amount provided under the program for education, training and information activities conducted by the family planning organisations.
In relation to clinical activities, the approved deficits of the State and Territory Family Planning Associations have been funded by Health Program Grants each year since the introduction of the IIealth Program Grants on I July 1975.
The following table details grants LO the family planning organisations for both clinical and non-clinical activities:

Financial year

Health program grants to State and Territory
family planning associations

Family planning program gran ts to
family planning organisations

$m

$

1975-76

0.87

499,191

1976-77

1.64

59'1,625

1977-78

2.05

595,863

1978-79

2.10

634,233

_ . _ - _ -19-7-9--80- - _ . _..

_ ... .2.1_5 - - - - -642,750

(2) The Family Planning Association of Queensland opened five hranch centres (Cairns, Townsville, Rockhamp" ton, Gold Coast and Ipswich) during the period March 1973 and August 1975. An additional centre was opened at Mount
Gravatt in 1976. Part-time resource workers commenced at To(}woomha in 1978 and Mtlsa in 1980.

(3) Yes.

(4) Yes. However, such a pattcrn is to bc expected given a major emphasis under the Family Planning Program of train-
ing general practitioners and othcr health professionals, and thus improving the quality of family planning services available through the general health services system.

(5) The wider availability of contraception and of family planning counselling, through the health services generally and through special family planning clinics, is intended to rcduce the number of unwanted pregnancies and ahortions.

Tax A voidance
(Question No.l1I)
Mr Lcs Johnson asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 Novemher 1980:
(1) Will seelion 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Acl be strengthened to empower the Commissioner for Taxation to strike out schemes which may derive tax benellts to the participants but which arc artificial and contrived, and bear nO relationship to normal commercial transactions; if not, why not.
(2) Has the Government estimated the revenue foregone as a result of the failure to suitably amend section 260 of the Act; if so, what has been the estimated loss for each of the last five years.
Mr Howard - The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I refer the honourable member to m)' answer at page 1633 of weekly Hansard :\0. 15, 1980, to Question No. 6326 asked by him on 20 August 1980. At this stage 1 have nothing to add to that answer.

Supply of Doctors
(Question No. 117)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) What is the current doctor-to-population ratio by Federal electoral division throughout Australia.
(2) Will a greater supply of doctors lead to (a) a reduction in the quality of medical services in Australia, in that the smaller number of patients available to each doctor will result in (i) some doctors providing services for which they are not adequately equipped, (ii) some doctors providing services which cannot be justified, (iii) doctors' skills particularly those involving technical procedures, not being utilised sufficiently often to ensure maintenance of competency and (iv) increasing difficulty in providing adequate clinical experience for the vital intern, resident and specialist training periods of medical education, (b) increasing cost pressures, as doctors decide tbe resources that will be used in the medical care of individual patients, (c) the compromising of current initiatives, aimed at maximising the efficiency and effectiveness of the health services, such as hospital rationalisation and (d) the health services not being able to determine the most efficient use of resources because of the health services being expected to provide the resources needed for doctors to practice medicine, irrespective of the health services assessment of the need for additional people.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) My Department does not have available the detailed information needed to answer this question as the distribution of doctors according to electorate is not available. In any event, the tendency for specialists to congregate in certain areas would yield very distorted results. There would also be problems in that doctors in the larger hospitals serve patients not necessarily from within the electorate in which the hospital is located.
(2) These points were raised by my Department in the Report of the Committee of Officials on Medical Manpower Supply, and I accept them as valid views for argument. However, there are other viewpoints which need to be taken into consideration when considering the supply of medical practitioners, such as those expressed by the other members of the Commillee of Officials.
Lead in Petrol
(Question No. 129)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the article headed 'I.ead Levels worse than on freeway; survey' on page 3 of the Age of 19 August 1980.
(2) If so, can he say who commissioned the reported survey carried out by the ACI Environics.
(3) Has he taken any steps to investigate and evaluate the survey results; if so, what steps.
(4) Can he confirm reports that the Victorian Liberal Party State Conference supports a ban on the use of lead in petrol.
iVIr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes, my attention has been drawn to the newspaper article.
(2) r am informed that the survey was commissioned and
paid for by the Collingwood Council.

Answers to Questions

24 February 198] REPRESENTATIVES 63

(3) The report of the survey has been closely studied by my Department. It is clear that the levels of airborne lead in the report are not low. I lowever, methods used in the study do not accord completely with the recommended procedures for monitoring for airhorne lead as approved by the National Health and Medical Research Council (NH & M RC) and results cannot be assessed directly against Council's guidelines. Further comment on the study cannot, therefore, be made but the honourable member can be assured this matter is being maintained under review by the appropriate expert committees of the NH & MRC.
(4) No. The relevant rcsolutinn passed at the R2nd Victorian State Council meeting in March 1980 asked the Government to 'act to reduce the content of lead in petrol immediately because of the serious health hazard to all people and especially children'.
Civil Defence
(Question No. 131)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime ivlinister, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Has he instigated preparations for the civil defence of Australians in the event of a nuclear strike against Australia.
(2) has the Olfice of National Assessments or any other Government or semi-Government body produced a report, or provided any form of advice to the Government concerning the result dnd expected civilian losses Collowing a nuclear strike against Australian capital cities.
(3) When did the Natural Disasters Organisation commence its survey relevant to possible civil defence needs, what are the specific terms of rderence of that survey and at whose directive was it undertaken.
(4) When will the survey he completed and will the results be made public.
(5) In view of his statements concerning the possibility of a world nuclear war, will he ensure that thc Government upgrades the survey and expeditcs its completion.
(6) Where are nuclear proof bunkers located in the following cities: (a) Sydney, (b) Newcastle and (c) Wollongong, New South Wales, (d) Melbourne and (e) Geclong, Victoria, (r) Brisbane, (g) the Gold Coast, (h) Ipswich, (i) Gympie, (k) Maryborough, (I) Gladstone, (m) Roekhampton, (n) Mackay, (0) Bowen, (p) Townsville, (q) Cairns, (r) ToolVoomba and (s) Mt Isa, Queensland, (t) Adelaide, South Australia, (u) Perth, Western Australia, (v) Hobart and (w) Launccston, Tasmania.
(7) Did he state in his reply to question No. 6143 (Hansard, 19 August 1980, page 444) that priority would be given to support 01' a collective deterrent to a Soviet challenge rather than upgrading of civilian defence; if so, has he been advised that the threat of nuclear attack comes from the Soviet Government and only the Soviet Government.
Mr Anthony The answer to the honourable membcr's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Priorities in Australian civil defence preparation take account of the assessed low probability of nuclear attack and the priority given by Government to support of practical measures which give the best assurance of the probability remaining low. Precise definition of the form of such a remote eventuality is not practicable. Our civil defence capacity depends heavily upon the extensive organisations and capabilities which have heen established in recent years to mitigate the drects of major natural disasters. These capabilities, together with some special preparations including the survey of fallout shelter space, provide a basis for timely expansion should development of the risk of direct military attack upon Australia require it.

(3) to (5) The Natural Disasters Organisation survey of fallout shelter space in suitable existing buildings is a continuing tcchnical activity carried out at the request of, and to provide information and assessments for, State and Territory authorities responsible for the planning of civil defence measures. It commenced in 1966 following a decision by government, and is being maintained. The results are in the form of technical planning data and are not published. However, many buildings in all capital cities have been surveyed and the space located could in relevant circumstances provide shelter from fallout for some hundreds of thousands of people.
(6) See (3) to (5) above. Fallout shelter spaces do not constitute 'nuclear proof bunkers'.
(7) Yes.
Assistance to Local Government: Cost of Telegrams
(Question No. 132)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Did his office send out telegrams at 7.50 p.m. on 6 August 1980. relating to Commonwealth assistance to local government; if so, to whom and to what addresses were the telegranls sent.
(2) Were some of the telegrams sent by his office after normal olfice hours to the electoral offices of members and senators; if so, why was the statement sent by telegram after olfice hours, instead of being posted.
(3) What was the cost of sending the telegrams.
Mr AnthonyThe answer to the honourahle member's question is as follows:
(1) The text of the telegrams in question together with lists of the names and addresses of Senators and Members were lodged at the Canberra Post Office for transmission at 11.20 a.m. on 6 August 1980.
(2) See (l) above. However, the practice of giving same day notice to Members and Senators of statements on Commonwealth Assistance to Local Government was adopted as a result of requests from Members for prompt advice. The Parliament was not in session when the accouncement was made on 6 August 1980 and telegrams were the only effective means of achieving same day advice to all Members and Senators.
(3) Charges for the telegrams amounted to $14,075.05.
Job Cassettes
(Question No. 137)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister ror Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to thc operations of a company known as the Careers Adviser, Sound Information Pty Ltd, whose postal address is PO Box 8, Broadway, Sydney, NSW2007.
(2) Is he ahle to say whether this company advertises in journals with national circulation to sell Job Cassettes at $9.80 each; if so, do these advertisements state that the cassettes (a) will help young unemployed people secure employment and (b) are now being used hy career advisers in Federal and State Government Departments; if so, are the cassettes being used by the Federal Government and in which Departments; if not, will he initiate action against the continued publication of these advertisements.
(3) If it has been determined that these cassettes are of some value, will he consider measures necessary to secure a

64 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

copyright for the cassettes and make the cassettes available to the young unemployed through such programs as the Community Youth Support Scheme.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) I am aware that the company advertises in journals with national circulation and of the claims made in the advertisement. Although I do not have access to a complete list of Commonwealth and State Government Departments that use the cassettes, they are used by my Department in its Career Reference Centres throughout Australia and by a number of State Government Departments in New South Wales.
(3) My Department has investigated the possibility of securing copyright for the cassettes and has found the cost to be excessive by comparison with a more comprehensive series of career audio tapes that it has had produced. Tapes from this series are not provided through the Community Youth Support Scheme (CYSS) but are freely available to unemployed young people through the Career Reference and Work Information Centre networks of the Commonwealth Employment Service. Alternatively, individual CYSS groups can, if they so desire, purchase the Sound Information cassettes from the Commonwealth funds that they are allocated.
Repatriation Pensions
(Question No. 141)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Is the maximum pension rate payable to the wife or widow of a disabled veteran $4.05.
(2) Has this pension not been increased since 24 September 1964.
(3) Will the Minister consider increasing the amount of pension payable to the wife or widow of a disabled veteran.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(l) Yes, except a widow may receive a higher rate of pension if she qualifies as a war or defence widow by virtue of the veteran's death being accepted as due to service or if her husband at the time of his death was receiving, or was subsequently adjudged to have been entitled to receive, a disability pension at the Special (T. & P.I.) Rate or at the equivalent rate as a double amputee.
(2) Yes.
(3) Dependants' pensions have not been increased because successive Governments have concentrated available finance on ensuring that incapacitated veterans and war/defence widows are adequately compensated in terms of pension and have the best possible medicaltrcatment facilities available to them. In this way, the whole family receives the benefit of increased pensions and allowances and the primary purpose of Repatriation pensions, as compensation for service-related disabilities, is achieved. Any proposal to increase the dependants' pension payable to the wife or widow of a disabled veteran would need to be considered in the Budget context.
Australia Council
(Question No. 146)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:

(\) Is the newly appointed chairperson of the Visual Arts Board also a member of other boards of the Australia Council.
(2) Does the Council condone membership of more than one board by its members.
Mr Ellicott-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) and (2) I refer the honourable member to my answer of 18 September 1980 to Question No. 6423, asked by Mr Humphreys in similar terms, upon notice, on 21 August 1980 (Hansard, IXSeptember 1980, page 1588).
APEX Domestic Air Fares
(Question 1\0.147)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Is it a fact that Apex air fares can be purchased only for a portion of the total economy seats on Ansett and TAA flights; if so, what is the number of seats made available for Apex bookings.
(2) Are people unable to purchase Apex tickets on flights where the maximum number of seats available for advance purchase has already been reached; if so, will he ensure that Ansett and TAA include this proviso in their advertising of Apex fares.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's queslion is as follows:
(I) Yes. Approximately 7.5 per cent of economy seats on an annual basis are made available for Apex sales.
(2) When the maximum number of seats available for Apex fares on a particular flight have been reserved passengers must seek another flight or be waitlisted for cancellation. Both airlines state in their advertising that Apex farcs apply to a limited number of seats on specified jet flights.
Nursing Homes
(Question No. 148)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
What are the (a) current approved fees and (b) names and locations of those nursing homes where the cheapest ward accommodation exceeds the minimum patient contribution plus the basic nursing home benefits, for each (i) State and (ii) Territory.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The names and locations of approved nursing homes where the cheapest accommodation exceeded, at 14 Novcmber 1980, the minimum patient contribution plus the basic nursing home benefits, and their fees are set out below:

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPR ESENTATlVES 65

DAILY FEES FOR ORDINARY CARE PATIENTS

Name of nursing home and location

All Multi-bed

bed

ward

fee

fee

5 bed
ward fee

4bed ward
fee

Aeolus Ryde Airlie, Wahroonga
Austral House, North Manly

$c

$c

New South Wales 27.25

$c 27.25

$c 27.25

Avoca House, Avoca Beach Ballina, Gordon
Bathurst, Kelso Beecroft, Beecroft Bonnie Doon, Randwick
Buckland, Springwood Cronulla, Nth Cronulla Currawong, Ashfield

34.21

26.76 28.56
28.08 27.41
27.16 27.21

28.56 28.08

27.36
31.52 29.58
27.16 27.21

Dubbo, Dubbo Elizabeth Lodge, Willoughby
Endeavour, Springwood Gladstone House, Burwood
Glenwood, Greenwich
Gosford, Gosford Greentrees, Cremorne Greenwood, Normanhurst
Holmwood, Bexley Kura, Mayfield Kenilworth, Bowral
Killara, Killara Kurmala, Strathfield Mira,lda, Miranda

29.10
28.67 30.15
27.98 50.33

27.73 26.97
29.28

28.25 27.73 26.97
29.28 27.26

30.09 28.25 28.03
27.78

Monteith, Chatswood
Mountview, Pymble Narla Village, Belmont North Natalda, Brookvale
Nowra, Nowra Orana, Moss Vale Pinjarra, Gordon Pittwater, Avalon Queens Lynne, Roseville Riverview, Cooranbong Rothesay, Rose Bay

27.58

31.99 28.91

31.99 28.55

26.87 27.00
30.46 26.84

StJoachims, Lidcombe Terrey Hills, Terrey Hills Toukley Lakeside, Toukley

27.32 26.84

27.32 27.25 26.84

VVahroonga,VVahroonga Wallawa, Chatswood Whitehall, Lindfield

28.96

27.15

31.49 27.15

Willowood, Chatswood

27.29

Yamaia, Killara
Abalene, Elsternwick Alexandra, Caulfield Alice Berry, Emerald Balmoral Lodge, Grovedale Bambra House, Caulfield Blackburn, Blackburn Camberlea, Camberwell

Victoria
36.50 36.05 36.1 0
36.40 36.35

29.28
36.50 36.05

29.28 36.50

Canterbury, Canterbury Carisbrooke, Canterbury Chelsea Park, Chelsea

36.10

38.20

38.20 37.40

3 bed ward
fee $c
27.25 32.05 27.36 28.56 29.58
27.16
29.25 27.15 28.03 26.97

2bed ward
fee
$C
27.25 27.96 33.47
27.84 30.36 33.02 31.58 27.41
27.16 28.21 -29.43 31.59 29.75 29.05
30.43 26.97

1 bed ward
fee
$c
2~.25
28.96 36.61 -38.89 27.84 33.56 34.52 33.08 28.41
29.96 30.93
33.09 31.25 31.40
33.13 30.47

27.78

29.16

30.59

33.28 27.96 29.7.2 27.42 28.70 27.48 29.74 28.55 30.46
28.25 26.84 31.49 27.15 28.74 33.28
36.50 36.05

28.46 30.42
27.97 30.20 29.63 27.48 30.60 33.43
31.83 28.34
J~:~!i
29.25 28.84 -30.84 32.15
29.47
30.19
33.28
37.05

39.28 29.96 31.52 -33.12 30.27 30.70 32.63 29.63 31.17 34.86 29.35 33.13 29.84
29.41 -36.30 28.82 33.25 32.84 -36.84 33.49
29.47 -36.80 31.64 -41.44 39.28
38.50 38.05

36.05
38.75 37.40

36.05 50.90
39.30

36.55 52.00
-53.10 39.80
41.40

66 REPRESENTATlVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Name of nursing home and location
Claverly, Geelong Eastern Districts, Croydon Eildon, Ringwood Evangelia, Parkdale Garthowen, Surrey Hills GJenalwyn, Box Hill Gracedale, Camberwell Hanslope, Alphington Harcourt, Canterbury Innisfree, Kyneton Kalonga, North Balwyn Keswick, Mentone Lewisham, Windsor Maidstone, Maidslone Maroona, Glenhuntly Mt. Martha, Mt. Martha Myola, East Malvern Newcomb, Newcombe North Western District, TulIamarine Preslon and Districts, West Preston Pineville, Geelong West Queenscliff, Queenscliff Reubenville, Moonee Ponds Rangeview, Wangaratta Riverside, Pattersons Lakes Sl. Elizabeth East, Malvern St. rYeS, East Melbourne St. Jude's, Surrey Hills St. Michael's, Murrumbeena St. Peter's, Armadale St. Raphael's, Kew Siesta, Moorabbin Sorrento House, Sorrento Springvale, Springvale Studley Park, Kew Sunshine, Sunshine Thomastown, Thomastown Westbury, Balwyn Western, Footscray Western Suburbs, Yarraville Wyuna, Northcote
Marooma, Windsor Palm Beach, Palm Beach Palm Lodge, New Farm
St. James, Wavell Heights Seahaven, Sandgate
Abbingdon Kingswood Adaire, Kensington Park
Burnleigh Parkside Flinders House St Peters Francis Norwood Mitcham Kingswood North Adelaide, North Adelaide
Ravcnbrook Semaphore Ridge Park, Myrtle Bank
St David's, St.Peter's

All Multi-bed

bed

ward

fee

fee

$c

$c

36.35

37.20 38.15

37.00

36.65
37.7.5.
35.45 37.25 38.75 37.75 39.05

40.00 3R.IO
36.80

38.05 37.35 35.80
37.15 35.80 36.00 35.55

36.00

35.75

35.70 36.45 37.45 39.80
37.65 38.65
36.55
36.40 Queensland
26.50

5bed ward
fee $c
38.25 35.45 35.70

26.40 South Australia

33.95

32.95

33.25

34.45 -35.45
33.80

32.95 33.55 33.60

4bed ward
fee $c
38.40 40.00 38.10 35.95
36.00
38.25 39.30
35.70 36.30 37.50 37.40 26.50
26.00 26.40 37.55
33.20 32.95 33.60

3 bed ward
fee
$c
39.00 37.00

2 bed ward
fee
$c
39.00 37.00

1 bed ward
fee
$c
40.50 39.50

38.70 40.00
36.80

39.00 41.00
39.10
36.95 36.80

40.15 43.00
40.10
37.95 38,80

36.20 37.00

40.20 38.00

38.25 35.45

39.25
35.45 39.80

39.75 36.45

35.70

37.70

36.30 37.50

36.30
37.50 37.40

37.30 38.50

26.50
26.30 26.40

26.00 26.60
26.60 26.40

28.90
28.70 -29.76
27.30 27.40

37.55 38.80
33.20
33.55 33.60

37.55

41.05 40.20 -46.20

34.20 32.95 35.55 35.10

36.20 36.45 37.55
38.10 - 40.10

36.45 --37.45
33.80

39.45 -41.45
34.80

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 67

All Multi-bed

5 bed

4bed

3 bed

2 bed

bed

ward

ward

ward

ward

ward

Name of nursing home and location

fee

fee

fcc

fcc

fee

fee

------------------------------------------------

$c

$c

Sc

$c

$c

$c

Hathaway Dynnyrne Jessen Lodge Longford Mayfair New Town Springslade Legana

Tasmania 28.35 29.25

27.55

27.90

27.90 28.25

Sunnybrae Launceston Tara Dynnyrne

28.25 27.30

I bed ward
fee $c
28.90 29.25 -30.25

There are no nursing homes in: Western Australia, Australian Capital Territory, Northern Territory. where the cheapest ward accommodation exceeded the minimum patient contribution plus basic nursing home benefits at 14 November 1980.
Tonsillectomies
(Question No. 149)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a case heard in the Sydney Coroner's Court involving the death of a 5 year old boy reSUlting from complications after a tonsillectomy.
(2) Has his attention also been drawn to evidence given in the case suggesting that a large number of tonsillectomies are completely unnecessary.
(3) Will he liaise with State Ministers for Health to arrange funding for a program of doctor education to ensure that practitioners are kept informed of recent trends in throat infection diagnosis and tonsillectomies.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Yes.
(3) While the Commonwealth makes a substantial contribution to the costs of undergraduate and specialist medical education and training, I do not consider that it would be appropriate for the Commonwealth to fund an activity, such as that suggested by the honourable member, which is a form of continuing medical education. Because it is in the personal and professional interests of medical practitioners to keep abreast of developments in their form of practice, and continuing medical education is a major way of them doing so, I believe that medical practitioners should have the major responsibility for continuing medical education costs.
Pre-natal Classes
(Question No. 150)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Is it a fact that private health insurance funds do not provide, and are not required to provide under the provisions of the National Health Act, any cover for pre-natal classes other than those conducted by medical practitioners and physiotherapists.
(2) Does this exclude from health insurance cover prenatal classes conducted by such organisations as the Childbirth Education Association.
(3) Will he examine initiatives which might be taken to provide standardised accreditation to members of organisations like the Childbirth Education Association in order that health

insurance companies might be more disposed to extending cover to pre-natal classes conducted by those accredited organisations.
(4) Will he initiate discussions with Medibank with a view to examining the possibility of extending insurance cover to pre-natal classes conducted by the Childbirth Education Association.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Basic medical tables are restricted to benefits for professional services rendered by qualified medical practitioners, particularly optometrists and approved dentists in respect of certain dental services. However, benefits for services such as physiotherapy, pre-natal/post-natal therapy are able to be provided under health insurance organisations' supplementary tables of benefits. There is no legislation specifically governing the nature and extent of supplementary benefits a health insurance organisation may wish to provide. The organisations themselves are virtually free to determine these matters. The Government's role in relation to the provision of such benefits is essentially one of ensuring that contribution rates are sufficient to finance benefits payments.
The decision by the Government to allow health insurance organisations the latitude for innovation and flexibility in the provision of supplementary benefits has led to a very competitive situation. Organisations are conscious of this situation and strive to satisfy, as far as possible, the needs of their contributors.
It is therefore a matter for the private health insurance organisations to decide for themselves whether or n01 their table of supplementary benefits will provide benefits towards the cost of fees raised for pre-natal classes conducted by the Childbirth Education Association. The large majority of health insurance organisations do provide supplementary benefits for pre-(ante)-natal therapy, but such benefits are generally restricted to these services when rendered only by qualified /registered physiotherapists.
(2) Yes, to the extent that the practitioner concerned is not a qualified/registered physiotherapist.
(3) and (4) I would not stand in the way of any organisation that wishes to expand its Tange of supplementary benefits to cover pre-natal classes held by the Childbirth Education Association. However, as I have explained above, health insurance organisations are free to determine the nature and extent of supplementary benefits and I believe that this should continue to be the situation.
In the circumstances, I do not believe that it would be appropriate for me to attempt to infiuence the health insurance organisations in regard to the range of ancillary benefits allowed. I would suggest that organisations such as the Childbirth Education Association make direct representations to the Voluntary Health Insurance Association of Australia and Medibank Private.

68 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Diabetes
(Question No. 151)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:

(I) Is it a fact that diabetics are entitled to free use of insulin, but must meet the cost of administering the drug through syringes.

(2) Is it also a fact that syringes required for injecting insulin can cost up to $100 a year.

(3) Does diabetes affect a greater proportion of people over 50 than under.

(4) Can he say how many aged and invalid pensioners suffer from diabetes.

(5) Will he review the National Health Act to enable the free or subsidised use of syringes on prescription for use by diabetics.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) A number of insulin preparations are currently listed as

pharmaceutical benefits. These preparations are available to

the general public on the payment of the patient contribution,

currently $2.75 per prescription and free of charge to eligible

pensioners i.e. those in possession of a Pensioner Health

Benefits card or a Health Benefits card.

.

The provision of medical equipment such as insulin syringes and needles falls outside the scope of the National Health
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, which is limited to the provision of drugs and medicinal preparations. The cost of syringes is not subsidised under the National Health legislation.

(2) The expense incurred by insulin-dependent diabetics in meeting the cost of syringes and needles is determined by the type of syringe used by diabetics, the dosage levels and the frequency of doses required to meet the individual needs of patients with different requirements. The costs for individual patients can vary substantially.

(3) In general terms, there are more people over 50 years of age who suffer from diabetes than under 50 years of age. However, in the context of the use of syringes and needles the ma-
jority of insulin-dependent diabetics are under 50 years of age.

A substantial proportion of diabetics over 50 years of age suffer from 'mature onset diabetes' most of whom are not de-
pendent on insulin and whose diabetes is adequately controlled by diet or a combination of diet and oral
hypoglycaemic agents.

(4) There are no data available whereby the number of aged pensioners who are diabetics can be determined. However, I understand that the Department of Social Security is soon to publish statistics showing the number of invalid pensioners suffering from diabetes.

(5) Consideration has been given to ways and means by which Government assistance can be given to diabetics to help in meeting the cost of insulin syringes and needles.

The Government is sympathetic to the needs of diabetics and is mindful of the costs to the patient in the management of diabetes. However, in the current economic situation which has necessitated policies of restraint in public expenditure, it has not been possible for the Government to commit itself to additional programs, such as assistance with the cost of insulin syringes and needles. Nevertheless this matter will be kept under review.

Postal Voting

(Question No. 152)

Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:

(I) When a person who is bed-ridden applies for a postal
vote and spoils that ballot paper, can that person receive another ballot paper from the divisional electoral office; if not, should the postal voter make the proper corrections in the margin of the original ballot paper.

(2) Is he aware that those postal voters familiar with the
electoral office direction that spoiled ballot papers may be replaced by fresh ballot papers at the polling place, are reluc-
tant to make corrections on the spoiled ballot paper fearing their vote may be rendered invalid.

(3) What notification is given to postal voters that corrections must be made on the ballot paper.

(4) Are records available of postal voters who have spoiled their ballot paper subsequently returning the ballot paper to the divisional electoral office with a written request for a new ballot paper.

(5) Will he ensure that each postal voter receives, along with their ballot paper, a list of instructions outlining, for example, procedure to be followed in the event that the ballot
paper is spoilt.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) Voters who spoil a ballot paper may obtain another by

returning the spoilt ballot paper to a Polling Official or a Div-

isional Returning Officer, as the case requires. Voters also

have the option of correcting spoilt ballot papers for example,

by placing the numbers indicating their correct preferences

adjacent to the appropriate boxes.

.

(2) No. It has not previously been suggested that the reason why only an extremely low number of postal ballot papers are returned with corrections, is that suggested by the question.

(3) and (5) The printed Directions to Elector and Authorized Witness which are issued to all postal voters do not, at present, include any reference to the options available to postal voters who spoil their ballot papers. I have asked the Chief Australian Electoral Officer to revise the Directions to include this information.

(4) No. But while no statistics are maintained in this regard the Chief Australian Electoral Officer has advised that only very few requests are received from postal voters for replacement of spoilt ballot papers.

Stationery Punch
(Question No. 153)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Is it a fact that the Government stores which supply Commonwealth Government Department offices as well as the offices of Members and Senators, contain a two-hole punch known as General No. 330 punch.
(2) Is this punch made in Shanghai in the People's Republic of China.
(3) If so, what is the reason for stocking this foreign-made punch.
(4) Is there a satisfactory Australian-made replacement.

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 69

Mr NewmanThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) The Common Use Stores stock a punch described as serial 696/24-punch paper two-hole, 6mm dia. adjustable to either 70mm or 80mm centres.
(2) Since September 1980 the Common Use Store in Brisbane has held a stock of punches against this serial- --General No. 330 made in the People's Republic of China.
(3) The punch contracted for issue under the Common use system is a Leitz model 5087 manufactured in West Germany. However, the Brisbane common use store, being unaware of the availability of this item under period contract, purchased 180 punches manufactured in the People's Republic of China at $2.00 each. To date 29 of these punches have been issued.
(4) The market for this type of punch was tested in J979 under the public tender system and no Australian-made punch was offered.

Commonwealth Property Owned or Leased
(Question No. 155)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) What property and land is (a) owned and (b) leased by the Commonwealth Government in the subdivisions of the Electoral Division of Lilley, of (i) Clayfield, (ii) Wooloowin, (iii) Nundah, (iv) Hendra, (v) Banyo, (vi) Boondall, (vii) Sandgate and (viii) Sandgate North.
(2) In each of the cases referred to in part (i) to what purpose is the land or property presently put and by whom.
(3) Where thc Commonwealth is leasing property or land, from whom is it being leased.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3).

ELECTORAL DIVISION OF LILLEY

Subdivision and Addresses

Department/

Use

Authority

Lessor

(i) Clayfield (a) Owned Albion-6 Anstey Street
Eagle Farm-Schneider Road
Eagle Farm-35 Violet Street Eagle Farm-Violet and Want Streets AscotLancaster Road Clayfield-Sandgate and Railway Parade Hamilton-Racecourse Road Pinkenba-Eagle Farm Road and Radio
Street (b) Leased Eagle Farm26 Cu rtin Avenue
Eagle Farm-2 Curtin Avenue
(ii) Wooloowin (a) Owned Wooloowin-50-52 Hunter Street
Lutwyche-Lutwyche Road and Chalk Street Kedron-Gympie Road and Sadlier Street WooloowinWellington and Torrance
Streets (b) Leased Kedron-Park Terrace
Lutwyche Shopping Village
(iii) Nundah (a) Owned Northgate-351 Melton Road
I\undah-Station and Nundah Streets
Eagle Junction-Junction Road Nundah-Cameron Street and I\undah Road Wavell Heights-Austin Street Nundah-Sandgate and Buckland Roads (b) Leased Nundah1176 Sandgate Road Toombul Shoppingtown

Electoral Office
Works Depot
StarT Residence Stores Depot Telephone Exchange Post Office PostOmce Vacant Land
Rehabilitation Centre
Workshop and Storage
Migrant Plats
Post Offiee Post Office Telephone Exchange
Training Depot
Office Accommodation
Revenue Leased to Jefrrcss Bros Ltd
District Employment Office
Line Depot Telephone Exchange Line Depot Post Office
Office Accomodation Post Ollicc

Administrative Services (Electoral)
Housing and Construction
Transport Transport Telecom Commission Postal Commission Postal Commission Postal Commission
Social Security
Bureau of Meteorology
Administrative Services
Postal Commission Postal Commission Telecom Commission
Defence-Air
Telecom Commission
Administrative Services
Employment and Youth Affairs
Telecom Commission Telecom Commission Telecom Commission Postal Commission
Social Security Postal Commission

Owen Booker and Co. Pty Ltd
Owen Booker and Co. Pty Ltd
State of Queensland Department of Education
Kaloo Pty Ltd
Cornish Investments Westfield Queensland
Pty Ltd

70 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Subdivision and Addresses
Nundah-Buckland Road (iv) Hendra (a) Owned Doomben-90 Lamington Avenue Doomben-28 Mordant Street Doomben-30 Mordant Street Doomben-32 Mordant Street Doomben-34 Mordant Street Doomben-36 Mordant Street Doomben-38 Mordant Street Doomben-15 Silva Street Eagle Farm-Lamington Avenue Hendra25 Woodville Street Meeandah-Sugarmill Road Pinkenba-Eagle Farm Road and Sugannill
Road Hendra-Nudgee Road and Hedley Avenue (b) Leased Nil (v) Banyo (a) Owned Banyo-Tufnell and Earnshaw Roads Banyo-Apperley Street and St Vincents
Road Northgate-Toombul Road
Virginia-St Vincents and BlinzingerRoads Virginia-St Vincents Road (b) Leased Banyo-163 Elliott Road
(vi) Boondall (a) Owned Boondall-Moongalba Street Zillmere-Muller and Ewing Streets Zillmere-Handford Road (b) Leased Nil (vii) Sandgate (a) Owned Sandgate-Bowser Parade Deagon-FentonjScott and Barclay Street Sandgate-Bowser Parade
(b) Leased Sandgate-70-72 Louden Street
Shorncliffe-Allpass Parade

Use Postal Depot
Staff Residence Staff Residence Staff Residence Staff Residence Staff Residence Staff Residence Staff Residence Staff Residence Brisbane Airport Staff Residence Stores Depot Telephone Exchange Stores
Vehicle S'tores Depot Telephone Exchange Buildings Branch
Stores Stores Complex Stores Complex Repair Workshop
Staff Residence Telephone Exchange Post Office
Drill Hall Line Depot Post Office and
Telephone Exchange Office Accommodation Boatshed

(viii) Sandgate North (a) Owned and (b) Leased Nil

Departmentj Authority Postal Commission
Transport Transport Transport Transport Transport Transport Transport Transport Transport Defence Army Defence Army Telecom Commission Wool Corporation
Defence Army Telecom Commission Telecom Commission Telecom Commission WoolCorporation Telecom Commission
Defence Army Telecom Commission Postal Commission
Defence Army Telecom Commission Postal Commission
Social Security Defence Navy

Lessor State of Qucen~land
R. J. and J. M. Anderson
M. C. Shellshear and K. G. Cantrell
Thc Navy League of Australia Queensland Division

Rosemount Repatriation Hospital
(Question No, 158)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Is the Minister able to say how many signatures are contained on petitions which call for a reversal of the decision to close Rosemount Repatriation Hospital, Windsor, Queensland, and which were presented to the 31st Parliament.

(2) Is the Minister also able to indicate from which other sources the Minister's predecessor received requests to review the decision to close Rosemount Repatriation Hospital.
(3) Will the Minister consider a review of the decision and allow the public and interested groups to provide to him submissions on the future of the hospital.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veteran's Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) I am unable to provide the informalion sought by the honourable member in respect of petitions presented to the

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 71

House of Representatives. The copies of petitions provided by the Clerk. of the House of Representatives to Ministers do not contain signatures. I understand that it is not the practice of the House to ascertain the number of signatures on petitions. However, tbe original petitions would be available for perusal in the House Table Office.
No petitions dealing with this matter were presented to the Senate during the 31 st Parliament.
(2) Representations seeking a review or a reversal of the decision to close Rosemount Hospital have been received from various sources. Organisations which have had representations made on their behalf are the Hospital Employees Federation of Australia, the Kedron/Wavell, Sunnybank., Beachmere and Sandgate Sub-branches of the Returned Services League of Australia, the War Widows Guild, the Union of Australian Women and the Australian Tramway and Motor Omnibus Employees Association (Queensland). Members of Parliament and various members of the public have also made representations.
(3) [t is not proposed to review the decision to close the Rosemount Repatriation Hospital, Windsor. The decision was taken only after careful consideration of the findings of an extensive review of the role, function, level of operation and continuing need for the hospital and following discussions with the local Federal member ofpariiamentand the Hospital Employees Federation of Australia.
Australian Capital Territory: Alteration of Land Use
(Question No. 170)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Is it a fact that applications for alteration of land use in the Australian Capital Territory must be lodged with the Australian Capital Territory Supreme Court without requirement for prior public notification of intent to seek a change.
(2) Did his Department notify the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly that lodgment of an application with the Court made the matter sub judice and thus not open to debate or public inquiry.
(3) If so, will he examine the procedure to ensure that proper opportunity exists for public debate on matters of changed land use and other planning changes.
Mr HodgmanThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am advised that the position is that Section IlA of the City Area Leases Ordinance permits a Canberra lessee to make application to the Supreme Court for a variation of the land use permitted under his lease without prior consultation.
The legislation goes on to provide that the Minister for the Capital Territory may lodge a certificate with the Supreme Court in the event that the variation sought is repugnant to the principles for the time being governing the construction and development of Canberra. The Cou rt cannot grant a variation if such a certificate is lodged.
(2) An officer of the Department of the Capital Territory advised the Clerk to one of the House of Assembly Standing Committees that as a certain matter was hefore the Australian Capital Territory Supreme Court the matter would probably be regarded as sub judice and that before the Standing Committee proceeded with the advertised public inquiry into the matter, it would be prudent for formal legal advice on the question of sub judice to be obtained.
(3) The procedure was recently examined by the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory as part of its

Inquiry into the Adequacy and Public Acceptability of Planning Procedures and Processes in the Australian Capital Territory.
The Government accepted a recommendation made by the Committee that applications of this nature should in future be dealt with by the Department of the Capital Territory instead of the Supreme Court.
The Department will not be able to grant a variation that is in conflict with the planning principles currently applying. The National Capital Development Commission has been and will continue to release major planning issues for public comment prior to formulating a policy. This arrangement is considered to enable adequate public debate on the principles applying to land use issues.
Furthermore when individual applications are lodged with the Department it is proposed that the proposal be publicly advertised so that any person or body opposed to the proposal can lodge an objection.
All objections lodged with the Department will be taken into consideration and the applicant or any third party dissatisfied with the Department's decision will then have a right of appeal to an appropriate Tribunal.
Legislation to bring the new arrangement into force will be introduced as soon as possible.
Location of Australian Gm-ernment Employees
(Question No. 175)
Mr Uren asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
(I) How many Australian Government employees were located in (a) Canberra, (b) each capital city and (c) provinicial centres during each of the years 1977-78 to \979-80.
(2) What proportion of (a) total employment and (b) office-based employment in each capital city was located in the central business district in each year referred to in part (1 ).
Mr VinerThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The statistics sought are not readily available in the required categories. The only relevant and comparable figures which are available have been obtained by Department of Administrative Services from Joint Office User Surveys and are set out below.

Location
New South WalesSydney Provincial
Total
VictoriaMelbourne Provincial
Total
QueenslandBrisbane Provincial
Total

1978-79*

1979-80t

19247 1928
21 175

21 318 2175
23493

18020 838
[8858

[6664 1095
17759

5741 1214
6955

5808 1438
7246

72 REPRESEl\TATJYES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Location
South AustraliaAdelaide Provincial
Total

1978-79*
3726 177
3903

1979-:'\Ot
7455 253
7708

Western AustraliaPerth Provincial
Total

4355 220
4575

4831 253
50R4

TasmaniaHobart Provincial
Total

1 617 330
1947

1416 347
I 763

Northern Territory-

Darwin

Not available

767

Provincial

Not available

114

Total

8Rl

Australian Capital Territory

25026

27835

* Figures exclude outdoor staff figures and reflect officebased Public Service Act staff only.
t As for *. Figures for Sydney, however, include Concord
Repatriation staff and Melbourne figures exclude Defence areas whether Public Service Act staff or not.

(2) To effectively answer this part of the question would require a survey of all Commonwealth buildings whether owned or leased, in the CBD. Given the magnitude of the task I am reluctant to authorise the use of the resources that would be necessary to draw together the information which the bonourable member has requested. The Department of Administrative Services, however, is undertaking a survey which may provide some statistics relevant to the question. I will reply further when the relevant information has been received and compiled.
Aluminium Industry Exports
(Question No. 176)
Mr Oren asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
What was the (a) volume and (b) value of exports of (i) bauxite, (ii) alumina and (iii) aluminium, expressed (A) in terms of total exports and (B) according to country of destination in each year since 1970.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In the table below the Australian Statistician has provided information on exports of aluminium and alloys (unworked), by country of consignment, for the years 1969-70 to 1979-80, and total exports of alumina for the years 1970-71 to 1979-80. Alumina was not separately identified in the commodity classification used to record statistics of Australian exports for the year 1969-70.
Exports of aluminium are not separately recorded. Information on exports of bauxite, and details of exports of alumina by country of consignment, cannot be provided as the figures are confidential.

EXPORTS OF ALUMINIUM AND ALLOYS, UNWORKED, AND ALUMINA 1969-70 TO 1974-75

Aluminium and alloys unworked

1969-70 -- --

1970-71

1971-72

1972-73

1973-74

1974-75

SA'OOO

$;\'000

$1\'000 '000 kg $A'OOO

$A'OOO

SNOOO

'OOOlb f.o.b. 'OOOlb f.o.b. 'OOOlb LO.b.

(a) f.o.b. '000 kg f.o.b. '000 kg Lo.b.

Argentina Burma Brazil China-
excl. Taiwan Province
Taiwan Province only
German Democratic Republic
Greece Hong Kong Indonesia Iran Israel Japan Korea, Republic of Malaysia Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Philippines Singapore South Africa Sweden
Tanzania Thailand

950
1,095
1,121 8,741
207 329 879 70,837
127 1,152 6,433
602 32
3,015 215
2,163 113
1,294 366

355 213
1,436

231 2,206

773

12,512 256 1,950 12,057
73 1,526 73 205 1,238 13,474111,765

35 261 1,581 129
10 689
55 508 28 303 95

91
8,689 270 27
3,588 159
2,384 22
7,147 903

73
278
411
159
2,31 I
2,821 557
278 21,545
28
2,088 58 9
854 39
561 4
1,682 209

58,117
1,443
14,866
175
470 90,429
599 3,416 13,390
86 2,741
31 484
8,297 2,856

9,054
281
3,177 62
g7 16,253
130 527 3,230
32 577
12 79
1,865 595

6,006
24
4,595
3,703 446
533 46,999
390 2,524 1,907
30 2.544
108
3,082 1,956

1,919
8
1,503
1,646 247
203 17,225
161 R39 993
21 972 42
1,332 873

44
328
2,510 1,787
16 31,948
39 149
8 851
54 4,625
5
1,706 2,323

22
184
1,056 872
7 13,584
22 103
I 512
37 1,997
2
739 1,113

2,350 576
52,317
189 202 1,212
10 10 3,643 4 15 10
2,866

1,433 445
29,971
156 118 1,007
8 10 2,275 3 14 8
1,649

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATTVES 73

1969-70

1970-71

1971-72

1972-73

1973-74

1974-75

Aluminium and alloys

$A'OOO

$A'OOO

$A'OOO '000 kg $A'OOO

$A'OOO

$A'OOO

unworked

'OOOlb Lo.b. 'OOOlb f.o.b. 'OOOlb f.o.b. (a) f.o.b. '000 kg f.o.b. '000 kg f.o.b.

United Kingdom USA Other

10,992 2,556 8,000 1,802 331

80

16

4

695 236 599 156 80

27

15

11

3

3 543 314

25

10 284

90 14,361 2,491 6,599 2,624

97

95 103 122

Total

. 111,381 22,972 176,030 36,012212,171 38,557 81,462 30,621 46,492 20.347 64,065 37,536

Alumina

'000

'000

'000

'000

'000

tons

tons

tonnes

tonnes

tonnes

No country of consignment details available

Total

nsr nsr 1,778 95,125 2,504 132,042 2,952 154,868 3,831 194,472 4,503 297,877

(a) From 1972-73 the unit of quantity has been kilograms (kg). f.o.b. -free on board. nsr-not separately recorded. Noted: Figures have been rounded and discrepancies may occur between sums of the component items and totals.
EXPORTS OF ALUMINIUM AND ALLOYS, UNWORKED, AND ALUMINA, 1975-76 TO 1979-80

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

Aluminium alloys unworked

$A'OOO

$A'OOO

$A'OOO

$A'OOO $A'OOO

'000 kg f.o.b. '000 kg f.o.b. '000 kg f.o.b. '000 kg Lo.b. '000 kg Lo.b.

Argentina Burma Brazil China-
excl. Taiwan Province Taiwan Province only German Democratic Republic Greece Hong Kong Indonesia Iran Israel Japan Korea, Republic of Malaysia Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Philippines Singapore South Africa Sweden Tanzania Thailand United Kingdom

5,006 2,950 3.002 2,011 7,024 6,355 11,868 12,828 9,981 13,586

1,428

877 3,273 2,162

903

882

332

363

376

528

1,798 1,265 554 470 807 828 1,653 2,127 2,472 3,686

1,125

885

889

848 1,029 1,085 2,347 2,646 1,130 1,856

729 50330
124

304 32,013
123

10 56,029
212

9 44,639
224

56.503 159

50,191 178

50,607 1,938
224

48,504 2,010
313

26,972 84
1,047

28,961 112
1,559

372

236

200

218

112

146

213

259

377

632

37 4,468
226

34 2,907
167

35 7,172
300

36 5,940
248

26 6,493
541 51

42 6,547
544 37

9 7,873
772 26

15 8,514
885 22

20 8,635 1,624
9

37 11,792
2,273 18

482 2,765

310 1,819

3,754 41

3,195 5

2,085

2,158

2,967 8

3,447 2,105 8

3,036

74 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Aluminium alloys unworked
United States of America Other
Total

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

$A'OOO

$A'OOO

$A'OOO

$A'OOO $A'OOO

'000 kg Lo.b. '000 kg Lo.b. '000 kg f.o.b. '000 kg f.o.b. '000 kg

f.o.b.

160

89

29

38

26

36

24

31

32

40

161

239

274

383

217

374

69,074 44,009 75,533 60,004 75,921 69,270 81,111 82,323 55,048 68,448
---

Alumina

'000 tonnes

'000 tonncs

'000 tonnes

'000 tonnes

'000 tonnes

No country of consignment details available

Total

5,265 436,064 5,877 566,976 6,320 666,401 6,408 719,787 7,236 970,865

(a) From 1972-73 the unit of quantity has been kilograms (kg). Lo.b.-free on board.
nsr-not separately recorded. Noted: Figures have been rounded and discrepancies may occur between sums orthe component items and totals.

Australian Government Office Space
(Question No, 178)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
(1) How many square metres of office space were (a) leased and (b) owned and occupied by the Australian Government during each of the years 1977-78 to 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of office space was located in (a) Canherra, Australian Capital Territory, (b) Sydney, New South Wales, (c) Melbourne, Victoria, (d) Brisbane, Queensland, (e) Adelaide, South Australia, (f) Perth, Western Australia, (g) Hobart, Tasmania, and (h) provincial centres during the years referred to in part (l).
(3) What proportion of (a) total, (b) leased and (c) owned and occupied space in each state capital city was located in the central business district during those years.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1 ) Area in square metres:
(3) Percentage of total space in (1) above:

1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

Leased Owned

842800 833 100

888400 831 000

998239 854541

Note: Figures arc for office space used by civil departments and the Departments of Defence. Statutory Authorities are not induded.
(2) Percentage of total space in (1) above:

Location
Canberra Sydney Melhourne Brishane Adelaide Perth Hobart Provincial

1977-78
26.8 20.0 27.3 6.1 6.0 4.3 1.7 5.5

1978-79
28.8 19.5 27.1 6.1 4.9 4.3 1.7 5.9

1979-80
30.2 19.1 22.8 6.8 6.7 4.1 1.4 7.4

Central Business District

1977-78 Total

leased

owned

[978-79 Total

leased

owned

1979-80 Total

leased

owned

Canberra Sydney
Melbourne Brisbane Adelaide
Perth Hobart Darwin

26.8

15.2

38.4

28.8

15.0

43.6

30.2

19.0

43.2

13.5 23.1

19.2 23.8

7.8 22.4

12.8 22.0

17.5 22.0

n7o.8

12.0 18.2

16.5 18.8

7.1 17.6

5.7

5.8

5.6

5.6

5.6

5.5

5.6

5.1

6.2

3.9

5.9

2.6

4.0

6.0

1.8

4.3

6.4

1.8

3.8

4.9

2.6

3.7

4.6

2.6

3.4

4.0

2.6

1.7

l.l

2.4

1.7

l.l

2.3

1.3

0.1

2.0

2.4

3.0

1.8

1.7

3.1

0.2

1.5

2.5

0.3

Prisoners-of-war Evacuated through Nagasaki
(Question No, 180)
Mr Uren asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, 01127 November 1980:

Can the Minister provide any estimate of the numher of Australian prisoners of war who were evacuated from Japan
through radiation contaminated areas of Nagasaki at the end of the Second World War.

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 75

Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Records as to the number of Australian prisoners of war who were evacuated from Japan through Nagasaki at the end of the Second World War are not kept by the Department of Veterans' Affairs. It is understood that 24 Australian prisoners of war were in the area of possible radiation at the time of the atomic bomb explosion at Nagasaki.
I understand that one veterans' association claims that 1048 Australian prisoners of war were evacuated through Nagasaki between 12-24 September 1945.

Radiation Exposure in Japan
(Question No. 181)
Mr Uren asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
Has an ex-serviceman, or the family of any ex-serviceman, sought compensation for radiation-related illness or death attributable to radiation exposure at Nagasaki or Hiroshima, Japan; if so, how many have sought compensation and what determination has been made in each case.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
It is not possible without exhaustive examination of the records held by my Department to determine whether claims for compensation have been received specifically for radiation-related illness or death attributable to radiation exposure at Nagasaki or Hiroshima.
As reasons for decisions by determining authorities were not given until 1975, it is not possible to determine in the majority of cases whether a condition accepted as service-related, actually resulted from service in the Nagasaki or Hiroshima areas as opposed to another area of service.
Following recent media reports, my Department has received seven claims in respect of radiation. These have not yet been determined.

Taxation Office
(Question No. 189)
Mr Eric Robinson asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
(1) What has been the total average employment of the Australian Taxation Office for the last 10 years.
(2) When was computer processing of assessments introduced.
Mr HowardThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Total average employment for the last 10 years, as stated in the Estimates of Receipts and Summary of Estimated Expenditure each year, is as set out hereunder. Seasonal employees, i.e., temporary staff employed during peak processing periods, are included.

Year ended 30 June
1971 1972

Average employment
10,687 10,844

Seasonal staff
215 204

Year ended 30 June
1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

Average employment
11,149 11,506 11,811 12,371 12,327 11,983 12,106 12,423

Seasonal staff
197 239 242 247 270 181 173 180

(2) In respect of returns for the year ended 30 June 1966.
Health: Bulk Billing Arrangements
(Questiou No. 198)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
What were the (a) number of medical services and (b) amount of Commonwealth benefits paid for (i) eligible pensioners and (ii) disadvantaged persons under direct (bulk) billing arrangements for each of the last twelve months for which figures are available.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In the twelve month period from January 1980 to December 1980 my Department paid Commonwealth medical benefits for the following services bulk billed on behalf of eligible pensioners and disadvantaged persons (N .B. figures relate to claims paid during this period).
(a)~

January 1980 February 1980 March 1980 April 1980 May 1980 June 1980 July 1980 August 1980 September 1980 October 1980 November 1980 December 1980
Total

Number of services

Pensioners Disadvantaged

1,618,981 1,600,398 1,585,608 1,496,700 1,652,222 1,608,301 2,087,669 1,741,065 1,827,566 1,772,972 1,656,032 1,627,174

333,192 349,118 364,162 356,437 395,634 407,149 539,052 463,802 502,360 483,637 462,400 439,513

20,274,688

5,096,456

(b)~

January 1980 February 1980 March 1980 April 1980 May 1980 June 1980

Commonwealth benefits paid

Pensioners Disadvantaged

$
17,474,608 17,686,599 17,594,975 16,563,631 18,323,761 17,890,282

$
3,304,176 3,546,422 3,703,337 3,610,077 4,024,450 4,126,439

76 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

July 1980 August 1980 September 1980 October 1980 November 1980 December 1980
Total

Commonwealth benefits paid

Pensioners Disadvantaged

23,160,016 19,216,916 20,273,434
19,610,504 18,985,069 19,760,688

5,429,964 4,614,865 5,035,701 4,838,219
4,781,557 4,772,782

226,540,483

51,787,989

What were the (a) number of medical services and (b) amount of Commonwealth benefits paid for disadvantaged persons in the following categories as classified in schedule 1 to the Health Insurance Act: (i) general practitioner consultations, (ii) pathology, (iii) specialist consultations and (iv) operations for each of the last 12 months for which figures are available.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Health: Disadvantaged Persons
(Question No. 199)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:

In the twelve-month period from January 1980 to December 1980 my Department paid Commonwealth medi-
cal benefits for the following services bulk billed on behalf of disadvantaged persons. (N.B. figures relate to claims paid during this period.)

NUMBER OF SERVICES FOR DISADVANTAGED PERSONS

General practitioner
consultations

Specialist Pathology consultations Operations

January 1980
February 1980 March 1980 April 1980 May 1980 June 1980
July 1980 August 1980 September 1980
October 1980 November 1980 December 1980

228,212 231,268 242,464
231,236 261,018 262,765 351,313
313,869 334,686 315,951
295,673 280,190

64,277
71,462 72,198 78,986 81,517 89,701
116,366 88,457 101,167 102,399
102,387 96,110

14,586
17,416 19,124
16,765 19,625 20,224
27,245 23,458 24,788 24,437
24,621 23,828

6,672
7,478 7,591 6,802
7,530 7,566 9,840 7,927
9,234 8,984 8,930 8,718

Total

3,348,645 1,065,027

256,117

97,272

COMMONWEALTH BENEFITS PAID FOR DISADVANTAGED PERSONS $

General practitioner consultations

Specialist Pathology consultations Operations

January 1980 February 1980
March 1980 April 1980 May 1980
June 1980 July 1980 August 1980 September 1980
October 1980 November 1980
December 1980

1,955,580 1,951,922 2,021,053 1,951,515 2,198,280
2,207,211 2,931,603 2,591,719
2,776,858 2,608,998 2,529,010
2,501,156

523,623 588,626 604,269
668,508 690,973 759,197
994,285 741,208 862,506
860,533 883,539
864,761

329,426 405,904 442,176 386,027
444,519 455,150
609,439 518,041
549,678 528,185 545,388 554,482

189,602 216,090 216,506
200,673 221,455 212,128 279,508 232,120
276,216 265,272 261,639
270,034

Total

28,224,905 9,042,028 5,768,415 2,841,243

Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education
(Question No. 201)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:

What (a) has been the maximum and (b) is the current enrolment at each university and college of advanced education funded by the Australian Government.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is contained in the following

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 77

tables: Table A shows highest enrolment and current enrolment of universities and table B shows highest enrolment and current enrolment of colleges of advanced education.
Table A
CURRENT STUDENT ENROLMENT AND HIGHEST NUMBER OF STUDENTS ENROLLED-UNIVERSITIES

Institution

Highest Students number of* enrolled students
in 1980 enrolled

Sydney . New South Wales
New England Newcastle . Macquarie Wollongong Melbourne Monash La Trobe Deakin . Queensland James Cook Griffith Adelaide Flinders Western Australia Murdoch Tasmania Australian National

17,959 18,359 8,461 4,302
10,516 2,849 16,214 14,096 8,770 4,799 18,358 1,893 1,998 8,827 3,850 9,791 2,485 3,517 6,112

* Where more students enrolled than in 1980.

18,466 4,621
8,886 18,517 1,896 9,345 4,045 9,865 3,525

TableR
CURRENT STUDENT ENROLMENT AND HIGHEST NUMBER OF STUDENTS
ENROLLED-COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION

Institution

Highest Students number of* enrolled students
in 1980 enrolled

Alexander Mackie Armidale Catholic Teachers College
Cumberland Goulburn Hawkesbury
Kuring-gai Mitchell
Nepean Newcastle New South Wales Conservatorium
of Music . . . . . . . Northern Rivers . . . . . . Nursery School Teachers College
Orange Agricultural College Polding College Riverina Sydney College of Arts Sydney Kindergarten Teachers
College Sydney Teachers College
Guild Teachers College Milperra . . . . .

1,386 1,458
988 1,381 1,047 1,000 3,035 3,579 1,589 2,603
465 1,009
255 266 599 3,670 624
384 2,731
360 790

1,473 1,503
3,790 2,826
496
640
3,057

Institution

Students enrolled
in 1980

Highest
numher of* students
enrolled

New South Wales Institute of Technology
Wollongong
Ballarat Bendigo Caulfield Footscray Gippsland Lincoln Prahran Preston Royal Melbourne Institute of
Technology Swinburne Victorian College of Arts Victorian College of Pharmacy Warrnambool SCV-
Burwood Coburg Frankston Hawthorn Institute of Catholic Education IECD Melbourne Rusden Toorak
Brisbane Kindergarten Darling Downs Capricornia Kelvin Grove MtGravatl North Brisbane College of Ad-
vanced Education Queensland Agricultural College Queensland Conservatorium of
Music Queensland Institute of Tech-
nology Townsville College of Advanced
Education . . . . . . . Adelaide College of Arts and Ed-
ucation Hartley Roseworthy Salisbury South Australian Institute of
Technology
Sturt Churchlands Claremont Mt Lawley Nedlands Western Australian Institute of
Technology Tasmania Canberra College of Advanced
Education

7,850 1,040 1,776 1,726 4,998 2,651 2,512 1,737 2,133 2,321
11,192 5,119
505 392 1,393
1,967 1,425 1,014 1,543 1,483
982 4,373 2,340 1,700
487 4.131 2,315 2,660 2,158
1,701 742
280
7,253
1,033
5,318 2,362
372 1,516
5,612 1,796 2,795 1,308 2,159 2,169
11,497 2,926
5,364

1,200 2,061
1,791
1,443 1,263 1553
1,832 555
2,351

* Where more students enrolled than in 1980.

78 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Loy Yang Power Station Site Workers: Unemployment Benefit
(Question No. 2(4)
Mr Cunningham asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
Is he able to say whether the Victorian Government's reported agreement to pay hardship payments to the 600 workers whose employment was terminated at the Loy Yang power station site in April 1980, will affect those men who have been successful in their appeals to the Victorian Social Security Appeals Tribunal regarding their rights to receive unemployment benefits.
Mr HuntThe Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The terms of the agreement under which the Victorian Government has undertaken to make payments to certain persons whose employment was terminated at the Loy Yang power station site in April 1980 have been examined in the form in which they were released by the Premier of Victoria on Friday, 28 November 1980.
Upon the basis of that examination, it would appear that any payments of unemployment benefit which have been or may be made to those persons, whether as a result of an appeal to the Social Security Appeals Tribunal or otherwise, would not be affected by that agreement. Whether or not the amount of any payment to be made under that agreement to any particular person would be affected by any payment of unemployment benefit made to that person by the Department of Social Security is a matter upon which I am unable to comment.

Women's Refuges

(Question No. 2(8)

Dr Blewett asked thc Minister for Health, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:

(1) What has been the allocation of funds for women's refuges by (a) Stat!) and (b) centre.

(2) How do the grants for each centre compare with those of the last financial year.

(3) Has any allocation been made in funding for assistance to (a) child care programs, (b) new refuges, (c) extensions to existing services or (d) women's refuges referral services.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) and (2) Under the Community Health Program, the Commonwealth has provided $3.82m this financial year in block grants to the States for women's refuges. The 1980-81 block grants to the respective States are as follows:

New South Wales Victoria . . .
Queensland South Australia Western Australia
Tasmania

$ 1,170,000
890,000 500,000 510,000
470,000 280,000

Total

3,820,000

Responsibility for making financial allocations from the
block grants to individual refuges rests with the relevant State authority. Advice has been received from the States that the 1980-81 allocations of Commonwealth funds so far made to individual refuges, and the comparable expenditure figures for 1979-80, are as follows:

COMMONWEALTH FUNDS ($)

1980-81 allocation

1979-80 expenditure

New South Wales
Albury Women's Refuge Armidale Women's Shelter 'Betsy' Women's Refuge-Bankstown 'Bonnie' Women's Refuge-Cabramatta 'Bringa' Women's Refuge-Dee Why 'Butler Lodge' Women's Refuge-Glebe 'Catherine Haven' Women's Emergency Shelter-Broken Hill 'Cawarra' Women's Refuge--Penrith Central Coast Women's Crisis Centre-Norahville 'Community Cottage'-B1acktown 'Corner House' Emergency Accommodation Centre - -Bathurst 'Delvena'Women's Refuge -Chatswood 'Elsie' Women's Refuge-Glebe 'Essie' Women's Refuge- -Rooty l/ill Grafton Women's Refuge 'Jenny's Place' Women's Refuge Islington 'Juno' Women's Refuge-Warilla 'Kulkuna Cottage' Women's Refuge-Griffith 'Louisa' Women's Refuge-Queanbcyan 'Marianvilla' Women's Refuge-Arnc1ifTc Marrickville Women's Refuge Salvation Army Women's Refuge-Mayfield Richmond Women's Emergency Centre-Lismore Tamworth Women's Refuge . . . . . Wagga Wagga Women's Refuge 'Warrina' Women's Refuge-Coffs Harbour

30,632
33,338 37,825 55,338
71,854 28,632 12,963
46,725 44,745
39,388 39,409 40,100 89,554 66,054 31,473 40,446 25,663 21,713 46,725 34,216 79,808
18,010 32,884 21,687
17,863 29,626

28,230 33,967 40,367
55,338
71,854 28,632 12,963
5,00b 44,096
36,775 39,409 41,000
89,554 79,311 31,473 40,108 15,663 21,713 29,900 34,216 82,058 18,949 42,800 20,514
16,438
29,626

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 79

1980-81 allocation

1979-80 expenditure

Woy Woy Women's Refuge Women's Emergency Refuge-La Perouse
Women's Stress Centre-- Ashfield

35,888 24,116 42,409

35,888 23,453 40,696

Sub-total -New South Wales (i)

1,139,084

1,089,991

(i) An amount of $30,916 remains unallocated.
Aboriginal Women's Refuge Blackburn Baptist Church Women's Refuge 'CO-AS-IT' Women's Refuge Footscray Women's Refuge . . . . . 'Doneare' Community Care Women's Refuge Latrobe Valley Women's Refuge Maroondah HalfWay House 'Mary Anderson' Emergency Lodge Mordialloc HalfWay House Mountain Women's Refuge North West Region Women's Refuge Peninsula Women's Refuge Southern HalfWay House Women's Refuge Warrnambool Women's Refuge Western Region Women's Refuge Women's Liberation HalfWay House

Victoria

43,797 55,206 47,496 56,024 59,266 54,491 52,195 41,229 51,360 55,752 53,621 56,670 49,804 55,877 59,523 74,529

49,155 51,165 45,164
53,040 42,727 52,164 42,529 38,797 52,108 50,972 50,461 54,614 47,358 47,858 54,494 68,356

Sub-totalVictoria(ii)

866,840

800,962

(ii) In addition, $9,100 has been allocated in 1980-81 towards the costs of central administration of the program. An amount of $14,060 remains unallocated.

Queensland

Bowen Women's Refuge Brisbane Women's 'Shelta'-West End Bundaberg District Women's Crisis Centre Garema Women's Refuge-Brisbane Ipswich Women's' Shelter
Kalparrin Women's Refuge-New Farm Koolkuna Women's Refuge Redcliffe Legion of Mary Women's Refuge-lndooroopiUy
Louisa Lodge -Gladstone . . . . . . . . Lutheran Church Women's RefugeWoolloongabba Madonna House Women's Refuge- -Bulimba Majella House Women's Refuge-Miami Beach Ringsfield Women's Refuge-Nanango Rockhampton Women's Refuge . . . . . Salvation Army Women's Refuge-Mackay Salvation Army Women's Refuge Mount Isa Save the Children Fund Women's Refuge-Redeliffe Sunnybank Family Care and Support Coorparoo Townsville Women's Shelter Women's Shelter Cairns

11,143 47,333 39,048 26,571 24,429 22,286 11,271 24,000 17,143 29,048 18,429
20>571 12,000 12,857 12,429 15,000 13.714 25,714 42,286 34,571

10,090 40,814 12,063 20,069 39,261 39,583
27,172 33,850
14,845 10,473 7,230 38,561 26,667 8,428 10,785 9,882 38,543 45,302

Sub-Total--Queensland (iii)

459,843

433,618

(iii) $40,157 has not yet been allocated to individual refuges.

South Australia

Bramwell Lodge-Fullarton

.....

Elouera Emergency Accommodation Centre for Women-Whyalla

Hopehaven Women', and Children's Emergency Shelter-Adelaide

...

Lower Eyre Peninsula Wonwn's and Children's Emergency Hostel-Port Lincoln

Mount Gambier Women's Refuge

Naomi Women's Shelter-Prospect

Para Districts Women's Shelter-Elizabeth

Western Area Women's ShelterWoodville

34,200 17,000 59,500 30,700 39,000 67,000 46,000 48,000

28,838 14,550 60,400 30,500 20,831 66,150
47,074 41,932

80 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Women's Emergency Shelter-North Adelaide Women on the Move Women's Shelter-Christies Beach Women's and Children's Emergency HostelPort Augusta

Sub-Total-South Australia

ACRAH Women's Refuge-Leederville
Ave Maria Women's Refuge-Highgate Byanda Women's Emergency Centre-Perth
Emmaus Women's Refuge-Inglewood Goldfields Women's Refuge-Kalgoorlie Jesus People Inc.-South Perth Lucy Saw Centre-Kwinana IRockingham Mary Smith Night Shelter-Bentley
Nardine Women's Refuge-North Perth Northam Share and Care Women's Refuge City of Stirling Women's Refuge .
Warrawee Women's Refuge-Fremantle Wonthella House Women's Refuge-Geraldton O'Neil House-Port Hedland

Western Australia

Sub-Total-Western Australia

Annie Kenney Young Women's Refuge-Hobart Caroline House-Hobart Elim Centre-Hobart . . . . . . . .
Hobart Women's Refuge Karinya Young Women's Shelter-Launceston Launceston Women's Refuge
Oakleigh House-Burnie

Tasmania

Sub-Total-Tasmania

1980-81 allocation
62,500 54,000 52,100
510,000

1979-80 expenditure
58,125 47,575 45,950
461,925

41,200 28,700 14,500 30,900 27,000 17,700 29,700 29,800 82,600 12,900 61,700 70,300 21,000 2,000
470,000

37,930 30,675 23,625 26,793 21,675 17,625 25,379 26,114 83,045 5,316 61,692 58,850 8,257
426,976

52,874 27,235 9,663 91,567 39,839 48,727 10,095
280,000

50,754 25,628 8,904 89,663 36,500 47,351
258,800

(3) (a) The funds made available to women's refuges under the Community Health Program provide for the care of accompanying dependent children as well as women.
In addition to Community Health Program funds, WOmen's refuges approved under that Program are generally eligible to receive grants under the Children's Services Program administered by the Department of Social Security. Most refuges receive these grants, which currently comprise-
(i) $10,000 per an~um towards the salaries of child care workers; and
(ii) $2,000 for special needs, toys and equipment. This COmponent is subject to annual review.
(b), (c) and (d) No specific provision has been made this financial year for the funding of new refuges, extensions to existing services or women's refuge referral services. However O'Neil House, Port Hedland, Western Australia, and Oakleigh House, Burnie, Tasmania, have been approved for initial funding this financial year from funds made available within the existing block grants to Western Australia and Tasmania, respectively.
Domestic Communications Satellite
(Question No. 211)
Mr Tnnes asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
(I) What are the additional services, capital equipment, and facilities, expected to add $26 million to the cost of the Government's satellite project referred to in his predecessor's

statement to the House on IH September 1980 (Hansard, page 1503).
(2) What arc the rcasons for the $46 million increases in the Postal and Telecommunications Department's estimates of the cost of the Government's satellite project between October 1979 and September 1980.
(3) How many million dollars has each rcason contributed to this cost increase.
!VIr Sinclair .. The answer 10 the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The additional services, capital equipment and facilities arc equipment for an improved School of the Air service (55 million), field trials of HACBSS Receive Only Earth Stations ($1.3 million) and additional site acquisition, installation and interconnection costs associated with major city earth stations ($19.7 million). The additional major city earth station costs are provisional, and have been included in case additional sites are required.
(2) As indicated in the then Minister for Post and Telecommunications' statement to the House on 18 September 1980, the increase of $46 million includes an increase in real terms of $2 million, and an inflation factor of $44 million to cover cost increases between the earlier estimate of $21 () million in 1978 prices, and the recent estimate of $256 million in 1980 prices. In estimating the inflation factor, an average inllation rate of 10 per cent has been assumed.
(3) See answers to questions (I) and (2) ahove.

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 81

Domestic Communications Satellite
(Question No. 212)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to (a) a statement on page 2 of Volume 3 of the Australian National SateUite Communications System Request for Tender that a possIble future development will result in Adelaide accessing a 5th (low power) transponder with one TV and two sound channels, referring to broadcasts by the Australian Broadcasting Commission as part of an expanded HACBSS service. (h) a statement on page 6 of the document Thc National Communications Satellite System Outline of Proposcd Service Requirements and Technical Specifications, referring to the II low-powered transponders on the first satcllitc having an approximate power output of 15 watts and (c) the official view of the Satellite Planning Group, for cxample enunciated by its Chairman, Mr R. Johnson, that 10-15 walls is the probable range within which the power of the satellite's smaller transponders will fall.
(2) Does the statement referred to in part (I) (a) represent the view not only of the ABC but also of thc Overseas Telecommunications Commission,

(4) The design of the satellite is such that four hip,h pow-

ered transponders can direct HACBSS programs to four 1"(:-

gional areas via the north east, south east, central anei we,tcrn

Australian satellite beams. To avoid time zone and otlicr

gramming problems. it is possible that the ABC may

tl)

use a low powered transponder switched to the central ,-\U\-

tralian beam to distribute a South Australian program to tire

ABC regional broadcasting transmitters in South ;\u,tralia

and perhaps to those people and communilie, who cquir

themselves with high performance HACBSS receiving earth

stations. If the ABC did so decide, it would still be possible for

people and communities in South Australia to usc normal

HACBSS receiving earth stations, however, they would then

receive Northern Territory rather than South Australian

programs. The Request for Tender has been written to permit

such an arrangement to be implemented should the ABC so

decide.

(5) The design of the satellite is based on the judgment th'lI high powered transponders are necessary if the cost of
IIACBSS receivers is to be kept in the order of $1.000 '" indicated by my predecessor. The projected use of a lower
powered transponder in South Austral ia hy the AHe is a
specialised application and the resultant increased cost of individual HACBSS receivers for that purpose will not be known until tenders have been examined.

(3) Is the OTC the Government's preferred developer of the Satellite system and is it also the view of OTC's Satellite Planning Group that the satellite's low-powered transponders
are most likely to have a power output closer to 10 watts rather than 20 watts, if so, will he affirm the published views of his predecessor, appearing in answer to question No. 5357 (Hansard, 18 September 1980, page 1610) that sludies in Australia indicate that direct satellite broadcasting using 20 watt transponders is feasible and that in the Australian con-
text the proposed services areas to be provided are larger than those applying in Canada and consequently powers higher than 20 watts are considered to be necessary.

Domestic Communications Satellite
(Question No. 213)
Mr [nnes asked the Minister ror Communi-
cations, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
(1) Is expensive and elaborate thick route satellite te[- ephony circuitry being requested by Telccom Australia as part of the Government's satellite project?

(4) If he will affirm his predecessor's stance, will the ABC and the OTC cease investigation of a separate 10-15 watt, Adelaide based HACBSS service for the Central Australian spot beam.
(5) [f the ABC's investigations into 10-15 watt direct broadcasting prove fruitful, does the possibility of" commercial 10-15 watt direct broadcasting arise before the advent of the second working satellite.

(2) Did Telecom state on pagc [1 of Volume 4, Part I, of the Satellite Request for Tender documents, that there are no specific requirements foreseen for this equipment; if so, why did it request the circuitry referred to in part (I) '!
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes, In the Request for Tender documents, the satellite transmit power is not specified in terms of the transponder power, but as an effective radiated power from the antenna directed towards Austra[ia. Depending on the antenna performance. the actual transponder power is expected to range between ten and fifteen walls for the low powered transponders, and to be approximately thirty watts for the high powered transponders.
(2) Yes.
(3) As announced in Parliament on 1RSeptember 1980, the Government decided that at this lime the Overseas Telecommunications Commission (Australia) be designated as the authority to own and manage the domestic communications satellite system. For the remainder of the question, see the answer to (1).

(l) Telecom has requested tender bids for Transportable plant, with associated satellite tdephony circuitry. for possible itinerant lise on thick route telecommunications links.
(2) Page 13 of Volume IV, Part I of the Satellite Request for Tender states that thcrc arc no specific requirements foreseen for Telecom thick route telephony services via satellite. This means that Telecom docs not currently expect to employ thick route satellite telephony for permanent application in the national telecommunications network. The transportable equipment which has hecn specified in the Request for Tender is designed to provide Telecom with the capability to cover unforeseen temporary shortfalls in traffic capacity on particular links in the national network. Such circumstances could arise out of a major emergcncy, or unavoidable delays in some key elements of the capital construction programme. The extent of any application of such equipment, however, will be critically t.Iepcndcnt upon the prices received and their relationship to the costs of equivalent terrestrial links.

82 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Taxation: Victorian Football League Players
(Question No. 218)
Dr Everingham asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to an article in the Age of 19 September 1980 which lists 35 top Victorian Football League players who were directed to pay some $200,000 in extra tax and penalties following Departmental investigation.
(2) Is he able to say whether this list includes players from everyone of the 12 VFL clubs except Carlton.
(3) Has his attention also been drawn to an article in the Age of 22 September 1980 which notes that a VFL club lost its books rather than have its players burnt by the taxman; if so, can he assure the House that there is no substance to this rcport and that no advance knowledge of the Departmental investigation was given to a VFL club.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) No. The secrecy provisions of the income tax law prevent the Commissioner of Taxation from supplying this information. The Commissioner has, however, been able to give the general advice that it is his practice, when carrying out an exercise of this kind, to ensure that there is no discrimination between taxpayers and that this principle was not departed from in the investigation of the tax affairs offootballcrs in Victoria.
(3) Yes. The Commissioner has advised that it is not his practice to give any group of taxpayers unfair advantages over another and there was no departure from this principle in investigation of the tax affairs of footballers in Victoria.
General Insurance Companies
(Question No. 219)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 2 December 1980:
(l) Has his attention been drawn to the widespread concern throughout the insurance industry at the continued and alarming number of general insurance company failures.
(2) Has his attention also been drawn to a recent press statement by a leading actuary in Melbourne that a further five general insurance companies may go into liquidation in the 1980's.
(3) Is it a fact that he and his predecessors have rejected my repeated attempts to have the Insurance Act 1973 strengthened in order to protect policy holders and the industry from such collapses.
(4) Has his Department failed to follow up proposals for change which were circulated to the insurance industry two years ago; if so, why.
(5) When will amendments to both the Insurance Act and the Life Insurance Act, which have been repeatedly put to him by the Insurance Commissioner, the J-ifc Insurance Commissioner and the Insurance Council of Australia be submitted to Parliament for consideration.
(6) Will proposals, and amending legislation in particular, to strengthen the Insurance Act 1973, include (a) tighter solvencycontrols, (b) investment controls and (c) fit and proper persons provisions.
(7) In view of his persistent rejection of proposals to protect policy holders from insurance collapses, will he as a matter of urgency introduce legislation to give priority to policy holders over other unsecured creditors when an insurance company goes into liquidation.

Mr HowardThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) I am aware that the in.surance industry is concerned about the failure of some insurance companies in recent years.
(2) I am aware of press reports of an address by an actuary attributing to the actuary predictions that in the 1980's there would be a reduction in the number of insurers operating in Australia and that the reduction would be mainly by mergers and takeovers but also by a certain number of insolvencies.
(3) to (5) It is recognised that the Insurance Act 1973 requires some strengthening and I shall be seeking the early in-
troduction of appropriate amendments. r would hope, subject
to the Government's overall legislative program, to be in a position to introduce the amending legislation in the 1981 Autumn Sittings. I do not, however, intend to seek amendments to the provisions of the Life Insurance Act at this time. I might add that a review of that Act will be undertaken in consultation with the life insurance industry, and it is anticipated that the review will take into consideration any relevant recommendations of the Australian Financial System Inquiry concerning life insurance companies.
(6) It would not be appropriate to comment in a piece-meal fashion on the nature of amendments before they are introduced. The amendments will reflect the benefit of consultation with the insurance industry.
(7) See (3), (4) and (5) above. Provisions concerning the order of priority for the payment of claims of unsecured creditors of a company in liquidation are contained in companies legislation. Under these circumstances I suggest that it would be more appropriate for the honourable member to direct this aspect of his question to the relevant Commonwealth Minister, my colleague the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs.
Parliament House: Facilities for Members' Children
(Question No. 226)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 2 December 1980:
(1) Is it a fact that (a) all political parties during the 1980 Federal election campaign expressed support for policies encouraging growth and development of the family unit, and (b) a Minister in his previous Government reportedly resigned on the grounds that he wanted to spend more time with his family.
(2) If so, has the Government initiated action to provide facilities within the Parliament and its precincts for the children of Members and Senators who visit Parliament throughout the sitting period.
(3) If no suitable provisions are available, will he initiate action in the House to install such facilities.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) The Government's policies are designed to strengthen the position of Australian families. To this end, it has developed a wide rangc of programs of assistance which emphasise prevention of family breakdown and which give priority to those families in need and most at risk of breakdown.
(b) The Honourable A. A. Staley decided not to stand for re-election to the Federal Parliament.
(2) and (3) The provision of facilities within the Parliament for the children of Members and Senators is a matter for the consideration of the Presiding Officers.

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 83

Schools Commission Programs
(Question No. 228)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 2 December 1980:
(1) What assistance has been provided through the programs of the Schools Commission to each (a) public and (b) private school in the Electoral Division of Lilley for each year from 1977-78 to 1979-80.
(2) What assistance is proposed for 1980-81.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Funds for non-government schools made available under programs administered by the Schools Commission in 1980 are set out below. Grants are made available on a calendar year basis and information is provided in this way. Payments for the years 1977-1979 are set out in the reports which were tabled in the House of Representatives on the dates listed below:
Report-States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 197624 November 1978
Report -States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1977-21 August 1979
Report -States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1978-26 November 1980
It is not possible to provide information in respect of payments to individual government schools except in relation to grants made under the Special Projects (Innovations) Program of the Commission. The Commonwealth Government, through Schools Commission programs provides bulk funding to the Queensland Government for government school programs to disburse as it sees fit. The following funds have been allocated to government schools in Queensland through Schools Commission programs in 1979 and 1980:

'1980

'1981

RecurrentGeneral Migrant

32,200,000 1,135,500

33,105,500 1,437,500

Disadvantaged Special

2,087,000 1,841,000

2,119,500 1,844,500

Capital

37,263,500 '14,892,000

38,507,000 '16,012,000

52,155,500

54,519,000

, Supplemented to March 1980 prices , March 1980 prices 3 December 1979 prices 4 May 1980 prices

Grants made to government schools in the Electorate of Lilley in 1977, 1978, 1979 and 1980 under the Special Projects
(Innovations) Program have been:

$

1977

Banyo State High School Kedron State High School

1,732 4,621

1979

Sandgate Special School

1,000

1980

Nudgee State Primary School

1,000

(2) Capital grants will be made payable to the following non-government schools in 1981 and 1982:

St Margaret's CEGGS, Albion
St Joseph's, Bracken Ridge Clayfield College, Clayfield Sacred Heart College, Sandgate

$ 50,000
50,000 40,000 10,000
160,000 154,200

(1981 )
(1982) (1981 ) (1981)
(1981) (1982)

1980 Electorate: Lilley

Non-government schools

Albion
Banyo Bracken Ridge Brighton Clayfield
Hamilton Hendra Northgate Nudgee Nundah
Sandgate

St Columban's Christian Brothers College St Margaret's CEGGS St Pius'
StJoseph's St Kieran's Clayfield College
St Agatha's St Rita's College St Cecilia's
Our Lady Help of Christians' St John's St Joseph's College
Corpus Christi College St Joseph's Sacred Heart College
Sacred Heart Primary

General recurrent
$
354,624 243,108 105,737 63,436
53,159 167,552 105,667 350,208 52,629 63,516 63,106 329,040 239,040 84,992 167,507 137,701

Capital
$
'102,970 '101,400
1,960 360,555
1,490 416,700
645 1,310
270 920 3,230 1,270 2,505 1,345 '150,575 2,460

Special education
$

Disadvantaged
schools $
3,000

Innovations
$
1,421

84 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Non-government schools

Shorncliffe Wooloowin Zillmere North

St Patrick's Christian Brothers' College HolyCross St Flannan's

I Includes $2,970 library resources grants. 2 Includes $1 ,400 library resources grants. J Includes $555 library resources grants. 4 Includes $1,700 library resources grants. 5 Includes $575 library resources grants.

General recurrent
$ 203,904
95,200 222,555

Capital
$ 4,145 2,325 3,290

Special education
$

Disadvantaged
schools
$

Innovations
$

Fire Hose Couplings
(Question No. 230)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 2 December 1980:
What action has the Minister or his predecessor taken to ensure that the airport fire services carry out the unanimous recommendation which the Commonwealth Fire Board reached on standardisation of fire hose couplings on 5 May 1977 and which was tabled on 27 September 1978.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Commonwealth Fire Board in its report recognised that two types of couplings, viz. British Instantaneous (BIC) and Storz, were gaining world wide and Australian acceptance. The Board considered that the Storz design offered marginal advantages and therefore adopted it as their recommended coupling.
(2) My Department adopted the BIC as standard for the purpose of airport fire fighting circa 1953, and having assessed the Storz coupling, has continued to regard the BIC as a superior coupling for this particular application. It is understood that the Department of Defence maintains a similar view.
(3) No change is therefore planned, but appropriate adapters are carried where necessary.
Fire Hose Couplings
(Question No. 231)
Mr Morris asked the Prime Minister, upon notice', on 2 December 1980:
(I) Did he indicate that the Commonwealth Fire Board should continue with the investigation which his predecessor asked it to make into the progressive introduction throughout Australia of a standardised firehose coupling; if so, when.
(2) When did he forward copies of the Board's report to the State Premiers.
(3) When and how did each Premier respond.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1 ) Yes, Apri11976.
(2) 3 January 1978.
(3) I refer the honourable member to the statement made by Senator Chaney when presenting the report by the Commonwealth Fire Board on the standardisation of firehose couplings in the Senate on 27 September 1978, Senate Hansard. page 974.

Fire Hose Couplings
(Question No. 232)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 2 December 1980:
(I) Can he provide more complete and recent information on the types of firehose couplings used by authorities and organisations in Australia than that given by his predecessor on 24 August 1978 (Hansard. page 786) in answer to question No. 203 which I first placed on notice on 6 October 1977.
(2) To what extent has co-ordination of fire-fighting equipment on each side of the River Murray improved since the speech by the honourable member for Boothby on 3 May 1971 (Hansard. page 2400).
(3) To what extent can the fire-fighting equipment in Albury, NSW, be used in association with the fire-fighting equipment in Wodonga, Victoria, and vice versa.
(4) To what extent can the fire-fighting equipment in Tweed Heads, NSW, be used in association with the firefighting equipment in Coolangatta, Queensland, and vice versa.
(5) To what extent have departments carried out the unanimous recommendations which the Commonwealth Fire Board reached on standardisation of firehose couplings on 5 May 1977 and which were tabled on 27 September 1978.
(6) Is the Queensland State Fire Services Council whose intended program of State-wide standardisation was noted in the Board's report, converting to the Storz coupling, recommended by the Board and adopted in New South Wales and Melbourne, Victoria.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am advised that generally the information given by my predecessor on 24 August 1978 (Hansard, page 786) in answer to Question 203 of 6 October 1977 is stiJI correct for the major fire brigades throughout Australia. There has been a progressive change to Storz couplings in New South Wales and Melbourne.
(2) to (4) I am advised that in the border areas brigades in each State carry adapters so that if mutual assistance is required connections can be made to equipment in the other State.
(5) Departments have not acted on the Commonwealth Fire Board's recommendation. Such action would be premature until State brigades accept and adopt the recommendation of the Commonwealth Fire Board.
(6) I am advised that no change to the existing screwed coupling is proposed liy the State Fire Services Council, Queensland, at this stage.

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 85

Isolated Patients' Allowances
(Question No. 234)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 2 December 1980:
(1) What steps were taken to inform the community of benefits and conditions of the isolated patients' allowance, in (a) 1979-80 and (b) 1980-81.
(2) What (a) groups and (b) individuals have been contacted in relation to the program.
(3) What sum has been allocated for (a) publicity and (b) information relating to the program in (i) 1979-80 and (ii) 1980-81.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) A basic requirement of the Isolated Patients' Travel and Accommodation Assistance Scheme is referral by a medical practitioner to the nearest suitable specialist or consultant physician. Emphasis is therefore placed on informing potential users of the Scheme through the medical profession and associated organisations. To this end, upon commencement of the Scheme in October 1978, and following changes in the Scheme in June 1979, letters, explanatory pamphlets and application forms were sent to medical practitioners in country areas and appropriate hospitals, medical centres, community health centres and welfare authorities. Included were Department of Social Security country regional offices and relevant State Government authorities. Similar material was issued in 1979-80. Advertisements were also placed in country newspapers. In 1980-81 following further amendments to the Scheme applicable from I October 1980, revised explanatory pamphlets and application forms were ordered for issue on the same basis as in previous years.
(2)-
(a) A wide variety of interested groups and organisations were contacted by the various offices of my Department but a detailed record of these is not available.

(b) Individual country medical practitioners have been kept informed. Responses have been provided to a considerable number of individual enquiries on the Scheme hut it is not practical to attempt to identify each one of these separately.
(3)-
(a) (i) $50,000; (ii) $45,000 was originally included in the estimates for a further advertising campaign in 1980-81 but because of the rapid increase in usage of the Scheme it was felt that it is widely known in isolated areas and expenditure of further Commonwealth funds for this purpose could not be justified. The number of applications processed in 1979-80 was 20,000 and is expected to exceed 38,000 in 1980-81.
(b) (i) $8,000; (ii) $4,000.
Public Hospital Beds
(Question No. 235)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(1) What was the total number of occupied public hospital bed days for (a) each State, (b) the Northern Territory and (c) the Australian Capital Territory during the last year for which figures are available.
(2) In each case, what was the proportion of (a) standard, (b) shared private doctor of choice and (c) single room private doctor of choice beds.
(3) What has been the trend as to the proportion of public hospital beds occupied by private (and formerly intcrmediate) patients during the last 20 years.
Mr MacKeIlarThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) and (2) The estimated numbers of occupied bed-days and their proportions by patient status, in recognised hospitals in each State and Territory, for the year cnded 30 June 1980 are:

State/Territory

New South Wales

Victoria

Queensland

South Australia

Western Australia

Tasmania

Northern Territory

.

Australian Capital Territory

Hospital patients

Private patients

All patients

('000) %
3,293 47 2,182 34 2,023 80 1,069 66
968 60 475 86 183 89 95 38

(000) %
3,787 53 1,834 46
519 20 556 34 646 40 77 14 24 11 158 62

('000)
7,080 4,016 2.542 1,625 1,614
552
207 253

This information has been provided by the various State and Territory health authorities under the hospital costsharing agreements.
The further break-up of private paticnts in recognised hospitals according to the type of accommodation provided (i.e. shared ward or single room) as requested by the honourable member is not available.
(3) My Department does not have access to statistical data that would enable the identification with any real accuracy of any trend in the proportion of public hospital beds occupied by private patients over the last 20 years. The earliest information available, on a national basis, concerning the proportion of bed-days in public hospitals occupied by private patients is in respect of the year ended 30 June 1964.

From that year to the introduction of the 1975 hospital financing arrangements, information provided to my Department by the State and Territory health authorities in relation to the distribution of the various types of patients accommodated in public hospitals was by ward type. This information covered (a) public ward patients (split into 'pensioner' and 'non-pensioner' patients, with non-pensioner including some patients with private health insurance) and (b) 'non-public ward' patients (including patientsboth with and without private health insurance). A classification by benefit entitlement (insured, uninsured, pensioner, tuberculosis and others) was also provided.
Since 1975, information provided to my Department relates both to hospital patients (who may be insured or uninsured and who receive treatment provided by hospital doctors) and

86 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

private patients. Private patients may be insured or uninsured and may be in private or shared wards.
Statistics available to my Department for the years prior to 1975 are therefore not comparable with those available since that date.
Attached are two tables. Column 'A' of the first table shows the percentage of non-puhlic ward bed-days (which would include some uninsured days) for 1963-64 to 1974-75, and column 'B', the percentage of insured bed-days (in public and non-public wards) for the same years. The second table shows the percentage of private bcd-days in recognised hospitals since 1976-77. Statistics are not available for the year 1975-76 due to variations in the times at which the 1975 hospital costsharing arrangements became effective in the States /Territories.

A Non-public
ward beddays'

B Insured bed-days

1963-64 1964-65 1965-66 1966-67 1967-68 1968-69 1969-70 1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75
1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

%

%

29.4

47.1

29.7

47.6

30.0

48.0

30.0

46.6

29.9

47.0

31.6

47.9

33.6

49.3

36.0

53.0

36.4

54.8

38.3

55.5

39.8

55.8

41.1

56.0

Private bed-days in recognised hospitals
% 43.2 45.0 44.6 42.5

- Excludes South Australia and Western Australia-figures not available.

Inquests into Post-operative Deaths
(Question No. 236)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(1) lIas his attention been drawn to a report by Ron Hicks in the Bulletin of 18 November 1980 on an inquest into the death of Matthew Davey.
(2) Is he able to say whether the parents of Matthew Davey have to pay a large sum of money in legal costs.
(3) Will he have urgent discussions with the Attorney General to ensure that adequate legal aid is available to the parents of Matthew Davey and others in similar circumstances to ensure that such tragic post-operative deaths can be fully investigated and hopefully recurrences prevented.
Mr MacKellar ~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) to (3) This question is more appropriately directed to the New South Wales Minister for Health. However, based on enquiries made, it is my understanding that it is not usual in that State for legal aid to be provided in respect of matters connected with a coronial inquiry.

X-Ray Emissions
(Question No. 237)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice. on 3 December 1980:
(l) Is it a fact that television tube burn-out can cause significant X-ray emission in (a) the older type of television set and (b) visual display terminal units.
(2) Does this emission cause cataract formation in the eyes ofviewers in some cases.
(3) Can a relatively inexpensive additional safety device be inserted to prevent occurrences referred to in part (2).
(4) Has the Australian Radiation Laboratory investigated this; if so, is it satisfied with the safety of television receivers and other electron accelerating devices available in Australia.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (4) During the past few years the Australian Radiation Laboratory has investigated X-ray emission from TV tubes. Prototype units are subject to a stringent test protocol recommended by the National Health and Medical Research Council (NH & MRC) which requires that the radiation field 5cm from any external surface in any direction should not exceed 0.5 milliroentgens per hour under extremely faulty conditions. Of 150 TV receivers and approximately 70 video display terminals, only one unit (a colour TV receiver) has breached the NH & MRC standard and this did so by a factor of 2 when pushed to its high voltage limit. The protective circuitry included in this model was re-designed and proved to be satisfactory before its release to the market. \iost receivers have produced no detectable radiation although a few have reached levels of 0.01 milliroentgens per hour at their high voltage limit.
It is generally accepted that for X-rays the dose-response function for the induction of cataracts severe enough to impair vision has a threshold of somewhere between 200 and 500 rad when delivered in a single brief exposure and 1000 rad or more when delivered over a period of months. The likelihood of doses of this magnitude arising from a malfunctioning picture tube is extremely small and it is not considered that the incorporation of an additional safety device as suggested by the honourable member would be justified on these grounds.
Subtitles to Television Programs
(Question No. 241)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
Has he evaluated the feasibility of introducing subtitles to television programs, especially news programs, to assist people with hearing difficulties; if so, what are his conclusions; if not, will he undertake to do so.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Exploratory discussions concerning captioned television for the hearing impaired were held in Sydney in October 1980. The meeting was attended by representatives of aU broadcasting sectors, the Government, and other interested parties, including the Australian Deafness Council and the Australian Centre for Visual Television.
Agreement was reached at the meeting to conduct research into the needs and priorities of the audience for a closed captioning system, standardisation of hardware and software, the possibility of using imported captioned material and the demand for a centralised captioning service. As the honourable member will be aware, closed captioning is the means by

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 87

which captions can be generated for usc by those who need them and not impede the screen for those who do not.
I shall be interested to see the results of this research.
In the meantime, several developments have already occurred which should be of benefit to the hearing impaired.
The first is the introduction of multicultural television on Channels 0/28 in Sydney and Melbourne under the auspices of the Special Broadcasting Service (SBS).
The SBS has received an encouraging response from some members of the deaf community who appreciate the opportunity to watch sub-titled television programs.
The SBS has also recently introduced sign language to accompany its 6.28 pm and 8.27 pm headline ncws bulletins and is working towards complete subtitling of the main half hour news at the earliest possible opportunity.
The ABC has advised me that consideration is being given to the introduction of a closed captioning system for some of its programs.
In addition, you may be interested to know that proposals for public television services are currently being examined. Every effort will be made to ensure that programs for the hearing impaired are included in these new services should they be established.
Coal and Oil Shale Miners
(Question No. 244)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
Is the Minister able to say whether coal and oil shale miners are compelled to retire at the age of 55 years; if so, what provision is there for a miner to receive income from the Department of Social Security in the years prior to his being eligible for an age pension.
Mr Hunt-The Minister [or Social Security has provided the following answer La the honourable member's question:
The matter of the retiring age for coal and oil shale miners does not come within my portfolio. However, it is understood that coal and oil shale miners are employed under conditions of superannuation which take account of the early age of retirement.
In addition, any ex-miner who, prior to rcaching age pen-
sion age, meets the relevant qualifications for a benefit pay-
able through my department would be eligible to receive such a benefit.

heen rounded, discrepancies may occur between sums of component items and totals.)

TABLE I
Persons with a hearing problem-Aged 15 years or more, September 1978
Age group (years)
('000)

65 or 15-24 25-44 45-64 more Total

Males Females Total persons

21.3 106.7 201.6 131.3 460.9 21.1 62.1 96.4 127.6 307.1 42.4 168.9 297.9 258.9 768.0

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics publication 'Hearing and the Use of Hearing Aids (persons aged 15 years or more), September 1978' (Catalogue No. 4336.0).

TABLE 2 Persons with a hearing problem-Aged 2 to 14 years,
February-May 1979
Age group (years) ('000)

2-4

5-9 10-14 Total

Males Females Total persons

*2.0

20.3

16.5

38.7

*2.7

13.8

10.5

27.0

*4.7

34.1

27.0

65.7

* Subject to high sampling variability.
Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics publication -Sight. Hearing and Dental Health (persons agcd 2 to 14 years), February-May 1979' (Catalogue No. 4337.0).
(2) The survey estimates of the number of persons aged 15 years or more possessing a hearing aid are shown in Table 3.
TABLE 3 Persons possessing a hearing aid-Aged 15 years of more,
September 1978 Age group (years)
('000)
65 or 15-24 25-44 45-64 more Total

Hearing Impairments
(Question No. 245)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(I) What statistics or estimates are available that show the number of persons with hearing impairments.
(2) How many persons in Australia are deaf to the degree that they need hearing aids.
Mr MacKelIar----The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Tables I and 2 show survey estimates of the number of persons in Australia aged 2 years or more suffering from hearing problems, based on recent Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) supplementary health surveys. (Where figures have

Males Females Total persons

*2.4 5.7 24.3 47.1 79.5 *1.7 5.0 15.6 51.8 74.2 4.1 10.7 39.9 98.9 153.6

* Subject to high sampling variability.
Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics publication 'Hearing and the Use of Hearing Aids (persons aged 15 years or more), September 1978' (Catalogue 1\0. 4336.0).
In addition to those persons aged 15 years or ,narc, 5,800 children aged 14 years or younger are currcnLly fitted with hearing aids by the National Acoustic Laboratories ("AL). Although the ABS and NAL figures arc compiled on different bases, the combined total of approximately 160,000 persons possessing hearing aids is considered a reasonable estimate. This represents approximately 1.1 per cent of the total population.

88 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Perth Airport: Baggage Conveyor
(Question No. 247)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(I) What are the dimensions and precise location of the extensions to Perth Airport's baggage conveyor, reference W89/W21/80 in the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette, No. G47 of 25 November 1980, at a cost of $54,305.
(2) When are the extensions expected to be completed.
(3) Who were the unsuccessful tenderers for the contract.
(4) What are the anticipated (a) capacities and (b) annual costs of (i) operation and (ii) maintenance of the proposed extensions.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The dimensions of the baggage conveyor are 25,28 m x 20.15 m. The total length of the conveyor surface is 83.68 m. The conveyor is located in the International Arrivals Hall, Ground Floor, Perth Airport, which is being constructed as part of the 1979/80 Capital Works Program.
(2) Early April 1981.
(3) No further firm submitted an offer.
(4) (a) To satisfy airline criteria for processing a Boeing B747 aircraft, the capacity of the conveyor is:
(i) One hundred and forty bags when stationary, and (ii) Five hundred bags in a 15 minute period when
moving.
(b) (i) $220; (ii) $1,400.
Hobart Airport: Cleaning Contract
(Question No. 248)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(1) What were the previous arrangements for the cleaning of the terminal building at Hobart Airport referred to in Commonwealth of Australia Gazette, G. No. G44, 4 November 1980, at a cost of$215,438.37.
(2) Who held the previous cleaning contract.
(3) What was the period of the last contract.
(4) Who were the unsuccessful tenderers for the contract.
(5) What is the (a) area to be cleaned and (b) proposed frequency of cleaning under the terms of the contract.
Mr Hunt~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Private contractor carried out the work following public invitation of tenders.
(2) Eastern Shore Cleaning Service, P.O. Box 71, Bcllerivc, 7018.
(3) Three years.
(4) Croucher Pty Ltd, 206 Harrington Street, Hobart, 7000.
PCC Cleaning Services Pty Ltd, 505 High Street, Northcote, 3070.
C. and K. Coppleman, Dorans Road, Sandford, 7020.
(5) (a) Approximately 1,630 square metres of tloor area plus all windows, furniture, et cetera.
(b) Frequencies vary from continuous to once per year depending on the use and/or type of area to be cleaned.

Community Youth Support Schemes
(Question No. 253)
Dr Jenkins asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(1) How many Community Youth Support Schemes have operated since the commencement of the Scheme in (a) each State, (b) the Australian Capital Tcrritory and (e) the Northern Territory.
(2) What is the break-up of these figures for each Federal Electoral Division.
(3) What was the name of each scheme and what was the datc of (a) commencement and (b) termination of each where applicable.
(4) How many statT have been employed by each scheme during the last 12 months.
(5) What was the financial allocation to each scheme during the same period.
Mr Viner -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (5) This information is not readily available within my Department and to obtain it would take considerable time and effort beyond the normal requirements of administration. For this reason, I do not propose to have officers take time out from their normal duties to seek and collate the great detail and diversity of in formation sought. If the honourable member desires information about a specific project it can be provided.
Contract Mail Deliveries
(Question No. 265)
!VIr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(1) Has thc Attorney-General's attention been drawn to the increased volume of mail addressed to 'The Householder' which Australia Post is delivering under contract.
(2) Can steps be taken to prevent the invasion of privacy of the ordinary citizcn, if so, what are they?
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's question:
(1) The Attorney-Gcneral has received no complaints in reccnt times about delivery by Australia Post of mail addressed to 'The Householder'.
(2) The Attornery-General has made a reference to the Commonwealth's Law Reform Commission on the subject of privacy. The terms of that reference direct the Commission, inter alia, to inquire into and report upon the extent to which undue intrusions into or interferences with privacy arise or are capable of arising under the laws of the Commonwealth Parliament and the extent to which procedures adopted to give effect to those laws give rise to or permit such intrusions or interferences. As part of its work the Commission is directing its attention to unsolicited mailings and the subject is referred to in the Commission's Discussion Paper No, 13 entitled Privacy and Intrusions. The Government will carefully consider the Commission's Report on privacy when delivered and will then decide what, if any, action is necessary on this subject.

Answers to Questions

24 February 198 I REPRESENTATIVES 89

Sickness Benefit
(Question No. 266)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(I) Is it a fact that the rate of sickness benefit, as advertised on social security guidelines, paid to single persons 18 years of age and over is $64.1 0 per week.
(2) Is it also a fact that the rate of sickness benefit paid to single persons 18 years of age and over who transfer from unemployment benefits to sickness benefits, is only $53.45 per week.
(3) Is it a further fact that some persons who are not classified 85 per cent incapacitated but do have substantial medical disabilities may remain on sickness benefits for lengthy periods.

Charles Darwin University: Interim Chancellor
(Question No. 269)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(I) Is the proposed Interim Chancellor of the new Darwin University an expatriate Australian who resides in the United States of America.
(2) Were suitably qualified Australians also considered for this position.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) I have seen reports that the Northern Territory Government has appointed Mr Rupert Murdoch as interim Chancellor of the proposed Charles Darwin University. The matter is entirely the responsibility of the Northern Territory Government.

(4) Does the rate of sickness benefit referred to in part (2) continue regardless of the length of period the person is dependent upon sickness benefits.
(5) Is there discrimination against the sickness benefit recipient receiving $53.45 per week; if so, will the Minister take immediate action to rectify this apparent anomaly.
Mr HuntThe Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Italian Earthquake Victims
(Question No. 270)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
Does the relaxation of criteria relating to sponsorship of Italian earthquake victims extend to waiving the necessity for the sponsor's maintenance guarantee which is normally required when sponsoring aged immigrants.

(1) The maximum rate of sickness benefit payable to single persons 18 years of age and over without dependants is $64.10 a week.
(2) The Social Services Act provides that the weekly rate of sickness benefit payable to a person cannot exceed the weekly rate of salary, wages or other income which that person has lost by reason of his incapacity. The Act also provides that where a person transfers from unemployment benefit to sickness benefit the amount of unemployment benefit paid to that person shall be regarded as a loss of income suffered by that person.
The maximum rate of unemployment benefit payable to a single person aged 18 years or over without dependants is $53.45 a week. Therefore, such a person in receipt of unemployment benefit who transfers to sickness benefit, and has no loss of income other than unemployment benefit, is eligible for a maximum rate of payment of $53.45 a week.
(3) To qualify for sickness benefit a person must, amongst other things, satisfy the Director-General of Social Services that he is temporarily incapacitated for work by reason of illness or accident. To qualify for invalid pension a person must be 85 per cent permanently incapacitated for work or permanently blind. A person not qualified for invalid pension may qualify for sickness benefit for as long as he satisfies the relevant criteria.
(4) An unemployment heneficiary whose total loss of income when transferring to sickness benefit consists of a loss of unemployment benefit of $53.45 a week would continue to be eligible for a maximum rate of benefit equal to this amount. This would, of course, be increased if there were an increase in the relevant rate of unemployment benefit.
(5) The limitation on the rate of sickness benefit to the amount of a claimant's loss of income resulting from his incapacity is required by the provisions of the Social Services Act referred to in (2). These provisions have been in the relevant Act since payment of sickness benefit was introduced.

Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Persons sponsoring Italian earthquake victims are expected to provide care and maintenance on arrival, but an application would not be held up should a maintenance guarantee not be forthcoming.
Pesticides
(Question No. 272)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
Do labelling regulations as devised by the National Health and Medical Research Council applying to pesticides such as D.D.T., Dieldrin and Heptachlor, as used to combat the caterpillar plague in New South Wales, northern Victoria and southern Queensland reflect the possibility of transferring undesirable residues to stock.
Mr Mac KellarThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
National Health and Medical Research Council (NH & MRC) recommendations in relation to labelling of agricultural chemicals refer only to the human toxicological hazard which may be associated with the product. The recommendations therefore include statements appropriate to the scheduling, warnings and first-aid dircclions. They do not reflect the possibility of residues appearing in stock as a result of the product's approved use.
To ensure that residue levels in stock do not exceed maximum permissahle levels, directions in relation to approved use, application rates, method and time of application and withholding periods are included on the label.
The provision of these directions is the responsibility of the State Departments of Agriculture as it is the State governments which possess legislative control Over all chemicals. Label directions are always proposed having regard to good

90 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

agricultural practice and when followed ensure that maximum permissable levels of residues do not occur.
The use of D.D.T., dieldrin and heptachlor in emergency situations such as in the control of heliothis plague is at the discretion of the State Registrars of Pesticides. It is therefore the State Government's responsibility to ensure that in such circumstances, users are made aware of the precautions which must be taken and withholding periods which must apply to ensure that undesirable levels of residues do not occur.
Repatriation Hospitals in Brisbane
(Question No. 274)
l\ir Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(1) Is it a fact that on 23 September 1980 a veteran with full entitlement to repatriation facilities and whose nearest hospital was Greenslopes Repatriation Hospital, Qld, was unable to be admitted to the intensive therapy section at Greenslopes Repatriation Hospital because of capacity occupancy.
(2) If so, will the Minister examine revocation of the decision to close Rosemount Repatriation Hospital, Qld, so that chronic cases may be accommodated at Rosemount, thereby allowing more adequate facilities to be available for acute cases at Greenslopes Repatriation HospitaL.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) The intensive therapy unit at Repatriation General Hospital, Greenslopes comprises 8 beds and each was occupied on 23 September 1980. However, there is no record of any patient being turned away on that date, and in the absence of specific details I am unable to comment further.
(2) There is not and never has been an intensive therapy unit at Rosemount. Intensive therapy cases have always been cared for at Greenslopes and therefore the question of any change to intensive therapy capacity does not arise.
Concerning the closure of Rosemount, generally, the decision was taken only after an extensive review and analysis of the past and present utilisation of this facility. In essence this review indicated that in terms of clinical effectiveness and patient convenience, the patients currently cared for at Rosemount Hospital would receive better treatment at Greenslopes, where the full range of medical care is readily available.
Such action will not reduce the acute bed capacity at Greenslopes. The relocation of the rehabilitation unit at Greenslopes will facilitate the consolidation and redevelopment of the rehabilitation service at Greenslopes as part of an extended care service.
I should stress that the closure of Rosemount will not reduce the numbers of patients treated, the quality oftreatment, staff numbers or funding for medical treatment.
Pensions and Benefits
(Question No. 277)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to reports that many recipients of pensions and benefits are turning to emergency relief agencies because their incomes cannot meet everyday needs and that in consequence these relief agencies arc severely strained many having exhausted their funds.

(2) Will the Minister review, as a matter of urgency, emergencyrelieffunding throughout the Commonwealth.
(3) Will the Minister submit to Cabinet proposals for an immediate increase in all pensions and benefits to at least the level of the Henderson poverty line.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.
(2) No. Funding of emergency relief is not a matter for which the Commonwealth has sole responsibility. Emergency relief has been provided traditionally by State Governments and voluntary welfare agencies. Most State Governments have increased substantially their provision of funds for emergency relief in recent years. The Commonwealth Government, for the first time, provided financial assistance to emergency relief agencies in \979-80. The level 'of this Commonwealth funding is determined in a Budget context and it is in this context that any review of funding may take place.
(3) The poverty lines adopted by Professor Henderson for the purposes of the First Main Report of the Commission of Inquiry into Poverty have not been endorsed hy the Government. There are significant problems with the use of poverty lines including those used by Professor Henderson.
As announced by the previous Minister for SociaI Security on 28 February 1980, the Social Welfare Policy Secretariat has been requested to examine the whole issue of alternative approaches to measuring a poverty line that would be relative to Australia in the 1980s. Their report is expected to be completed during 1981.
Most basic rates of pensions and benefits are increased automatically in May and November each year in accordance with increases in the Consumer Price Index.
Those rates which are not subject to automati,c indexation, and the general question of levels of pensions and benefits, are considered by the Government each year in the Budget context.
Hospitals: Recurrent Funding
(Question No. 279)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for lIcalth, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to reports that Victoria is facing a hospital crisis situation because of the failure of the Federal Government to provide recurrent funds for staffing certain hospitals already built or nearly completed.
(2) Will he give an assurance that recurrent funds will be made available for the Austin and Sunshine Hospitals, Victoria, so that these hospitals may be fully utilised.
(3) If not, what proposals does the Federal Government have to deal with the hospital crisis in Victoria referred to in part (1).
(4) Will he undertake to hold urgent consultations with the Victorian Minister for Health so that, a rational policy can be developed.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) While I am aware of these reports I wish to point out that the Commonwealth Government is providing sufficient funds under the hospital cost-sharing agreement with Victoria to maintain hospital services at the levels existing at 30 June 1979, pending the report of the Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals. For expanded

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 91

or new services since 30 June 1979 to receive Commonwealth hospital cost-sharing funding, the State is required to show compensating offsets of services that were in existence at 30 June 1979. Of course, the State is able to fund these new or expanded services from its own resources if it wishes.
(2) While the Commonwealth Government makes a significant contribution (50 per cent of approved net operating costs totalling $272m in 1979-80) to Victorian recognised hospital operating costs and has an equal say in determining aggregate budget levels for the State, the allocation of funds to individual hospitals from within the approved aggregate budget is purely a matter for the State to determine.
(3) and (4) The Commonwealth Government-initiated Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals is due to report by the end of December 1980. The Government will not make any alterations to existing hospital funding arrangements pending receipt and consideration by the Government of the Commission of Inquiry's report.
New and Proof Coins: Distribution
(Question No. 281)
Mr Hodges asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(1) How are orders for new and proof coins normally despatched from the Royal Australian Mint.
(2) Has it been the practice to call tenders for the distribution of orders to clients.
(3) Have normal procedures been departed from with the distribution of the recently minted gold coins.
(4) By what means are the gold coin orders being despatched and who are the agencies responsible.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Uncirculated and proof coins have normally been despatched by registered or certified mail, but with the recent gold coins other arrangements have been made (see 4 below).
(2) and (3) Tender action is not applicable to distribution of orders by Australia Post. Tenders were called for the distribution of gold coins ordered direct from the Royal Australian Mint. Uncirculated gold coins ordered through banks have been distributed from the banks.
(4) Courier services have been employed for despatch of the 1980 gold coins. Further details are not disclosed because of security considerations.
Pharmaceutical Benefits
(Question No. 283)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) Is it a fact that 50 Paracetamol 500 milligram tablets on a prescription cost $2.75 as a National Health Scheme General Benefit and $1.67 or less when obtained without a prescription.
(2) If so, (a) will he circularise all medical practitioners, drawing their attention to this and similar examples in order to encourage them to save their patients money or (b) is the present pharmaceutical benefits book sufficient.
(3) How many of the benefits listed in the current pharmaceutical benefits book are cheaper than $2.75, even if the pharmacist charges the Chemist's Guild maximum recommended mark-up, as used in the example in part (1) provided the drug is supplied (a) on a prescription or (b) without a prescription where is it legal to do so.

Mr MacKeIlarThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Paracetamol tablet 500 mg, 50 has a Commonwealth dispensed price range of $2.44 to $2.51 according to the brand prescribed. Eligible pensioners (Le. those holding a Pensioner Health Benefits card) and sickness beneficiaries holding a Health Benefits card receive their pharmaceutical benefits free of charge. All other patients pay a patient contribution, currently $2.75, for each supply of a pharmaceutical benefit. Where the Commonwealth dispensed price of an item is equal to or less than the relevant patient contribution, the item is deemed not to be a benefit. In this situation the Commonwealth has no control over the price charged by the chemist for the item. Likewise where such an item is obtained without a prescription, the Commonwealth has no control over the price charged by the chemist, in which case the chemist sets his own retail price (which could be $1.67 or less).
(2) My Department regularly provides for publication in the AMA Gazette or as a supplement to the AMA Gazette, as a service to medical practitioners, a list of all pharmaceutical benefit items with a Commonwealth dispensed price equal to or less than the patient contribution for pharmaceutical benefits. In effect the list is an extract of the relevant items from the pharmaceutical benefits book. The latest list was published in the AMA Gazette of 4 December 1980.
(3) (a) Nil.
(b) As at I December 1980, 109 forms and strengths of various pharmaceutical benefit items listed in the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits were available without a prescription, in all States, for less than $2.75 assuming a 66.6 per cent mark-up. A further 45 were so available in at least one, but not all, States.
Airport Fire Tenders
(Question No. 291)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
Will he update the information provided in answer to Question 5599 in the 31st Parliament (Hansard, 19 August 1980, page 402) to the time of preparation of an answer to this question.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The tabulated information provided in answer to Question No. 5599 represented all available detail at that time. It was provided only after a lengthy examination and interpretation of historical records, financial statements and station log books.
As the Joint Parliamentary Committee of Public Accounts has thoroughly reviewed the purchase and operation of these vehicles, I do not propose to devote scarce Departmental resources to further pursuit of the matter.
Domestic Air Fares
(Question No. 292)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
Will he update the information provided in answer to Question No. 5600 in the 31st Parliament (Hansard, 1 April 1980, page 1572) to the date of preparation of the answer to this question.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

92 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

The following domestic air fare increases have been approved since 11 November 1975 for Ansettand TAA.

Date approved
II November 1975 20 April 1976 1 July 1976 1 July 1977 20 September 1977 14 July 1978

Average percentage
increase
3.0 3.0 4.0 3.5 6.0

Date approved

Average
percentage increase

30 September 1978

5.0

14 June 1979

10.0

31 January 1980

8.0

8 June 1980

5.0

1 September 1980

5.0

The air fares and percentage increases since 11 Kovember 1975 requested by the honourable member are as follows:

11 November 1975 December 1980

Percentage increase

F

y

F

Y

F

Y

From Sydney to~
:VIelbourne
Perth Adelaide Brisbane Hobart (via Melbourne) Darwin From Melbourne to~
Hobart Brisbane Adelaide Darwin Perth

$
57.30 226.50 87.40
59.90 97.80 225.80
51.30 106.30 53.00 225.80 192.10

$
45.80 181.20 69.90 47.90 78.20 180.60
41.00 85.00 42.40 180.60 153.70

$
106.70 368.60 156.50 111.00 173.70 377.20
96.90 179.20 99.70 377.20 315.30

$
77.60 268.10 113.80 80.70 126.30 274.30
70.50 130.30 72.50 274.30 229.30

per cent
86.2 62.7 79.1 85.3 77.6 67.1
88.9 68.6 88.1 67.1 64.1

per cent
69.4 48.0 62.8 68.5 61.5 51.9
72.0 53.3 71.0 51.9 49.2

F~First Class Air fare y ~Economy Class Air fare
Off-shore Industry Mobile Units
(Questiou No. 293)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
Will he update the information provided in answer to Question No. 6083 in the 31st Parliament (Hansard, 27 August 1980, page 858).

Mr Hunt- -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) Thirty-eight vessels arc recorded as having entered the enlarged restricted area hetween 13 May and 4 December 1980.
(b) No vessels were reported to have entered the 500 metre safety zones between 13 May and 4 December 1980.
(2) and (3) The tahles allached update the information given in the tables included with my previous answer.

Name

Date Time Distance off

Type

Taras Schcvchenko

20.05.80 1530 4 n,m. N side of Marlin P /Gen. Cargo

Sea Swallow

24.05.80 1405 2 n.ro. N\V of Snapper Gen. Cargo

Helene Clausen Ohtori Yuyo rvlaru Antigone

09.06.80 2115 1.1 n.m. :-Jth of Tuna 17.06.80 2154 3.5 n.m. NW of Halibut 22.06.80 1140 2.4 n.m. off Kingfish A
22.06.80 1145 3 n.m. S ofKingfish B

Gen. Cargo Car. Carrier Gen. Cargo
Blk. Carrier

Yuyo Mam No.2 25.06.80 2348 4.5 n.m. SE of Kingfish Tanker

B

Polycrest

28.06.80 0800 1.3 n.m. Nth of Halibut Iron/Ore Carr.

Laurel Peak

11.07.80 0650 3.5 n.m. N of Halibut Blk. Carrier

Shinsci Maru South Rainbow

12.07.80 0840 7n.m. Nth of Tuna 17.07.80 0145 5 n.m. off Snapper

Fishing Blk. Carrier

Woko Maru

17.07.80 2230 3 n.m. Nth of Halibut BlkCarrier

Owner USSR

Registry USSR

Swallow Maritime Corp.
C. Clausen D /S Co-op Line Co. Ltd.
TaiyoKisen Oceanic Bulk Transport Corp. Yuyo Steamship Co.

Liheria
Denmark Monrouia Japan Greece
Japan

Kristiansands Tankrederi Golden Nav.

Norway Panama

Not Known South Rainbow Shp. Inc.

Japan Liberia

Zuito Kaion K.K.

Japan

Gros~
tonnage 20,027
8,647

Remark-s - - - -
Intrusion to avoid adverse weather conditions

561 13,213 2,343 23,149

MLlstcr interviewed Master interviewed Master interviewed Master interviewed

38,878 Letter sent to agents

63,887 Letter sent to agents

9,694 23,537 20,546

Escorted ou t 0 f restricted area Contacted on Ch. 16
Intercepted) given permission to enter NW section Intercepted by HMAS Buccaneer

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 93

Name
Thaf;os Island Esso Danica Panamax World
Unknown Cresco

Date Time Distance off

Type

22.07.80 23,07,80 28,07.80
30.07.80 04.08,80

1355 2050 2302
0840 1520

3.5 n.m. Kingfish B 3 n.m. Nth of Halibut 10 n,m, NW of Kingfish A 2,8 n,m. off Kingfish A 5 n.m. SE side of Tuna

Cargo Tanker Blk. Carrier
Blk. Carrier

Botany Chemist 06,08,80 1610 3 n.m. off Halibut

Tanker

Frosso K Satsuki Maru

14.08.80 2025 3 n.m. off Halibut 29,08,80 0920 4 n.m. offHalibut

Cargo Merchant

Star Castor May Prince

31.08.80 1200 Not recorded 10.09,80 1800 5 n.m. E of Mackerel

Blk. Carrier Cargo

Canis Major Sydney Express ARPAD

17.09.80 0015 5 n.m. Nth of Halibut Fr. 19,09,80 0204 3,3 n.m. SE of Mackerel Con. 19,09.80 2356 0.6 n,m, SE of Halibut Blk. Carrier

Kyoten .\tlaru Evce

12.10.80 0200 Between Kingfish Band Cargo
~ackerel
12.10,80 1930 5 n.m. Nth of Halibut Elk. Carrier

Unknown
World Creation
Aristeus K.7.. Michalos
Ektor

15,10.80
26.10.80 26,10,80 11.11.80
19.11.80

1345
1315
1830 0330 0423

4,9 n.m, NW side Hali-
but 3 n.m. Nth side of Halibut 3 n.ro, Nth side of Tuna 4,7 n.m. NW side of Halibut 3,5 n,m. NW of Halibut

Blk. Carrier
LPG Tanker Fr, Blk. Carrier
Cargo

Apex
World Argonaut Anangci Triumph

21.11.80
23.1 L80 28,11.80

2024
1450 0510

Passed between Madin & Halibut 3.5 n,m. NW of Halibut 2.5 n.m. Kingfish A

Fr./Con,
Blk. Carrier Blk. Carrier

Unknown
Shin prima Maru
Marguerite Venture

28,11.80 30,11.80 02.12.80

1415 0500 1905

2.2 n.m. Nth side of KingfishA
Passed between Halibut and Tuna 7 n.m. Halibut

Blk, Carrier Freighter Cargo

Owner
Skros Maritime S.A. Dansk Esso A/S Eddie SS. Co.

Registry
Greece Danish Taiwan

Gross tonnage Remarks
9,444 Master interviewed 21,961 Escorted out of area 30,929 Master interviewed

E.B. Ababys

Norway

Yasuda Shintaku Ginko
K.K.
st. loannis Shp. Corp.
Mitsubishi Shoji

Japan
Greek Japan

Mohawk Shp. Corp.
Altair de Kavegacion SA Swansea Sh. Co. S.A.
Hapag-I.Ioyd A.G. Denizcilik Ananim Sirketi
Sankyo Kaiun K.K.

Greek Panama
Panama Hamburg Turkish
Japan

22,716 Advised of restricted area
3,421 Escorted Ollt of area

9,069 10,000T
14,667 4,444
6,644.92 27,407 23,636

Letter to agent Advised of restricted area \traster interviewed Communications established ).tlaster interviewed
Master interviewed

8,467 Master interviewed

Eagle S.S.Co.

Greece

14,976 Intercepted by HMAS Bombard No Communications

Sanko Line

Monrovia 39,411 Master interviewed

Ilarri!\ Shp. Co.

Greek

Monrovia Carriers Co. Greek

Master interviewed 16,022 Master interviewed

Marmandato Cia. Naviera Apex Shipping Corp.

Greek Greek

16,253 Letter to agents 16,398 Master interviewed

Gower Shp. Co.

Greek

Anangcl Triumph Cia. Greek

Naviera

19,264 13,633

Master interviewed Intercepted by HMAS Bombard Unable to contact

Yashima Kaiun K.K. Lilylield Co, Ltd,

Japan f-iberian

2,863 Intercepted and escorted out of area
7,027 Master interviewed

Government Expenditure at Airports
(Question No. 294)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:

Is he now able to provide the relevant information for 1979-80 referred to in answer to Question No, 6206 in the 31st
Parliament (Hansard, 19 August 1980, page 454),

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Information relating to 1979-80 financial year, which was not available when answering question 6206 in the 31st Parlia-
ment (Hansard, 19 August 1980, page 454), is as follows:

Total Government expenditure incurred by the Depart-
ments of Transport, Housing and Construction and Adminis-
trative Services on maintenance operation and new works at each of Australia's International Airports in 1979-80 is as follows:

Sydncy Melbourne Brisbane Perth Darwin

$'000 20,087
16,711 11,479
7,474 5,398

Total Government expenditure incurred by the Departments of Transport, I-lousing and Construction and Adminis-
trative Services on maintenance, operation and new works at each of Australia's domestic airports in 1979-80 is as follows:

(For the purposes of this table, domestic airports are defined as those serviced by the two major trunk operators AAA and TAA or, in the case of Port Hedland, MMA and
TAA).

$'000

Queensland

Coolangalta Maryborough Bundaberg Rockhampton Mackay Townsville Cairns Mt (sa

1,713 113 751
1,212 1,092 2,289 1,833 1,447

Australian Capital Territory Canberra

2.474

Hobart Launccston
Wynyard Devonport

Tasmania

1.988 2,772
453 450

94 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Adelaide

South Australia

$'000 7,084

Northern Territory Alice Springs Tindal Tennant Creek
Western Australia Port Hedland

2,022 239 397
2,477

Impact of Alcohol and Drugs on Driver Behaviour
(Question No. 296)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
What action has he taken at the time of preparation of the answer to this question in respect of each recommendation of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Road Safety following its inquiry into the impact of alcohol and drugs on driver behaviour.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
It is the policy of the Government to examine all such reports in detail before making public its response to particular recommendations. When this process has been completed in respect of the report in question, I shall be making a statement to the House.

Motor Cycle Accidents
(Question No. 297)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) How many (a) motor cyclists and (b) pillion passengers were (i) killed or (ii) injured in road accidents in each year since 1949.
(2) Is he able to say in how many instances referred to in part (1) the rider of the motorcycle was at fault, for each year since 1974; if not, what information is he able to provide on the (a) percentage and (b) number ofroad accidents in which the motor cycle rider was believed to be at fault, for the same years.
Mr HuntThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) The number of motor cycle riders recorded as (i) killed and (ii) injured in each year in road accidents since 1949 is as follows:
MOTORCYCLE RIDERS (EXCLUDING PILLION PASSENGERS)

Year

Killed Injured

1949 1950 1951
1952 1953 1954 1955 1956
1957
1958 1959

Not available in national tabulations

384

5,951

402

6,683

411

7,263

337

6,987

347

7,584

311

6,904

252

6,193

231

6,278

198

5,614

182

5,375

Year
1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979

Killed Injured

157

5,444

117

4,716

115

4,027

91

3,459

89

3,203

83

2,954

78

2,916

96

3,385

124 4,198

148

5,284

173

6,061

235

7,825

277

9,213

330 10,814

400 11,287

365 10,854

408 10,566

386 10,329

370

9,552

Not yet available from national or State publications

(b) Information on the number of pillion passengers (i)
killed and (ii) injured in each year since 1949 is not held on a national basis. The only available figures are for New South Wales, and South Australia for the years listed below. Figures on the number of motorcycle riders killed and injured in those States are also included for purposes of comparison.

Motorcycle riders

Pillion passengers

Killed Injured

Killed Injured

1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978
1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978

New South Wales

106

3,783

16

437

98

4,292

17

443

130

4,852

22

533

140 5,181

16

617

142 4,483

19

609

135

4,239

25

551

125

4,055

15

508

137

3,731

10

498

South Australia

12

812

14

930

28

1,313

23

1,736

46

1,820

30

1,738

41

1,622

42

1,625

33

1,403

1

118

7

169

3

208

9

281

6

293

276

2

253

7

216

3

192

(2) No.
Information held in the Office of Road Safety on (a) percentage and (b) number of road accidents in which the motor cycle rider was believed by the data collecting authority to be at fault is as follows:

Answers to Questions

24 Fcbruary 1981 REPRESENTATlVES 95

1975 1976 1977 1978
1977 1978

Casualty accidents involving
motor cycles

Casualty
accidents in which motor
cycle rider believed to
beat fault

South Australia

1,861

924

1,762

959

1,744

962

1,502

818

Tasmania

222

117

180

92

Percentagc in which
rider at fault
50 54 55 54
53 51

Voice Logging Recorders and Transportable Reproducers
(Question No. 299)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(I) For what specific purposes are the voice logging rccorders and transportable reproducers being purchased at a cost of $218,656 as mentioned in Commonwealth of Australia Gazelle G41, page 78, Reference item Cl /78/151.
(2) When will the equipment be delivered, where will it be located and when is it expected to become operative.
(3) Is the equipment intended to replace equipment in use; if so, what is the nature of the equipment being replaced.
(4) Who were the unsuccessful tenderers.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I) Recording of all voice communication between aircraft pilots and Air Traffic Controllers and playback of the recordings.
(2) Commencing on 2 January 1981, one unit per month until completion of the contract. Four voice logging recorders and two transportable reproducers will be located at Sydney Airport and one transportable reproducer will be located at Melhourne Airport. Commissioning is expected in june-july 1981.
(3) Yes. The new 42 channel units will replace ten channel Magnasync recorders and associated reproducers.
(4) Racal Electronics Pty Ltd, Rank Industries Australia Pty Ltd (Vic.), Rank Industries Australia Pty Ltd (NSW), Consolidated Electronics Industries Pty Ltd, Jacoby Mitchell Pty Ltd.
Runway Visual Range Measuring Equipment
(Question No. 300)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) What is the specific (a) nature and (b) purpose of the runway visual range measuring equipment being purchased at a cost of $296,412 and referred to as item Cl /78/30 on page 78 of Commonwealth of Australia Gazette G41.
(2) Where will the equipment be located, when will it be delivered and when will it become operative.
(3) What equipment is currently in use providing the function for which the new equipment is being purchased.
(4) Was Australian manufactured equipment purchased; if

not, why not.
(5) Who were the unsuccessful tenderers.
Mr HuntThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) The equipment ordered consists of three complete runway visual range measuring systems. Each system consists of three transmissometers, one background luminance sensor, one mini-computer hased processor unit and data recording facilities.
(h) The purpose of the equipment is to provide Air Traffic Controllers with a measure of the range at which runway lights can be perceived under reduced visibility conditions.
(2) The equipment is to be installed on runway 16 at Sydney airport and runways 16 and 27 at Melbourne airport. It is expected that the equipment will be delivered by mid 1981 and it is proposed that the three systems will be progressively installed and commissioned during 1982.
(3) Runway visual range measuring equipment of an early design was installed on runway 16 at Sydney airport and runway 16 at Melbourne airport, but neither system is currently in usc. Because of its age, spare parts are difficult to obtain and the replacement equipment will be more effective.
(4) No. No offer was received from an Australian manufacturcr.
(5) lIawker Pacific Pty Ltd, Vieom International Ply Ltd, Nissko-Iwai Co. (Aus!.) Pty Ltd, Email Ltd, ASEA Pty Ltd. Marconi Radar Systems Ltd, AEG-Telefunken.

Drink-driving Publicity

(Question No. 301)

Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:

(I) What is the precise nature of the evaluation of drink-

driving publicity to be carried at a cost of $97,730 referred

out to

by as

iRteemarkQR4/e0s1eaIrIc, hpPagtye

Ltd 80.

Commonwealth of Australia Gazette G41.

(2) Where will the evaluation be conducted and over what period.

(3) When will the evaluation be completed.

(4) Will he make the results of the evaluation available to the Parliament; if not, why not.

(5) Have previous evaluations of this nature been sponsored by his Department; if so, what were the results.

(6) Who were the unsuccessful tenderers.

Mr Hunt The answer to the honourable mcmber's question is as follows:

(I) The Oepartment of Transport's Office of Road Safety is testing a newly-developed drink-driving public education
campaign in Tasmania. This includes the conduct by Reark Reseach Pty Ltd of detailed interviews with a sample of 3,200 persons aged 18-50 to provide information on drinking and
drink-driving hehaviour followed by an analysis of the collected data.

(2) Hohart and Launceston: I September 1980 to I June 1981.

(3) July 1981.

(4) I expect to be ahle to inform the Parliament of the outcome of this research.

(5) Research of this nature related to drink-driving public education has not previously been undertaken by the
Department.

(6) P.A. Consulting Services Pty Ltd.

96 REPRESENTATrVES 24 february 1981

Answers to Questions

Cargo Transported between Australia and Japan
(Question No. 302)
!VIr 'Vlorris asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) What tonnage of (a) general and (b) hulk cargo has been transported between Australia and Japan hy sea by (i) Australian ftag (ii) Japanese tlag and (iii) other vessels, in each year since 1970.
(2) What percentage of (a) general and (h) bulk cargo do the figures referred to in parts 1(i) to 1 (iii) represent.
IVIr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

The Australian Statistician has advised that not all of the dctailed information sought by the honourable member is available. Although the Australian Bureau of Statistics compiles separate statistics on cargo transported between Australia and Japan (a) by vessels used as bulkships and/or tankers and (b) by other vessels, the figures are not subdivided to show the tonnage carried under dift'erent flags. Information on cargo transported by Australian, Jap8nese, and other countries' vessels is available only for total overseas cargo (a) loaded and (b) discharged at Australian ports.
Relevant available information for the period 1972-73 to 1978-79 and for the nine months ending March 1980 is shown in the following tables. Corresponding figures prior to 1972-73 are not available,

Table 1
CARGO LOADED IN AUSTRALIA FOR DISCHARGE IN JAPAN, BY TYPE OF VESSEL, 1972-73 TO 1978-79 AND NINE MONTHS ENDED MARCH 1980

Bulk (a)

General (b)

Total

Year

'000
revenue tonnes

%of total

'000 revenue
tonnes

%of total

'000 revenue
tonnes

1972-73

95,179

98.5

1973-74

107,997

98.8

1974-75

105,228

98.9

1975-76

JOl,827

98.8

1976-77

106,601

98.8

1977-78

98A23

98.9

1978-79

YJ,SS7

99.0

Nine Months Ended ~Iarch

1980(c)

78,305

98.3

1,444 1,361 1,167 1,204 1,314 1,113
920
1,352

1.5

96,623

1.2

109,358

1.1

106,395

1.2

103,031

1.2

107,915

1.1

99,536

1.0

94,807

1.7

79,657

For footnotes see Table 4.

Table 2
CARGO DISCHARGED IN AUSTRALIA FROM JAPAN, BY TYPE OF VESSEL, 1972-73 TO 1978-79 AND NINE MONTHS ENDED MARCH 1980

Bulk(a)

General(b)

Total

Year

'000
revenue lonnes

%of total

'000
revenue tonnes

%of total

'000
revenue tonnes

1972-73

1,977

59.2

1973-74

3,033

66.1

1974-75

3,586

70.4

1975-76

3,251

64.8

1976-77

3,328

66.1

1977-78

3,191

75.7

1978-79

3,224

76.3

Nine Months Ended March

1980(c)

2,015

63.4

1,363 1,553 1,509 1,764 1,703 1,025 1,003
1,165

40.8 33.9 29.6 35.2 33.9 24.3 23.7
36.6

3,340 4,586 5,095 5,015 5,031 4,216 4,227
,l,l80

For footnotes see Table 4.

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 97

Table 3
CARGO LOADED AT AUSTRALIAN PORTS, FOR ALL OVERSEAS COUNTRIES, BY FLAG AND TYPE OF VESSEL, 1972-73 TO 1978-79 AND NINE MONTHS ENDED MARCH 1980

Australian Flag

Japanese flag

Other

Total

Type of vessel

'000
revenue tonncs

%of total

'000 revenue
tonnes

%of total

'000 revenue
tonnes

%of total

'000
revenue tonnes

Bulk (a)-

1972-73

210

0.2

1973-74

96

0.1

1974-75

87

0.1

1975-76

85

0.1

1976-77

1,786

1.1

1977-78

3,192

2.0

1978-79

3,638

2.3

Nine Months Ended March

1980(c)

4,21 R

3.1

General(b)-

1972-73

359

4.6

1973-74

269

3.6

1974-75

236

3.3

1975-76

316

4.7

1976-77

370

5.8

1977-78

384

7.2

1978-79

450

7.3

Nine Months Ended March

1980(c)

320

6.8

Total-

1972-73

569

0.4

1973-74

365

0.2

1974-75

323

0.2

1975-76

401

0.3

1976-77

2,156

1.3

1977-78

3,576

2.1

1978-79

4,088

2.4

Nine Months Ended March

1980(c)

4,538

3.3

56,972 57,916 62,608 65,399 71,673 71,814 66,417
52,492
849 715 729 751 878 806 604
788
57,821 58,631 63,337 66,149 72,551 72,620 67,021
53,280

45.3 39.6 39.0 43.1 44.6 44.5 41.2
39.1
11.0 9.6 10.2 11.1 13.7 15.0 9.8
16.7
43.3 38.2 37.7 41.7 43.4 43.6 40.1
38.4

68,506

54.5

88,107

60.3

97,952

61.0

86,398

56.9

87,263

54.3

86,324

53.5

91,092

56.5

77,431

57.7

6,514

84.4

6,439

86.7

6,181

86.5

5,672

84.2

5,148

80.5

4,180

77.8

5,103

82.9

3,622

76.6

75,020

56.2

94,546

61.6

104,133

62.1

92,071

58.0

92,411

55.3

90,504

54.3

96,195

57.5

81,053

58.4

125,688 146,119 160,647 151,882 160,722 161,330 161,147
134,141
7,722 7,423 7,146 6,739 6,3% 5,370 6,157
4,730
133,410 153,542 167,793 158,621 167,118 166,700 167,304
138,871

For footnotes see Table 4.
TABLE 4: Cargo discharged at Australian ports, from all overseas countries, by flag and type of vessel, 1972-73 to 1978-79 and nine months
ended March 1980

Type o[vessel

Australian flag -----

'000
revenue tonnes

%af total

Japanese flag
'000 revenue
tannes

%of total

Other
'000 revenue
tonnes

%of total

Total
---
'000 revenue
tonncs

Bulk (a)

1.972-73

1973-74

89

0.4

1974-75

59

0.3

1975-76

189

1.0

1976-77

232

1.1

1977-78

420

2.0

1978-79

256

1.2

Nine Months Ended March

1980 (c)

112

0.7

General (b)-

1972-73

473

7.4

1973-74

511

6.1

1974-75

488

6.2

1975-76

779

9.9

1976-77

802

9.9

1977-78

532

9.3

1978-79

860

12.0

1,187

6.3

1,757

7.9

2,290

10.4

2,312

12.2

2,507

12.4

2,446

11.5

2,323

10.8

1,593

9.9

662

10.3

835

9.9

779

9.9

893

11.4

993

12.2

643

11.2

543

7.6

17,598

93.7

20,444

91.7

19,664

89.3

16,517

86.8

17,482

86.5

18,379

86.5

18,897

88.0

14,462

89.5

5,300

82.4

7,060

84.0

6,640

84.0

6,194

78.7

6,312

77.9

4,56J

79.5

5,758

80.4

18,785 22,290 22,013 19,018 20,221 21,245 21,476
16,167
6,435 8,406 7,907 7,866 8,107 5,736 7,161

98 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 19R 1

Answers to Questions

Type of vessel

Australian flag
'000 revenue
tonnes

%of total

Japanese !lag
------
'000 revenue
tonnes

%of total

Other
'000 revenue
tonnes

%of total

Total
'000 revenue
tonnes

Nine Months Ended March

1980 (c)

570

10.0

Tota1-

1972-73

473

1.9

1973-74

600

2.0

1974-75

548

1.8

1975-76

968

3.6

1976-77

1,034

3.6

1977-78

952

3.5

1978-79

1,115

3.9

Kine Months Ended March

1980 (c)

682

3.1

641

11.2

1,849

7.3

2,593

8.4

3,069

10.3

3,206

11.9

3,500

12.4

3,090

11.5

2,866

10.0

2,234

10.2

4,507

78.8

22,898

90.8

27,503

89.6

26,305

87.9

22,710

84.5

23,795

84.0

22,939

85.0

24,656

86.1

18,969

86.7

5,718
25,220 30,696 29,922 26,884 28,329 26,981 28,637
21,885

(a) Cargo carried by vessels used as bulkships and/or tankers. (b) Cargo carried by other vessels. (c) Preliminary, subject to revision. Notes: Any difference between totals and sums of components is due to rounding.
Quantities are expressed in Revenue Tonnes, which is the basis on which freight is charged. Revenue Tonnes is obtained by adding mass (tonnes weight) and volume (cubic metres) units.
Australian Bureau of Statistics, Canberra, ACT.

Replacement of Plate Glass Window
(Question No. 304)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) What are the circumstances of the payment of $1,664 to the Australian Mutual Provident Society for the replacement of a plate glass window reference MSDI08, page 59, Commonwealth of Australia Gazette G48.
(2) Where is the window located.
Mr Hunt -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Australian Mutual Provident Society is the owner of the building where a departmental officer, while carrying out bis duties, accidentally broke the shop-front window of a commercial tenant. The order was arranged to allow reimbursement of costs relating to replacement of the glass, sign writing and damaged furnishings.
(2) Scissortrix Hair Designers, Public Concourse, Level 3, Lombard House, Canberra City, ACT.
Hire of Boeing 747 Aircraft
(Question No. 305)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) When, where and for what precise periods is the Boeing 747 aircraft being contracted from Qantas Airways Ltd at a cost of $59,977, reference RPTB 20, page 59, Commonwealth ojAustralia Gazette, G 48, to be used.
(2) How many departmental officers will receive training under the terms of the contract.
(3) Who were the unsuccessful tenderers.
Mr Hunt -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I ) (a) Commenced IS August 1980.
(b) Qantas Flight Training Centre, Sydney (Kingsford Smith) Airport.

(c) Training includes:
Ground technical training-IS days Ground simulator instruction24 hours Flight simulator instruclion-22 hours Aircraft base training 8 hours.
(2) One.
(3) Nil; only Qantas is ahle to provide the facilities required.
Hire of Boeing 747 Aircraft
(Question No. 307)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) When and at what locations is the Boeing 747 aircraft being hired at a cost of 73,800, reference 2'v1375/1/38, page 59 of the Conm1lJIlwealth a/Australia Gazerte No. G 48 to be used.
(2) For what precise period is the aircraft to be utilised.
(3) How many departmental officers will receive continuation training during the hire of the aircraft.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) Commenced Scptember 1980.
(h) Qantas Aircraft Base Training Centre, Avalon, Victoria.
(2) Twelve hours.
(3) Three; two Examiners of Airmen (six hours each) and concurrently, at no additional charge, one Flight Engineer Inspector.
Inertial Navigation System
(Question No. 308)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon nOLice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) What is the specific nature and purpose of the inertial navigation system being purchased under contract reference

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 99

5/2/015 shown on page 60 of Commonwealth of Australia Gazette No. G 48.
(2) Is the system to replace or modify existing systems; if so, why precisely is the purchase being made.
(3) Where is the inertial navigation system to be located and when is it expected to be delivered and become operative.
(4) Who were the unsuccessful tenderers.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Inertial Navigation System (INS) is a very reliable, self-contained, all-weather navigation system which is independent of ground-based navigation aids. It is used in the Department of Transport's three Fokker F28 aircraft to assist in the calibration and testing of navigation aids. Each F28 aircraft has two INS systems installed, with one aircraft having the capacity for an additional third unit for developmental work.
(2) No; the item being purchased is a back-up spares unit.
(3) The unit is expected to be delivered during April 1981 and will be held at the Flying Unit, Department of Transport, Essendon Airport, Victoria. The unit wiII be operational upon delivery, and will be installed in an aircraft when one of the presently installed units becomes unserviceable or is removed for maintenance.
(4) The equipment is available only from Litton Systems Inc.; an order was placed following the granting of a Certificate of Exemption in accordance with Finance Regulation 52AA (4).
Apple and Pear Stabilisation Scheme
(Question No. 313)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(I) What amount of funds is being provided to each of the States by the Commonwealth as part of the Government's decision to adopt the Industries Assistance Commission recommendation to phase out the apple and pear stabilisation scheme.
(2) What criteria does the Commonwealth apply with respect to the expenditure of these funds.
(3) Is he able to say whether (a) Tasmanian and (b) Western Australian growers are using funds in a manner meeting the criteria.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) As part of the assistance measures announced in June 1980 for the apple and pear industries, the Government offered to continue supplementary assistance on a dollar for dollar basis with the States over the four seasons 1981 to 1984 up to a total maximum Commonwealth commitment of $3 million for apples and $800,000 for pears. Continuation of the supplementary assistance is intended to assist growers who have been reliant on exports to traditional "at risk" markets in the United Kingdom and Europe to adjust to the new export price support arrangements to apply after the 1980 season, and I anticipate that the allocation of the Commonwealth commitment among the States will take into account relative shares of exports to those markets in past seasons. The question of allocation is, however, still under consideration with the States.
(2) Expenditure of supplementary assistance funds may be for:
(a) adjustment assistance; and

(b) supplementary price support payments for apple exports during the period of the phasing out of the existing stabilisation arrangements.
(3) Details of orchard reconstruction programs proposed by a number of States are presently being considered. Although it is the Government's intention that those proposals, along with any others bearing on the reconstruction that may be agreed upon by the Commonwealth and States. should be flexible enough to meet any special needs of States and regions, adequate safeguards will be applied to ensure that expenditures by the States are consistent with the guidelines listed at (2) above.
Disabled Children
(Question No. 326)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(I) Has the Government accepted the recommendations contained in the Report by the Women's Advisory Council entitled My Child was Born Disabled relating to the extension of the Isolated Patients' Travel and Accommodation Assistance Scheme to provide for (a) follow-up treatment with the child's established and appropriate doctors and professionals with whom good rapport has been formed, regardless of their location, (b) funding for parents to visit their children when those children are in the care of distant institutions, (c) reimbursement of the cost of air fares incurred in obtaining treatment not locally available and in special cases, where parents seek particular services that are not available in their region, the request for reimbursement of air fares to be evaluated by a Board and (d) assistance to people with disabled children who live closer than 200 kilometres from their specialist.
(2) If so, when will the scheme be extended.
(3) If the Government will not accept the recommendations of the Report, why not.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (3) The substance of the matters recommended in the Report by the National Women's Advisory Council in connection with extension of the Isolated Patients' Travel and Accommodation Assistance Scheme (IPTAAS) has previously been given careful consideration. With regard to the particular points in your question, my comments are as follows:
(a) IPTAAS allowances are payable to patients from isolated areas for follow-up treatment by medical specialists or consultant physicians provided that the specialist or consultant physician is the nearest suitable one, and other relevant criteria are met. The nearest suitable specialist is normally regarded as the nearest specialist in the particular specialty but other specialists can be considered where it can be shown that the particular treatment required is not available from the nearest specialist.
(b) IPTAAS is designed to assist patients from isolated areas requiring specialist medical treatment. As extension of the Scheme to assist parents visiting children would significantly increase the scope and hence the cost of the Scheme such a change cannot be accepted at this stage.
(c) Air fares are reimbursable (less the first $20 per visit) provided other eligibility criteria of the Scheme are met and the referring medical practitioner indicates that air travel is necessary for medical reasons.
(d) IPTAAS was designed to assist people living in isolated areas to obtain specialist medical treatment not available locally. Because of funds limitations it

100 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

was decided that only those people who have to travel at least 200 kilometres to obtain specialist medical treatment should be assisted. To ensure some equity between patients living beyond 200 kilometres from specialist medical treatment and those living within 200 kilometres, a patient contribution of $20 is deducted from the allowance in respect of cach visit.
The other recommendations of the Report not already covered under IPTAAS would so alter the scope and intention of the Scheme that major cost escalation would he inevitable. With the Government's current Budget strategy of restraint on public spending, such cost escalation is unacceptable. Nonetheless, modifications to the Scheme have been recently approved to assist those young people with cleft lip and palate requiring orthodontic treatment and action is in hand to amend the legislation at an early date.
Public Service Salaries
(Question No. 338)
!VIr Les McMahon asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(l) Has his attention been drawn to statistics which indicate that, since November 1974, prices and average weekly earnings have risen by 72 per cent while the wages of Third Division officers of the Australian Public Service have risen by only 45 to 51 per cent.
(2) Is it a fact that over the same period, the average earnings of public servants have risen by 53 per cent while the average minimum award rate has risen by 166 per cent.
(3) Has the figure of 53 per cent referred to in part (2) been inflated by reclassification.
(4) How does he propose to rectify the wages of public servants being overtaken by the wages of the rest of the community.
Mr VinerThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am advised that the figures in (1), (2) and (3) are broadly correct with the exception that the 166 per cent shown in (2) should read 66 per cent. J am also advised that there is no established relationship nor should there he, between movements in the rates of pay of Third Division public servants and the particular indices referred to in (I) and (2).
In relation to (4), I have been advised by the Public Service Board that earlier this year it made a pay offer of from 5.5 per cent to 5.8 per cent in full settlement of the claims lodged with it and the Public Service Arbitrator for this group. That offer was rejected by the relevant staff organisations and in subsequent proceedings before a Full Bench of the Concilation and Arbitration Commission a 4 per ccnt interim increase was awarded with effect from 22 May 1980. Furthcr arbitral proceedings to determine the final increase for this group are proceeding.
Cosmetics
(Question No. 339)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(l) Can he say how many laboratories in ;\ustralia carry out the Ames test when testing cosmetics.
(2) Can he say whether there are any investigations currently being conducted into the production and marketing of cosmetics which may cause genetic damage or cancer.
(3) What steps will the Government take to ensure that these products are not marketed in Australia.

Mr MacKenar~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) No. Records are not kept of the laboratories in Australia which carry out tests on cosmetics. Therefore no indication can be given as to how many laboratories lIse the Ames test as part of their evaluation of cosmetic products.
The Ames test is, however, widely used in the toxicological evaluation of all new chemicals and the Cell Biology Unit of the Commonwealth Institute of Health is experienced in its use. NEvertheless, it must be realised that the Ames test represents only a small fraction of the total testing necessary for an adequate toxicological evaluation. While the Ames test is considered useful as a primary screen for bacterial mutagenicity, extrapolation of results to predict human carcinogenicity is not scientifically sound.
(2) Information regarding chemicals, including ingredients in cosmetics which come under suspicion as being mutagenic or carcinogenic, is regularly forwarded to the appropriate expert Committees of the National Health and Medical Research Council (NH & MRC) for evaluation.
Apart from certain hair dyes which are under constant review by the Poisons Schedule (Standing) Committee and the Carcinogenic Substances (Standing) Committee, I am not aware of any other problem with cosmetics which would warrant investigation into their possible mutagenic or carcinogenic potential.
(3) Should it become necessary to restrict the marketing of certain cosmetic products, then the NH & MRC would recommend to the State and Territory authorities responsible for administering poisons legislation that such products be banned.
Cosmetics
(Question No. 340)
Mr Lcs McMahon asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) lIas his attention been drawn to reports that Australian scientists are insufficiently trained to test cosmetic products which may include cancer-inducing chemicals; if so, is there any substance to these reports.
(2) If there is substance to these reports, what steps will he take to rectify this.
Mr MacKellar~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I am not aware of such reports and I would not agree that Australian scientists are insufficiently trained to test cosmetic products which may include cancer-inducing chemicals. The reason for reliance on overseas testing is that with Australia's limited resources it would be totally impracticable to duplicate the vast amount of testing already carried out overseas by specialist testing facilities such as the British Industrial Biological Research Association, of which my Department is a member.
Faculty of Medicine
(Question No. 341)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
When will he report on the progress of the scheme being conducted at the University of Newcastle, New South Wales, to admit students to the Faculty of Medicine on grounds of overall merit as distinct from strictly academic merit.
Mr Fife- -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 101

The University of Newcastle has established student admission procedures for the Faculty of Medicine ori the basis that multiple criteria are preferable to the single criterion of academic achievement. The policy is being evaluated by the University and as part of this process the Faculty of Medicine has recently published a paper on admission to the medical school. I will arrange for the Honourable Member for Sydney to receive a copy of the paper.
National Employment Strategy for Aboriginals
(Question No. 342)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(I) How many National Employment Strategy for Aboriginals (NESA) trainees have been employed by Senators and Members of the House of Representatives.
(2) What office equipment has been supplied for each trainee.
(3) What arrangements have been made for the supply of office equipment for NESA trainees in electorate offices.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Information provided to my Department indicates that twenty trainees have been employed by Senators and Members.
(2) and (3) See reply to House of Representatives Question No. 6310 (Hansard, 17 September 1980, page 1458).
Unemployment Statistics
(Question No. 343)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister for Employ- .ment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) How many persons were registered as being unemployed in the Electoral Division of Banks in (a) 1978, (b) 1979 and (c) 1980 to 30 November.
(2) How many persons in each year and period referred to in part (1) and being registered as unemployed were (a) immediate former schoolleavers seeking their first job and (b) under 25 years of age.
(3) How many persons in each year and period referred to in part (1) and registered as unemployed in categories referred to in parts (2) (a) and (2) (b) werefound work.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (3) The Electoral Division of Banks covers an area which is serviced by parts of a number of Commonwealth Employment Service Offices (CES) including Hurstville, Bankstown and Campsie. Statistics of unemployed persons registered with the CES are compiled according to individual employment office areas and are not available in respect of the Electoral Division of Banks as a whole. As a result, the information is not available.
Home Savings Grant Scheme
(Question No. 350)
Mr Darling asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
Further to his press statement 130/80 of 26 November 1980 in which reference was made to the Government's Home Savings Grant Scheme, on what does he base his assertion that

about 20,000 home seekers per year will obtain (a) assistance or (b) increased assistance as a result of the Scheme.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
These estimates are based on operational statistics of the Home Savings Grant Scheme and confidential information provided to the Department of Housing and Construction by housing finance institutions on dwelling prices paid by first home buyers and their family characteristics.
USSR Mercantile Fleet
(Questiou No. 352)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) How many Union of Soviet Socialist Republic's mercantile vessels visited Australian ports in (a) 1979-80 and (b) the period 1 July 1980 to the date of preparation of the answer to this question.
(2) What tonnage of goods was transported (a) from and (b) to Australia by vessels of the USSR mercantile fleet during each of the last five years.
(3) What percentage did the goods referred to in parts (2) (a) and (2) (b) constitute of total marine-carried (a) exports and (b) imports in each of the last five years.
(4) Is he able to say what percentage the freight rates charged in the period were above or below ruling respective liner conference rates.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) The Australian Statistician has advised that there were 192 visits by USSR flag vessels to Australia during the period July 1979 to June 1980. A number of the visits involved calls at more than one Australian port. These figures are preliminary and subject to revision.
(b) Figures are not yet available for the period following June 1980.
(2) The Australian Statistician has advised that the tonnage of goods transported by vessels of the USSR mercantile fleet in each of the last five years was:
(a) From Australia COOO freight tonnes) 1975-76-1,950; 1976-77-1,208; 1977-78-595;
1978-79-695; 1979-80-1,055 (Preliminary)
(b) To Australia COOO tonnes) 1975-76-226; 1976-77-274; 1977-78-125;
1978-79-202; 1979-80-228 (Preliminary)
(3) The Australian Statistician has advised that the goods transported under parts 2 (a) and 2 (b) above constituted the following percentages of total exports and imports by sea in each of the last five years
(a) Exports
1975-76-1.23; 1976-77-0.72; 1977-78-0.36; 1978-79-0.42; 1979-80-0.56 (Preliminary) (b) Imports
1975-76-0.84; 1976-77-0.97; 1977-78-0.46; 1978-79-0.71; 1979-80-0.76 (Preliminary) (4) Two USSR shipping lines operate in Australian liner trades. Baltic Shipping Company has been a member of the Australia to Europe Shipping Conference since 1969 and charges Conference rates. The Far Eastern Shipping Company (PESCO) has operated outside the Conferences in the East Asia-Japan trade since mid 1976. FESCO's service in

102 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 198]

Answers to Questions

the West Coast North America/Australia trade, which commenced mid 1977 was discontinued in July 1980. It has been reported that the general guidelines of FESCO are to offer freight rates around IS per cent below the relevant Conference rates. However, the percentage differential varies from cargo to cargo and complete information on the level of rate cutting is not available.
Motor Vehicle Manufacturing Industry
(Question No. 364)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 4 December 1980;
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the Australian Financial Review of 3 December 1980 that the latest Australian Bureau of Statistics figures indicate that local car manufacturers obtained only 75.1 per cent of the Australian market in the six months to Octoher 1980.
(2) What steps will the Government take to enforce its policy of 80 per cent of the market for local car manufacturers.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I) Yes. The market share figures quoted are issued monthly by the Department of Industry and Commerce, not the Australian Bureau ofStatistics.
(2) Recent trends in the market share performance of local manufacturers were taken into account by the Government in its recently announced decision to set the global quota level for 1981 at 88,000 units, compared to 90,970 in 1980.
Disabled Persons
(Question No. 366)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 4 December 1980;
Since 1981 is the International Year of the Disabled Person, will he make available to the States emergency services such as the police and fire brigade, the special telephone aid for the deaf which is known by the trade namc Porta-Printer 11.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Porta-Printer 11 telephone aid for the deaf is available to the public through a private company, Intercept Communications, PO Box 297, Camberwell, Vic. 3124. Telecom has given a permit for its connection to the telephone network and, as part of its contribution to the 1981 International Year of Disabled Persons, is to act as a distributing agent for the company as soon as an appropriate agreement has been concluded.
It is a matter for each emergency service to decide its own requirements for such a unit and to obtain one either from the supplying company or, in due course, from Telecom.
Social Security Regional Offices
(Question No. 369)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) Is it a fact that the workload of the Department of Social Security has increased since (a) the introduction of health benefit cards renewable every 2 weeks, for sickness benefit recipients and (b) the Commonwealth acceptance of immediate responsibility for payment of supporting parents benefits.

(2) Is it also a fact that this workload will be compounded with the increased number of schoolleavers becoming eligible for unemployment benefits.
(3) How many positions have been abolished in the Department of Social Security Regional OfficeS in the Electoral Division of Griffith.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) (a) Health benefits cards for sickness benefits recipients were introduced on 4 November 1980. It was expected that this would cause a slight workload increase. The Department has estimated that an additional 11 statT would be required in the Department to cope with this increased workload.
(b) The acceptance by the Commonwealth of immediate responsibility for the payment of supporting parents benefits took place in most States including Queensland from 6 November 1980. It was estimated that 115 additional staff would be necessary to handle the increased workload arising from the payment of these benefits.
The above estimates represent a total increase of 126 staff throughout a national network of 161 regional offices. The impact of these changes on anyone office will therefore be minimal. The situation is being monitored continually to ensure that no problems arise in any offices.
(2) The Department experiences an annual seasonal workload peak during the months of December, January and February. Specific arrangements are made in advance to assist regional offices to cope with these peaks.
(3) The Buranda Regional Office is the only office of the Department of Social Security in the Electoral Division of Griffith.
The workload and staffing levels in all regional offices are reviewed at regular intervals. As a resull of these reviews, the establishment of the Buranda Office was reduced by seven positions on 4 September J980 from 93 to 86 and by a further seven positions on 22 Octoher 1980. The current establishment of 79 positions is considered to be appropriate for the existing workload at the office and results in the office achieving levels of productivity comparable with other regional offices. However, an additional four positions (3 full-time and I part-time) have recently been allocated to the office in preparation for the additional workload expected over the December to January period.
Air Safety
(Question No. 370)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to Transport Australia's recent report entitled Airway Facility Maintenance and OperationPlan.
(2) Do pages 8 and 9 of this report recommend with respect to the fate of maintenance of airways engineering and safety matters that either:
(a) responsibility be handed over to private interests or (b) partial responsibility be handed over to private
interests or (c) responsihility for maintenance be left with Transport
Australia.
(3) Will:
(a) air safety (b) defence and (c) security

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 103

be prejudiced if the responsibility for maintenance of radio and radar equipment and of air navigational aids is turned over to the private sector.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) Yes, I am aware of the Department of Transport Australia's recent report entitled Airway Facility Maintenance and Operation Plan.
(2) Pages 8 and 9 of the report examine three options for the future development of airways engineering maintenance policy. In evaluating these options, the report concludes that the Department must, in order to satisfy statutory obligations, retain functional responsibility for the safe operation and maintenance of air route and airway facilities.
(3) As indicated in my response to part 2 of the Honourable Member's question, the Department is to retain the functional responsibility for the safe operation and maintenance of air route and airway facilities. Consequently, the questions posed in respect of effect on
(a) air safety
(b) defence and
(c) security
do not arise.
Bureau of Customs
(Question No. 371)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to claims by Mr David Cable, the President of the Customs Agents Federation, of a 5 month delay in the processing of by-law concessions by the Bureau of Customs; if so, is there any substance to the claims.
(2) What is the value to industry of the concessions which are subject to any delay.
(3) What are the details of staff ceiling for the Bureau.
(4) Are reported low staff ceilings imposed on the Bureau the main cause of the delays claimed.
(5) Are there other causes for the claimed delays.
(6) If the facts are as claimed and a substantial cost is being imposed on (a) business, (b) employment and (c) the whole community by this situation, will he take steps to remedy the state of affairs; if so, what steps will be taken.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes, I did notice the statements attributed to Mr Cable. There is no substance to the claims. The average processing time for by-law applications is at present less than six weeks. By-law applications range from the simple to the very complex and the latter cases usually require a longer period of time to resolve.
(2) See answer to (1).
(3) The current staff ceiling for the Bureau of Customs is 4885 of which 65 is for the By-law Branch.
(4) to (6) See answer to (I).

Loy Yang Station Site Workers: Unemployment Benefit
(Question No. 372)
Mr Lloyd asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) Have any workers stood down or dismissed because of industrial trouble at Loy Yang, Vic. received any social security pensions or benefits or will they receive any such benefits; if so, will the Department of Social Security investigate these payments following the announcement by the Victorian Government that special payments will be made to these workers.
(2) Will the normal Departmental attitude be maintained and overpayment of pensions or benefits be required to be repaid.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) and (2) Certain workers stood down or dismissed because of industrial trouble at Loy Yang, Victoria, in April 1980 have received payments of unemployment benefit from the Department of Social Security. It is possible that certain others of those persons might receive such payments when their entitlement thereto is fully examined as a result of appeals lodged with the Social Security Appeals Tribunal.
The terms of the agreement under which the Victorian Government has undertaken to make payments to certain persons whose employment was terminated at the Loy Yang power station site in April 1980 have been examined in the form in which they were released by the Premier of Victoria on Friday, 28 November 1980.
Upon the basis of that examination, it would appear that any payments of unemployment benefit which have been or may be made to those persons, whether as a result of an appeal to Social Security Appeals Tribunal or otherwise, would not be affected by that agreement.
Acupuncturists
(Question No. 373)
Dr Jenkins asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(I) Has consideration been given to registering medical practitioners who have completed courses in acupuncture available in Australia or overseas as specialists; if so, what (a) was the decision and (b) were the reasons for the decision; if not, why not.
(2) Do any provisions exist in Australia for registration of (a) lay acupuncturists and (b) medical acupuncturists.
Mr MacKellarThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The registration of medical practitioners is controlled under State and Territory legislation. In some States various medical specialties are also registerable. I do not know of any State which has considered the special registration of medical practitioners who have completed a course in acupuncture as medical specialists.
(2) (a) No.
(b) Medical acupuncturists, providing they possess an appropriate medical qualification, are eligible for registration in the States and Territories as medical practitioners.

104 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Acupuncture
(Question No. 374)
Dr Jenkins asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) Are there medical benefits items applicable to acupuncture treatment by a medical practitioner; if so, what are they.
(2) If there are no special items applicable to this treatment will he examine the necessity for this.
Mr MacKellar~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Medical benefits are not paid for acupuncture treatment as such. However where a legally qualified medical practitioner administers acupuncture in the course of a consultation with a patient, that consultation attracts medical benefits in the normal way. There are no special items in the Medical Benefits Schedule to cover acupuncture treatment.
(2) The question of specific items for acupuncture treatment is currently under consideration following an examination of the matter by the Working Party on the General Review of the Medical Benefit Schedule.

Hospital Benefits Reinsurance Trust Fund
(Question No. 376)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(I) What has been the division of funds in the Hospital Benefits Reinsurance Trust Fund between funds in 1979-80.
(2) What was the sum per contributor for each fund.
Mr MacKellar~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The division of the Hospital Benefits Reinsurance Trust Fund monies between hospital funds in 1979-80 is shown in columns (a) and (b) of the table set out below. The difference in the totals of the two columns is the amount of the Commonwealth contribution for the period (subject to minor adjustments).
(2) The net amount paid to or from the Trust Fund per contributor for each organisation is shown in column (c) of the table. For single contributors the amounts are half those shown.

HOSPITAL BENEFITS REINSURANCE TRUST FUND (1979-80)

Organisation
AMA(NSW) Catholic Guild Cessnock CBCo. Commonwealth Bank Druids Government Employees GUOOF HCF Hibernians HIC IOOF IOR Kurri Kurri Maitland Lysaghts MBF, (NSW) MUIOOF NIB NSW, R. and T. NSWTeachers PAFS Phoenix Reserve Bank SMH The Store Wollongong
Total
AHBS ANA AOF in Victoria Cheetham Druids Geelong GUHBS

Amounts paid into the
Trust Fund (a)

Amounts paid out of the
Trust Fund
(b)

$

$

New Sonth Wales (including Australian Capital Territory)

82,737.65 43,119.26 17,663.34 564,427.89 984,352.40
27,090.40 186,229.58
1,992,852.64 270,548.80
1,050,421.29 170,075.87 101,950.97 64,288.00 74,116.66

5,420.51
12,155.58 310,214.87 4,408,334.64 651,388.91 2,860,585.05 40,864.26 20,905.67
5,959,706.98 393,014.36
153,072.08
633,890.36

5,629,874.75 15,449,553.27

Victoria

844,223.89 13,236.20

274,254.63 101,035.24
364,124.12 310,093.77 97,115.98

Per Family Contributor
(c)
$
(72.90) 11.48
(25.64) (3.17) (26.63)
4.88 (46.23)
14.72 17.73 67.13 15.17 16.08 23.10 (17.44) (38.03) 14.74 7.95 (32.04) (10.86) (34.40) 66.27 (25.15) (32.22) (29.14) 35.36 (10.78)
8.60
(38.76) 2.84 5.43
(59.89) 68.27 11.54 14.80

Answers to Questions
- - - Organisation
HBA Hibernians HIC INF lOOF of Victoria lOR (Vic) Latrobe Valley Mildura MUIOOF NHBS PAFS Sons of Temperance Yanourn
TOlal
CPS GUOOF HIC lOR, (87) MBF MIM PTOnS Protestant Alliance Qld Teachers
Total
Advertiser
mc
Mutual Hospital NHSA Rechabites (81 ) Rechabites (83) SA Police Employees SA Public Service
Total
Goldfields Health insurance Fund HBF Health Services HIC
Total
APPM Council Coats Patons Druids HIC MBF Queenstown StLukes TGIO
Total
National Total

24 Pebruary 1981 REPRESENTATTVES 105

Amounts paid into the
Trust Fund (a)
$

Queensland

..
416,689.57 184,108.61 1,458.258.27
I 15,334.10

South Australia

260,123.53 32,342.31
636,966.74 1,044,766.68
23.356.69

Western Australia

5,521.20
58,502.94 370,204.74
457.585.57

Tasmania

498,835.85 2,562,539.41
61,291.71
- -518- ,420.19
3,641,087.16
89,295.57 34,142.55

647,902.42 93,279.26 272,281.38

Amounts paid out of the
Trust Fund (b) $
23,835,623.50 718,630.19 168,142.81 65,891.01 373,880.40 297,365.33 407,820.80 28,554.71
2,959,199.98 4,788.01
139,535.27
30,146.055.75
45,109.68 882,490.80 96,991.79 5,900,678.64
222,518.41
7,147,789.32
..
70,303.94 7,566,987.61 2,157,346.74
481,333.67
10,275,971.96
212.857.44
212,857.44
10,680.99 69,873.28

1,136,901.18 13,368,473.61

80,554.27 63,312,782.01

Per Family Contributor
(c)
$ 70.44 69.27
0.76 42.10 36.36 40.49 18.31
3.62 48.56 ( 46.12)
0.67 74.10 (35.15)
32.56
(55.67) 37.65 10.72 69.88 25.R7
(59.63) (61.02)
57.10 (56.00)
18.21
(19.04) 3.16
47.08 25.95 (2.22) 132.56 (17.29) (37.88)
34.25
44.71 (34.69) (15.15) (2.15) (23.15)
(14.33)
(37.58) ( 46.64)
2.95 7.08 (16.68) (45.39) (18.00)
(14.55)
16.89

106 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Medibank Private
(Question No. 378)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
Will he direct the Health Insurance Commission to appoint a consumer representative to the board of Medibank Private; if not. why not.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Health Insurance Commission Act provides for appointments to the Commission to be made by the Governor-General, who acts on the advice of the Federal Executive Council. The Act provides for the Commission to consist of a Chairman, the General Manager and up to 5 other members appointed as part-tim~ Commissioners.
The most recent appointments to the Commission were made in September 1980 whereby the Chairman and 5 part-time Commissioners were appointed. The Chairman and Commissioners were carefully chosen to ensure that the Commission will have membership to provide the business acumen to enable it to operate as a viable, statutory trading organisation, and at the same time reflect a range of community representation. For example it includes a member from the medical services field and a representative from the Council of Australian Government Employee Organisations (CAGEO).
The present composition of the Commission is considered to provide adequately for the representation of community and consumer interests. Accordingly, it is not intended to make any further appointments, or to vary existing legislation covering appointments to the Commission, to include specifically a consumer representative.
Bruce Highway
(Question No. 384)
Mr Adermann asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the congestion on the Bruce Highway, north of Caboolture, Queensland, resulting in frequent bottlenecks and a very high accident and fatality rate.
(2) Is it a fact that the growth rate and rate of development on the Sunshine Coast, Queensland, are among the greatest in Australia and yet the highway north of Caboolture consists only of a two-lane trafficway.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that the Gold Coast Highway has for a considerable period carried 4 lanes of traffic and that announcements have been made that even more lanes are to be provided on that highway.
(4) Does the Commonwealth Government provide 100 per cent funding for National Highways; if so, will he (a) travel the highway personally during the holiday period or when it carries weekend traffic to witness the total inadequacy of the highway to cope with the existing traffic loads, (b) study the accident and fatality rate on the highway hetween Caboolture and Gympie and (c) use every endeavour to expedite the upgrading of this section of the Highway to accommodate at least 4 lanes of traffic, recognising that this will involve consultations with the responsible Queensland State Minister.
Mr HuntThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) My attention has not been specifically drawn to the points the honourable member mentions, but it is true that the Bruce Highway north of Brisbane carries a large volume of traffic.

(2) I am aware that the Sunshine Coast area is experiencing a high rate of development and that this development is generatingtraffic on the Bruce Highway north of Brisbane.
(3) I understand that the Gold Coast Highway, which extends from the Pacific Highway at Coombabah to Coolangatta, is generally a 4 lane road with some sections being 6 lanes. I have not been advised of any plans by the Queensland Government to upgrade this Highway.
(4) The Commonwealth Government has, since 1974, accepted full financial responsibility for the development of the National Highway system. The Bruce Highway, between Brisbanc and Cairns, is a declared National Highway.
(a) If the honourable member is able to arrange a mutually convenient time. I would be happy to accompany him on an inspection of the Caboolture to Gympie section of the Bruce JIighway.
(b) and (c) I have referred the matters of traffic accidents and the need to upgrade this section of the Bruce Highway to my Department and they will consult with the Queensland Main Roads Department on these matters.
Brisbane Airport: Aircraft Noise
(Question No. 385)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) Will the construction of the proposed crosswind runway in the new Brisbane Airport development plans add to aircraft noise levels in the Shorncliffe, Sandgate area.
(2) Is it a fact that the positioning of the crosswind runway has caused great concern among the residents of the area.
(3) What assurance can he give that Eventide Nursing Horne residents will not be affected by high levels of aircraft noise.
Mr HuntThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The proposed crosswind runway is planned for use only by aircraft up to the size of the F27 Friendship. Airline jet aircraft would not use the crosswind runway and, therefore, aircraft noise levels in the Shornclitfe and Sandgate area will not be increased.
(2) I am not aware of any great concern from residents in the Sandgate and Shorncliffe areas over the proposal.
(3) Assurance can be given that the occupants of the Eventide Nursing Horne will not be exposed to high levels of aircraft noise.
Feasibility Fishing Projects
(Question No. 386)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) How many feasihility fishing projects have been approved to operate off the coast of Western Australia.
(2) On what dates was approval given for each project.
(3) Which companies Australian and foreign, are involved in each project.
(4) What has been the purpose of each project.
(5) What has been the level of involvement by the Western Australian State and the Federal Governments, in terms of a commitment of funds and personnel, to each project.
(6) Have any of the feasibility studies resulted ill a decision to proceed with a fishing or processing operation by the parties involved; if so, which ones.

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 107

(7) To what extent does the Government require each approved project to be related to the possibility of broadening the Australian market for sea food.
(8) How many feasibility projects have been approved in the other States during the period of approvals granted for projects in Western Australia.
(9) To what extent has the Government permitted feasibility studies for projects in areas already fished by Australian based companies off the west coast of Australia.
(10) What (a) numbers of vessels have been involved in each Western Australian project, (b) has been the type ofvessel, and (c) has been the vessel's country of origin.
(11) In determining approvals of projects involving Taiwanese firms, are discussions held with officials of the Taiwanese Government by representatives of the Australian Federal or State Governments; if so, at what level are those discussions held.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Thirteen.
(2), (3), (4) and (10). See Attachment 1.
(5) Western Australian and Commonwealth fisheries officials have been involved in assessment of the proposals and issuing oflicences. Observers have been placed on foreign vessels to ensure correct log book recording procedures are used, and to take scientific samples and measurements. The projects have not been subsidised by either the Commonwealth or the Western Australian Governments through direct injection of funds. Feasibility fishing projects therefore, provide a relatiyely inexpensive means of obtaining information to assist in management and conservation of fish resources in the Australian fishing zone, and to enable Australian fishermen to make informed investment decisions concerning their involvement in developing fisheries.

(6) Nine of the approved projects have commenced feasibility fishing operations. None has completed the full twoyear term of approval, although several operators have terminated the projects or indicated they intend to complete the feasibility projects in 1981. Thus in most cases, there is still limited information on which to base long term commercial investment decisions. However, some Australian companies have processed fish landed from feasibility fishing operations and have indicated an interest in developing longer term joint venture operations. All companies are advised at the time of approval, however, that successful completion of the project confers no exclusive or preferential rights in any fishery that may develop.
(?) All feasibility fishing projects are required to undertake Australian market evaluation in order to assess the potential of the resource for development for Australians. [n general, projects are required to land a minimum of 10 percent of the total catch and offer it for sale to Australian processors. The portion of this product which is not purchased by Australian interests must be exported as Product of Australia to test overseas markets.
(8) Ten.
(9) All feasibility fishing projects approved to operate off Western Australia have been permitted to operate in some areas where Australian-based companies have exploited either Spanish mackerel, prawn or rock lobster resources. In each case, however, species to be taken and fishing methods used by foreign vessels exclude those species and methods utilised by Australian fishermen. In addition, foreign vessels participating in feasibility fishing projects are generally not permitted to operate in specified areas off the south west coast during the western rock lobster season. There have been no confirmed reports of interference by foreign vessels operating under feasibility fishing arrangements with Australian vessels operating off the coast of Western Australia.
(11) No. Discussions concerning such projects are held between Government officials in Australia and representatives of Taiwanese fishermen and their Australian agents.

ATTACHMENT I

DATES OF APPROVAL, COMPANIES INVOLVED, PURPOSE, AND VESSEL DETAILS OF FEASIBILITY FISHING PROJECTS APPROVED TO OPERATE OFF WESTERN AUSTRALIA

Date of project approval

Companies involved

Australian partner

Foreign partner

Purpose* ofproject Number (Fishery tested) approved

Vessel details Type

Country of origin

8.9.78 8.9.78 28.9.78
2.3.79
5.4.79 12.4.79

Kailis and France
M. G. Kailis Gulf Fisheries Pty Ltd AMATIL in joint
venture with Sumitomo Shoji Kaisha (Aust) Ltd as Sumatil Pty Ltd Hunts Canning Co
West Ocean Canning Pty Ltd and H. J. Heinz Co
(Aust) Ltd Lombardo Marine
Group Pty Ltd

Dong Won Fisheries(a) Co
Ltd (R.O.K.) Mitsubishi(b)
Corporation (Japan)
Taiyo Fisheries Co (Japan)
Chuo Gyogyo(c) KaishaLtd
(Japan) and C. ltoh and Co Ltd
(Japan) Star-Kist Foods
(USA)
Dong Bang Ocean Fisheries Co (R.O.K.)

NorthWest Trawl
WA. Squid NorthWest
Trawl WA.Squid
WA.Tuna NorthWest
Trawl

2 Stern Trawlers Republic of Korea

12 Squid Jiggers

Japan

Stern Trawler

Japan

to Squid Jiggers

Japan

Purse Seiner

USA

2 Stern Trawlers Republic of Korea

108 REPRESENTATlVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Date of project approval

Companies involved

Australian partner

Foreign partner

Purpose* of project Number (Fishery tested) approved

Vessel details Type

Country of origin

12.4.79 18.5.79**
25.10.79 25.10.79*** 6.8.80
26.11.80 26.11.80

Lombardo Marine Dong Bang Ocean

Group Pty Ltd

Fisheries Co

(R.O.K.)

Mauri Bros and Dalmor Deep Sea

Thomson

Fishery and

Fishing Service

Enterprises

(Poland)

Kailis and France

Dong Won (a)

Fisheries Co Ltd

(R.O.K.)

Craig, Mostyn and Marissco (Pte) Ltd

Co Ltd

(Singapore) (d)

AMATILinjoint Taiyo Fisheries Co.

venture with

(Japan)

Sumitomo Shoji

Kaisha (Aust.) Ltd

as Sumatil Pty Ltd

M.G. Kailis Group Kaohsiung Fishing

Boat Commercial

Guild

(Taiwan)( e)

M.G. Kailis Group Kaohsiung Fishing

Boat Commercial

Guild

(Taiwan)( e)

WA. Squid Southern Trawl
WA. Squid North West
Trawl Emphasis on droplining, but gillnetting and
poling also approved WA.Squid
North West and Southern WA.
Trawl

Squid Jiggers Republic of Korea

Stern Trawler

Poland

Squid Jiggers Republic of Korea

Stern Trawlers Dropliner

USSR Japan

4

Gillnetters

3 Stern Trawlers

Taiwan Taiwan

* The purpose of each feasibility fishing project is to determine the extent and distribution, and examine the commercial potential of, the fish resource being tested.
** Project originally approved to operate otT Tasmania and South Australia. Approval given 20.3.80 to operate off south coast of Western Australia.
*** Approval withdrawn on 29 January 1980.
(a) In joint venture as Australian Deep Sea Trawling Development Co Ltd (ADTRAWL) (b) In joint venture as M and K Fisheries Pty Ltd (e) In joint venture as Albany Fishing Research Pty Ltd (d) In joint venture as Samieo Pty Ltd (e) In joint venture as Kailis Kaohsiung Fishing Co Pty Ltd (KKFC)

Institute of Multicultural Affairs
(Question No. 396)
Mr Young asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(I) Is the responsible Minister for the Institute of Multicultural Affairs the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.
(2) Does the Director of the Institute have direct access to the Prime Minister, thus by-passing the responsible Minister.
(3) Were the recommendations contained in the Review of Migrant and Multicultural Education, published one day before his policy speech, made availablc to officers on his stafT.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) There is no question of the responsible Minister heing by-passed.
(3) Copies of the Review of Multicultural and Migrant Education were delivered to the Minister's and my Office on 26 September 1980. The Institute recommended that its report be made public as soon as possihle. With the Minister's agreement, it was publicly released on the evening of 28 September 1980 and all political parties, therefore, had access to it before their Policy Speeches were delivered.

Cancer Study: Radium Hill Miners
Mr MacKellar-On 27 November 1980 (Hansard, page 125) Mr Scott asked me a series of questions about a study undertaken by the South Australian Health Commission into the incidence of cancer among miners at Radium Hill. The answers to those questions follow:
The study to which the honourable member referred was not funded by the Commonwealth Government.
I understand that whilst the study has not been discontinued there has been a change of plan because a large proportion of the employees involved have remained untraced. (Of the 300 who were the subject of intensive tracing only about 65 per cent had been located.)
I further understand that a low level search is continuing and that the SA Health Commission is seeking funds for an intensive tracing of the remaining popUlation. My Department has not been approached in this regard.
South Australian Railway Services
Mr Hunt On 4 December 1980 (Hansard, page 378) Mr Wallis asked me a question without notice concerning the Australian National Railways Commission's proposal to reduce passenger

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 109

services on the Peterborough-Adelaide and Adelaide-Gladstone lines.
J discussed the Commission's proposal with the South Australian Minister for Transport, Mr Wilson. The South Australian Government has agreed that seven services per week between Adelaide and Peterborough should be withdrawn. The State has also agreed to invite expressions of interest from private bus operators to operate over this route. Accordingly the Commission has deferred at this stage its plans for more extensive reductions in services on these lines.
Aboriginal Medical Services
(Questiou No. 33)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Further to the answer by the Minister's predecessor to question No. 5382 (Hansard, 16 April 1980, page 1847), what was the funding by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs for each Aboriginal Medical Service, by location, for 1979-80 and what are the estimates for 1980-81.
(2) Further to the answer to part (4) of question No. 5382, (a) has the Program Effectiveness Review (PER) been completed; if so, what recommendations were made to the Government by the PER task force and (b) does the Government intend to take any action, legislative or otherwise, as a result of the review; if so, what.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The funding of Aboriginal Medical Services by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs is as follows:

1980-81 1979-80 (est.)

Aboriginal Medical Service Co-operative, Redfern, NSW
Durri Aboriginal Medical Service, Kempsey, NSW
Victorian Aboriginal Health Service, Fitzroy, Vic,
Goulburn-Murray, Aboriginal Medical Service, Shepparton, Vic. (now part of Rumbulara Co-operative)
East Gippsland Aboriginal Medical Service Co-operative, Bairnsdale, Vic.
Aboriginal and Islanders Community Health Service, Brisbane, Qld
Aboriginal and Islanders Community Health Service, Townsville, Qld
Kambu Association, Ipswicb, Qld
Aboriginal and Islanders Community Health Service, Mackay, Qld
Aboriginal Community Centre, Adelaide, SA
Aboriginal Medical Service, Port Augusta, SA
Aboriginal Medical Service of WA, Perth, WA

$'000 356,9 79.7 408.2
11.0 55.5 384.3 226.6 13.0 52.6 12.5 29.5 213.7

$'000 471.0 44,5 408.5
11.0 55.8 309.9 211.9 16.5 51.5 19.8 32.0 242.0

1980-81 1979-80 (est.)

Central Australian Ahoriginal Congress Health Service, Alice Springs, NT
Nortb Australian Health Service, Darwin, NT
Urapuntja Health Service, Utopia, NT
Lyappa Congress, Papunya, NT Pitjantjatjara Homelands Health Service,
Pipalyatjara, SA
Kalano Association, Katherine, NT

5'000
319.9
15,0 227.7 220.9
361.3

$'000
281.0
30.0 248,0 257.0
406.0 63.0

Total

2,988.3 3,159.4

(2) (a) Yes. The PER was completed on 31 Marcb 1980. It will not he made puhlic.
(b) The Government will be considering the report of tbe PER Task Force along with two other recent reports concerning Aboriginal health: the reporl, Aboriginal Health by the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs and the report of the National Trachoma and Eye Health Program.
The matters under examination arc complex and demand careful and thorough consideration, The recommendations of the three reports are before the Government for its consideration and it is not appropriate for me to make detailed comment at this time.
Telegraph Offices
(Question No. 80)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Did he or his predecessor receive advice from Telecom Australia concerning that organisation's document Review of After-Hours Operations at Telegraph Offices.
(2) If so, was this advice incomplete in that it failed to mention schedules, proposed in the documenl, for the phasing-out of staffed after-hours operations at certain telegraph offices,
(3) What were the proposed schedules for these telegraph offices.
(4) Did Telecom advise that these schedules should he adhered to; if not, what scbedules are now proposed.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I )-(4) 1 bave confirmed that my predecessor received a copy of a report by an internal Telecom Working Party which investigated the provision of after hours telegraph services, The report is still under consideration by Telecom management. When these considerations are completed and in accordance with certain commitments made by my predecessor, I am to receive a report outlining the Commission's conclusions before any decisions are taken.
Domestic Communications Satellite
(Question No. 82)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, 011 26 November 1980:
(1) Is he able to say whether the statement by his predecessor in House of Representatives Estimates Committee A on 29 August 1980 (Hansard, pages 59-60) that the satellite will enable direct broadcasting of at least two television signals and that one will be the ABC and one could be a mixed signal, providing commercial and otber services, indicated

110 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

that Australia's first operational satellite will in [act carry 2 parallel television signals; if it did not indicate this, what did it indicate.
(2) In referring to other services, was the Minister alluding to a public broadcasting signal; if not, of what was the Minister speaking.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The statement by my predecessor on 29 August 1980 in relation to direct broadcasting of television signals, should not be interpreted as indicating that Australia's first operational satellite will carry two parallel television signals.
The first operational satellite will provide for the direct broadcasting of television signals to remote homesteads and communities throughout Australia by the ABC only. However, the current planning of the satellite system allows for the option of providing additional direct broadcast television and other services via a second operational satellite.
(2) The former Minister stated that any additional direct broadcasting service could be a mixed signal, providing commercial and other services.
A wide variety of additional broadcasting services is still possible, including television and radio. Whether or not to implement such services, which could include public hroadcasting signals, has yet to be determined. This depends, to a large extent, on cost information yet to he received from satellite

manufacturers, the intentions of potential satellite users once the cost is known, and the consideration of broadcasting policy options for their involvement.
Telephone Connections
(Question No. 85)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) At what exchanges has Telecom Australia underestimated demand for new telephone connections by sufficient numbers to cause new connections to he delayed for (a) 3 to 5 months, (b) 5 to 8 months and (c) greater than B months, after the time of application.
(2) At what dates is it expected that each exchange affected will be sufficiently serviced so that new connections can be achieved within 6 weeks or less of the date of application.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) A deferred application for telephone service is one which cannot be satisfied within three months due to the unavailability of cable or exchange equipment. The number of deferred applications at particular exchanges can change from day to day as new cable works are completed or new exchange equipment is installed. The following table illustrates the current overall position-

State
New South Wales (inc1. ACT) Victoria Queensland South Australia (inc!. NT) Western Australia Tasmania
Australia

Awaiting cabling
Metrop.
173 234 218 191 312 116
1,244

Awaiting installation of exchange equipment

Country

Metrop.

Country

2,887

150

X57

951

322

329

2,515

59

3\0

549

0

103

1,198

0

3

253

42

22

8,353

573

1,624

Total
4,067 1,836 3,102
843 1,513
433
11,794

It will be seen that a large percentage of deferred applications are awaiting the completion of cable works in the country areas. Telecom expects the bulk of these works to be completed within the next 12 months. A small. percentage of these deferred applications are in remote rural areas and Telecom has commenced work on its plans to expedite its rural network upgrading program to provide automatic service for manual subscribers and to enable applicants to be given service earlier than originally envisaged.
Most deferred applications which are due to shortages of exchange equipment arc at exchanges which are out of numbers for relatively short periods and only minor equipment extensions are required to overcome them. However, in a number of areas, for example, northern New South Wales and the Queensland Gold and Sunshine Coasts, demand is running well ahead of forecasts. In these high growth areas, major equipment extensions arc required. In some cases where exchange equipment has been fully allocated, further connections also depend on completion of exchange building extensions.

Aluminium Smelters
(Question No. 209)
Mr Howe asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 27 November 19RO:
(l) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the prices being charged by State Electricity authorities for power for aluminium smelters.
(2) Is the Minister able to say whether the prices quoted in The Age of 26 November 1980, of J .3ckw.hr. in ~ew South Wales, l.73kw.hr. in Victoria, l.Ukw.hr. in Queensland, 2~kw.hr. in Western Australia and O.7~kw.hr. in Tasmania are substantially correct.
(3) Do the prices charged by the various State authorities (a) reflect the real cost of production Or (b) represent substantial subsidies to the companies concerned, especially if the companies arc also receiving other generous concessions from State Governments.
(4) Is the Minister able to say whether the prices charged (a) are suhstantially helow the prices being charged for electricity for smelters overseas, for example, in the United States of America and Japan and (b) in no sense reflect international energy prices.

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 111

(5) Is there a contradiction between the Government's import parity pricing policies for oil and its failure to seek export parity pricing for energy supplied to the export-oriented aluminium in:lustry.
(6) Is it the Government's intention to subsidise foreign dominated resource based industries while reducing support for locally owned manufacturing industry.
Mr AnthonyThe Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) to (3) The determination of electricity prices, for any class of consumer, is a matter for the States and their electricity supply authorities, which as autonomous bodies under State legislation are normally required to meet certain financial guidelines and objectives in their supply operations. The specific arrangements between the authorities and large continuous users such as aluminium smelters are usually in confidential contracts and as such the details are not available. In connection with the Alcoa smelter proposed for Portland, Victoria, details of financial and tariff arrangements were announced by the Premier of Victoria in March 1980.
(4) Few comparative data are available on tariffs in electricity supply contracts in Australia and overseas. However, it would seem evident that Australia's abundant and accessible coal resources should give it a comparative cost advantage in electricity supply.
(5) Energy supplied to the aluminium smelting industry is predominantly in the form of electricity. As noted above (in answer to parts (1) to (3 the Commonwealth Government does not have responsibility for the provision and pricing of electricity in the States.
(6) No.
Oil Production
(Question No. 220)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 2 December [980:
What was the production rate of (a) parity and (b) nonparity oil produced from (i) small, (ii) medium, (iii) large and (iv) new oil fields (A) on Barrow Island, (B) in Queensland and (C) in the Gippsland Basin for the period July to December 1980.
Mr AnthonyThe Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Production of (a) parity and (b) non-parity oil produced from (i) small, (ii) medium, (iii) large and (iv) new oil fields (A) on Barrow Island (B) in Queensland and (C) in the Gippsland Basin for the period July to December 1980 is as follows:
(A) (i) (a) 89.75 megalitres, (b) none.
(ii) (a) 480.88 megalitres, (b) 207.14.
(iii) (a) none, (b) none.
(iv) 8.20 megalitres-the concept of parity and non-parity oil does not apply to the production from "new" oil fields.
(B) (i) (a) 40.30megalitres (estimate), (b) none.
(ii) (a) none, (b) none.
(iii) (a) none, (b) none.
(iv) none-not applicable as detailed above.
(C) (i) (a) 182.47 megalitres, (b) none.

(ii) (a) 1050.15 megalitres, (b) none.
(iii) (a) 4756.16megalitres, (b) 4756.16megalitres.
(iv) none-not applicable as detailed above.
Public Broadcasting Radio Licences
(Question No. 238)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(I) What organisations have applied for public broadcasting radio licences in each of the last 5 years, where are they located, what geographic or other interests do they represent and what area does or did each organisation propose to service.
(2) Which licence applications referred to part (I) have been (a) accepted, (b) rejected or (c) are still under consideration.
(3) What were the (a) dates and (b) reasons for the decision in each case.
(4) Where licence applications are still under consideration (a) what was the date of application and (b) when will a decision be made in each case.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) Invitations have been issued for the grant of a total of thirty-two broadcasting station licences. The answer in respect of applications for the grant of twenty-six of these licences is contained in the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal's Report No. 17/79, 'Report on Inquiries into the Grant of Licences for Public Broadcasting Stations 1978'. This report gives details of the successful and unsuccessful applicants and the proposals of the applicants for licences to serve the Adelaide, Armidale, Bathurst, Brisbane, Canberra, Dampier/Karratha, Hobart, Latrobe Valley, Lismore, Melbourne, Newcastle, Newman, Perth, Sydney and Toowoomba areas.
Details of the sole applicant and the proposals of the applicant for the grant of a public broadcasting licence to serve the Bourke area of New South Wales can be found in the Tribunal's Report No.7 /78, "Bourke Public Broadcasting Station Inquiry".
Copies of both reports can be made available to honourable members.
The following is the position with respect to applications received in response to invitations for the grant of five further public broadcasting licences:
(A) Albury-Wodonga (i) The sole applicant was Community Radio Albury-
Wodonga Co-operative Society Limited.
(ii) The applicant is based in Albury/Wodonga.
(iii) Almost all of the shareholders in the applicant society were residents of the Albury/Wodonga area as at 30 June 1979.
(iv) The area proposed to be served is the cities of Albury and Wodonga and nearby areas.
(B) Darwin (i) The sole applicant was Darwin Community College.
(ii) The applicant is based in Darwin (NT).
(iii) The Darwin Community College is a statutory authority under the Northern Territory Education Act 1979 and is governed by a Council of eighteen members. The applicant proposed that the station be run by a Board of Management and internal station committees structured to achieve a balance between college input and community input. Community representations in the station management structure are to be elected by member-subscribers.

112 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

(iv) The area proposed to be served is the City of Darwin.

(C) Alice Springs Area (i) The sole applicant was Community College of Central
Australia.

(ii) The applicant is based in Alice Springs (NT).

(iii) The Community College of Central Australia is an institution of Technical and Further Education within the Northern Territory Department of Education. Participation by the Alice Springs community in the management of the
station is to be effected by means of community representation on the College Council, the Management Committee of the proposed licensee corporation and on Advisory Committees within the station.

(iv) The area proposed to be served is the town of Alice Springs (NT) and immediate environs.

(D) Wagga Wagga Area (i) Tbe sole applicant was Wagga Wagga Community
Media Co-operative Limited.

(ii) The applicant is based in Wagga Wagga (NSW).

(iii) Most of tbe shareholders in the applicant society are residents of the Wagga Wagga area.

(E) Applications received in response to an invitation to apply for a licence to serve the Municipality of Windsor and nearby portions of the Shire of Colo (NSW).
(i) The sole applicant is Macquarie Towns Community Radio Committee.

(ii) Most of the members of the commitlee are residents of the proposed service area.

(iii) The committee proposes that the licence he held hy a Community Advancement Society to he formed. The Committee estimates a membership for the proposed society of 300 persons and organisations.

(iv) The area proposed to be served is that bounded hy the townships of Agnes Banks, North Richmond, Kurmond, Freeman's Reach, Wilberforce, Maraylya and Vineyard
(NSW).

(2) With respect to applications lodged in response to invitations to apply for twenty-seven licences, details of success-
ful, unsuccessful and withdrawn applications can be found in the two Tribunal reports mentioned in the answer to part (l) of the question. With respect to applications lodged in re-
sponse to invitations to apply for five licences referred to in sections (A) to (E) of the answer to part (I) of the question, the answer is:

(a) Licences bave been offered to Radio Albury-Wodonga Co-operative Society Limited, Darwin Community College, Community College of Central Australia and
Wagga Wagga Community Media Co-opcrative
Limited.

(b) None have been rejected.

(c) The application from Macquarie Towns Community Radio Committee is pending.

(3) With respect to the public enquiries into applicalions lodged in response to invitations to apply for twenty-seven li-
cences, details of the dates of the decisions and reasons for decision can be found in the two Tribunal reports mentioned in the answer to Part (l) of the question. With respect to the public inquiries into applications lodged in response to invi-
tations to apply for four licences referred to in sections (A) and (D) of the answer to part (l) of the question, the answer is:

(a) Albury/Wodonga licence-ll February 1980; Dar-

win licence-31 'March 1980; Alice Springs

licence-lO April 1980; Wagga Wagga licence-IO

December 1980.

.

(b) The Tribunal has published its Reasons for Decision in the cases of the Darwin, Alice Springs, and Wagga Wagga licences. Copies of these reasons can be made available to honourable members. The Tribunal's report containing the Decision and Reasons for Decision on the Albury/Wodonga licence grant will be available shortly.
(4) (a) The application from Macquarie Towns Community Radio Committee was lodged with the Tribunal on 28 November 1980.
(b) A public inquiry into this application is scheduled to be held in April 1981.
Lead-free Petrol
(Question No. 242)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(1) Is the Minister able to say whether most of the major oil companies in the United States of America no longer refine leaded petrol.
(2) Is the Minister also able to say whether motorists in the USA pay less for petrol than Australian motorists.
(3) Have the major oil companies operating in Australia obtained approximately $1,200 million in the last 3 years as a result of the world parity petrol pricing policy of the Government: if so, what measures will the Government take to ensurc that the costs to the oil companies of conversion to lead-free petrol are not passed on to the Australian consumer.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) I am advised that all major oil companies in the United States of America refine and market leaded petrol.
(2) The average price of super grade motor spirit in the United States of America was 30 cents (Australian) per litre on 8 January 1981. However, on 28 January President Reagan issued an order immediately decontrolling the price of crude oil in the United States. It is estimated that decontrol will add 5-lO US cents per gallon (1.1 to 2.3 (Aus.) cents per litre) to the cost of gasoline in the United States. On the basis of this information the indicated level of retail prices for super grade petrol in the United States is up to 32.3 (Aust.) cents per litre.
On 4 February 1981 the Prices Justification Tribunal set maximum wholesale prices for motor spirit in Australia. In Sydney these prices range between 33.57 and 34.77 cents per litre, resulting in the level of retail prices in Sydney being up to 37 cents per litre with prices being typically set around 35 cents per litre. In Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia those prices will be marginally higher as a result of the incidence of state levies (franchise fees) which add between 1.51 and 1.33 cents per litre to wholesale and retail prices.
(3) The producers o[ crude oil in Australia have received approximately $1,100 in aggregate sales revcnues [rom indigenous cr\lde oil production for the three years 1977-78, 1978-79 and 1979-80 at the levels of producer returns provided for under the Government's policy of import parity pricing. However operating expenses, royalties and company tax will result in a significantly lowcr level of net profits 'after tax.
Production of motor spirit takes place in the rcflneries and as such it would bc the refineries, and not thc crude oil producers, who would bear any possible increase in production costs of lead-free petrol.

Answers to Questions

24 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 113

Telephone Services: Shire of Newham and Woodend
(Question No. 276)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
Further to my letter to him in regard to the extension of Telecom Community Access 80 to the Shire of Newham and Woodend, Vic., will he state whether or not the application for a review of the situation is being considered in the light of the arguments presented by the Shire Council and myself.
!VIr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The review of telephone zoning and charging arrangements which led to the Community Access 80 initiatives concluded that community call access to Melbourne from the Woodend zone was not applicable as that zone did not adjoin an outer metropolitan zone. One of the principles of the Community Access 80 scheme was to provide subscribers in zones immediately adjoining the outer metropolitan zone with community call access to subscribers in the inner metropolitan zone.
The Woodend zone is not unique in being located in the 50-80 Km charging distance and not adjoining the outer metropolitan zone. Zoning arrangements are determined by technical, economic and community of interest factors.
Telecom has considered the arguments advanced by and on behalf of the Shire of Newham and Woodend for a review of the present arrangements. The Commission has advised, however, that the way is not clear to extend community call rates between the Woodend zone and Melbourne. It would be inequitable to apply community call rates between the Woodend zone and Melbourne without extending the same consideration to all other comparable zones around Australia.
Synthesis Telescope
(Question No. 316)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) What is a synthesis telescope.
(2) Does Australia have a degree of international ascendancy in the field of radio-astronomy.
(3) What are the reasons for the desirability of Australia (a) acquiring or (b) building a synthesis telescope.
(4) Has the CSIRO been drawing the attention of the Government to the need for such an instrument for some years; if so, for how many years.
Mr Thomson-The answer to thc honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) A synthesis telescope combines the output of a number of small movable radio-telescopes to provide a signal comparable in sensitivity and resolution to that which would be obtained from a large steerable radio-telescope with a diameter, were it feasible, of the order of kilometres. The concept. which has revolutionised radio-astronomy, was discovered by the CSIRO in 1947 and subsequently developed, especially in the UK.
(2) Yes: for some twenty years the investment in high quality radio-astronomy facilities, of which the foremost is the CSIRO 64 metre diameter telescope at Parkes. NSW, has enabled Australian scientists to achieve a high reputation in radio-astronomy as a result of a number of important Australian discoveries during this period.

(3) (a) In order to maintain Australia's high international reputation in radio-astronomy a powerful synl hesis telescope is required. In the northern hemisphere a major facility was built in the Netherlands in the 1970s and the largest in the world is nearing completion in the USA. Australia is uniquely situated not only in location, but in skills and expertise, 10 provide a similar capahility for study of the southern skies. The astronomical information gathered would be complementary to that obtained from other telescopes in the southern hemisphere, in the northern hemisphere and in space. Astronomical research with such telescopes is currently in the frontline of fundamcntal discoveries of new phenomena and forces in nature. It ranks with the investigation of electricity in the nineteenth century and the atom in the first part of the twentieth.
(b) Where telescope design can draw on expertise in other countries. an Australian designed and built synthesis telescope, which can be incorporated with the existing Parkes facility is the most practical and economic way for }\ustralia to proceed. As a major proportion of the facility will be built in Australia, the consequent benetits for Australian industries will be substantial.
(4) A consortium of CSIRO, Australian National University and three State universities submitted a proposal to the Australian Science and Technology Council (ASTEC) in September 1975 for the construction of a synthesis telescope in Australia. ln its Report to the Prime Minister entitled 'The Next Generation of Australian Telescopes' (March 1979), ASTEC gave tlrst priority to the construction of the proposed Australian Synthesis Telescope. That recommendation was supported in July 1980 by the Astronomy Advisory Committee, which advises me on matters relating to Government support in this area, in its report 'Astronomy in AustraliaDevelopments in the 1980,'. Consideration is being given to the proposal taking note of the views expressed in this recent report.
Election Opinion Polls
(Question No. 346)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
Is he able to say whether the Prime Minister expressed criticism before the 1980 General Election of media concentration on the results of various opinion polls conducted regularly throughout the election campaign; if so, is the Government considering extending the pre-election media blackout to include the banning of the publication of opinion poll results up to 2 weeks before polling day.
!VIr Sinc\airThe answer to the honourable member's (juestion is as follows:
In resp~ct tc the electronic media, there is no proposal before the Government to amend the relevant provisions of the Broadcasting and Television Act L942.
Responsibility for the print media, outside of Federal Territories is a matter for the State Governments concerned.
Regional Development Program
(Question No. 382)
Mr Adermann asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(l) Why were Sunshine Coast, Queensland, projects ineligible to receive assistance under the Commonwealth Regional Development Program when they had previously qua Ii tied.
(2) Was this decision taken by the Government.

114 REPRESENTATIVES 24 February 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) Has this area large and proven decentralisation growth and a great potential for further decentralisation of industry.
(4) If so, will the decision on tltis matter be reconsidered.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) The guidelines determined by the Government for the Commonwealth Regional Development Program provide that projects will be eligible to receive assistance if they arc located in centres-
(a) with a population size of 50,000; or
(b) with a population size of above 15,000 and a popu-
lation growth of at least 1,000 over the last five years; or
(c) which have demonstrated long term development prospects as a resul t of their resource base orlocation.

No urban centre on the Sunshine Coast meets either of the

first two of these criteria. Three loans have been made to pro-

jects on the Sunshine Coast in accordance with the third

criterion.

'

To ensure that the Program operates in a consistent manner
between States and regions, a review of the eligibility of
centres under the Program was undertaken by the Decentralisation Advisory Board in 1979. Following this review the Board recommended, and the Government accepted, that the
Sunshine Coast and a number of other centres, should not be eligible centres under the Program. The reasons for the
Board's recommendations are set out on page 4 of the Board's 1979-80 Annual Report tabled on 26 November, 1980.

(2) Yes.

(3) and (4) The rate of population growth of urban centres on the Sunshine Coast, and elsewhere, are kept under review by the Decentralisation Advisory Board. As appropriate, the
Board will make recommendations to the Government about the inclusion and exclusion of additional centres under the Program.


