House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 122, 1981 Wednesday, 6 May 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2019

Wednesday, 6 May 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.15 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Proposed Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in:
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic airfares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Keating, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Milton, Mr Morris and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Excise on Beel'
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. The hotel industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of the three basic needs oflife: a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The hotel industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The hotel industry is almost entirely within the private sector and makes a large contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The hotel industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The hotel industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry's 5,811 hotels in Australia.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian hotel industry.

8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its costs to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the hotel industry to pass on such increases to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
11. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The hotel industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:
(l) Recognise the importance and place of the Australian hotel industry in the social and economic life of the nation.
(2) Accept that the viability of the hotel industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the hotel needs of the nation in this period of growing population and increasing tourism.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bourchier, Mr Hyde, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
A substantial contribution to Australia's economy by the payment of taxation and to the quality of life of feHow Australians is made by parents in the work-force who have preschool children.
Taxation relief for adequate child-care is necessary to enable these parents to avail themselves of child-care facilities in order to take paid employment.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that tax-payers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenscs exempt from income taxation in the same way as othcr tax-payers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley and Mr Tambling.
Petitions received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of

2020 REPRESENTATJVES 6 May 1981

Petitions

Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully calls for:
The immediate and unconditional withdrawal of any proposals to deny unemployment benefits to unemployed people under 18 years old.
That the level of benefits for all unemployed people, and including people receiving sickness benefits and pensions, be raised to at least 120 per cent of the poverty line.
That future employment polides be devoted to job creation and the restoration of full employment rather than the evasion of this responsibility by hiding the unemployed in short term training and education schemes.
Public acknowledgement of the fact that unemployment is the result of insufficient jobs and not the fault of any minority group, the education system or the unemployed themselves.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byDrCass.
Petition received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of Parliament assembled in the House of Representatives. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other taxpayers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrHowe.
Petition received.
Confidential Medical Records
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we are gravely concerned by the invasion of privacy caused by Government agents seizing patients' medical records.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should:
Legislate to protect the private and confidential nature of medical records from scrutiny except on the express and informed consent of the patient or an order from a presidingjudge.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Malcolm Fraser and Mr Dean.
Petitions received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of children's services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 Budget. And further; that annual Budget allocations in the area of children's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon and Mr Scott.

Petitions received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(1) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-classified under Therapeutic Agents (not under "Cosmetics" as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully show"'h:
(1) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war related service by merchant seamen during World War 2.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric,
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any

Petitions

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2021

regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were subjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys. Petition received.
EI Salvador

Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(1) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the present government of EI Salvador has been responsible for the deaths of at least 10,000 people in 1980 alone; and that it has been condemned as one of the worst human rights violators in the world by organisations such as Amnesty International and the US Conference of Catholic Bishops.
Therefore we humbly request that the government of the Commonwealth of Australia:

Use of Live Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
2. That no central records exist on such inhumane use of live animals for experimentation purposes, yet research institutions in several Australian States engage in such a practice.
3. That there exists no uniform legislation between the States concerning responsible standards of research conduct, indeed, in some States there is a complete lack of legislation altogether.
Your petitioners therefore humbly prayihat the House of Representatives will enact legislation to require:

(i) urge the government of the United States of America to immediately cease all military aid to the government of El Salvador;
(ii) support the freedom of the Salvadoran people against the governing military dictatorship.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles Jones. Petition received.
Family Law Act
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth that allegations have been made by litigants that unjust decisions in relation to ancillary matters are being made at the Family Court of Australia.

(a) the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics on the numbers of live animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purpose;
(b) the National Health and Medical Research Council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all Government, Industry and Educational Research Laboratories.
And your petitioners as in duty bound wil1 ever pray.

We call on the Govcrnment to amend section 79 (I) of the Family Law Act to allow all Family Courts to be open and publication of details of proceedings permitted, provided names of parties and other identifying information is prohibited from disclosure.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon.
Petition received.

by Mr Humphreys. Petition received. Moreton Island: Sand Mining

Tertiary Education Fees
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the interim list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed a further mining lease against the advice of conservationists.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.

That students express concern that fees for tertiary education will be re-introduced.
That such a decision will severely restrict the access of rural students to tertiary education.
That all students have a right to equal access to tertiary education.
That such a decision will adversely affect the employment potcntial of young Australians.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray: That any proposal for the re-introduction of tertiary fees
be the subject of a full public inquiry and full debate. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mildren. Petition received.

2022 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Petitions

Trade Unions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that we are gravely disturbed by the actions of militant unions and" the ACTU, the failure of the President olthe ACTU to assist positively in settling the dispute which has caused massive losses to Qantas our National Airline, and we applaud the action of the Government in using RAAF planes to rescue Australians stranded abroad.
Your p'etitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament and the Government should be of firm resolve not to permit such unions to'hold the country to ransom and continue to take a forceful and resolute stand against such union militancy.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.

Anti-discriminatory Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament in Canberra assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That currently discrimination in the provision of work, in appointment to jobs and in promotion exists in Australia on particular, grounds including, inter alia, grounds of race, ethnic origin, marital status, pregnancy. sex and/or sexual preference; and
That currently discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits is exercised against particular groups of individual-in particular, against married women.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in Commonwealth employment. in employment of individuals under federal awards, in employment of persons by statutory bodies and quasi-governmental organisations, and in employment of all persons in areas over which Commonwealth and Australian Capital Territory equal opportunity legislation should have jurisdiction; and
That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits to all persons" without regard to sex and/or marital status.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrSpender.
Petition received.

Staging ofAmerican B52 Bombers

To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of "Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned in the Northern Territory respectfully showeth:

That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base for American B52 bombers:

Jeopardises the all A1!stral!ans. in

welfare of the citizens of Darwin and that it establishes a stronger potential

ooff

DarWin bemg a nuclear target in any contlict between the

USA and another power.

Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52s: .

(a) carried nuclear weapons

(b) were engaged in bombing missions against another State.
Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy.
Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the rnilitarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power contlict in this region.
Jeopardises the welfare of the Citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fall: out will increase substantially to the residents.
Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of peace in the Pacific region and ,violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty. Your petitioners therefore pray that the members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraws 'the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US. Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.
Australian Capital Territory: High Speed Transit Traffic
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned electors of the Division of Canberra respectfully showeth:
That traffic on AthUon Drive, which was built as a temporary measure to make do until Erindale Drive was constructed, is causing noise in excess of acceptable levels, and serious safety problems. The heavy volume of traffic transiting Beasley Street between AthUon Drive and Yamba Drive is also causing serious noise and safety problems in an area containing a school, a major sporting complex and a retirement village. One person has been killed and there have been other serious accidents.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray for an immediate, thorough-going and substantial review of the problems caused by the routing of high speed transit traffic to and from the Tuggeranong Valley through the southern Woden suburbs; and that an effective and comprehensive solution be instituted without delay.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly.
Petition received.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
AUSTRALIAN TAXATION OFFICE
Mr HAYDEN-Has the Treasurer's attention been drawn to the report in today's Canberra Times that the Australian Taxation Office has been unable to collect almost $l,OOOm in assessed tax because of staff shortages and that hundreds

Ques(ions Without Notice

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2023

of millions of dollars in tax remains undiscovered Australian Association of Independent

because of a lack of staff? Is it a fact that each tax Businesses, specifically representing the Belcon-

investigation officer employed generates revenue nen Traders Association, will be seeing me later

for the Government of around $200,000 a year, today. In implementing the Government's de-

that is, at least ten times the officer's salary? Is it a cision to sell the Belconnen Mall and to wind up

fact that, as the Auditor-General's recent report the Canberra Commercial Development Auth-

has shown, staff shortages created by arbitrary ority, a national consultant from the private

staff ceilings have cost the Government considerenterprise sector is to be retained to advise and

ably in terms of lost revenue and reduced control assist the Government. The proposal put forward

over spending? Finally, how does the Treasurer by the honourable member is indeed a most

expect the ordinary pay-as-you-earn taxpayer to interesting one, and I will be giving it most careful

believe that legislation such as a revamped section consideration, along with other proposals that no

260 will reverse the clear trend towards tax being doubt will be coming before me.

optional for the rich when the Government refuses to back up such legislation with the necess-

Mr Holding-Can't you make up your mind?

ary staff to enforce it?

Mr Cohen-Outrageous!

Mr HOWARD-My attention has been drawn to that article. I can describe the figure used in the article only as being quite fanciful and having no basis in fact. Quite obviously, the number of people employed in certain activities of the Tax-
ation Office does have an effect on revenue collections. That is particularly so in the area of the field audit operations of the Taxation Office, which is not concerned primarily with the detection of the sophisticated forms of tax avoidance to which the honourable member's question was directed. As he should know, the detection and countering of that kind of behaviour is more the province of the legislative sections of the Taxation Office and more a function of the rapidity with which tax

Mr HODGMAN-I am surprised that members of the Australian Labor Party are not interested in this, because it is a very important question in Canberra at the moment. Whilst there is no legal obstacle to subdividing the complex and issuing independent strata titles, I must point out that that would be a most unusual course of action to follow for a major shopping complex. I am informed that nowhere in Australia has a major retail shopping centre been subdivided in the manner proposed. However, I am informed that this has been done in other countries. I indicate that the matter will be given most serious consideration.

avoidance schemes can be dealt with by legislation and, in particular, of whether an omnibus antiavoidance provision such as section 260 can be introduced. In other words, sophisticated tax avoidance is best countered by sophisticated legislative response and does not necessarily depend upon the total number of people employed.

Before concluding, I will make two further comments. In principle it can be stated, and is
clearly stated, that the concept of private ownership accords with the Government's philosophy and the motivation behind the decision to release the Belconnen Mall to the private sector. I note the interest of the private sector, of both large and

BELCONNEN MALL
Mr TUCKEY-Is the Minister for the Capital Territory aware of the statement issuing from a meeting of 118 leaseholders of the Belconnen Mall that they would support its sale by strata title'? Does the Minister propose to make every effort to conduct the sale on those lines? Would present tenants have first refusal for the area they occupy?

small private enterprise organisations, in the disposal of the Mall. The question of the price per unit, arrangements for management and maintenance of the common areas including escalators, stairs, car parks and pedestrian areas and access to the 172 shops in the complex are all matters which will have to be given the most careful consideration. Lastly, I draw attention to a statement made last night by the Leader of the Australian Labor Party in the House of Assembly. He said

Mr HODGMAN-I thank the honourable that if the Australian Labor Party wins the 1983

member for his question. I am aware of a meeting Federal election it will immediately repurchase

held last night of shopkeepers operating at the the Belconnen Mall. Once again the Labor Party

Belconnen Mall, and I understand that over 200 shows how completely out of touch it is with the

people attended. At the meeting it was resolved real world of private enterprise. The views which

that a request would be made to me for strata it has expressed are totally opposed by the private

titles to be issued and for the shopkeepers to pursector and in particular the Belconnen Traders

chase the premises they currently occupy. I Association. The decision of the Government to

further understand that a deputation from the release the Belconnen Mall to the private sector

2024 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

has been overwhelmingly accepted and approved in the Australian Capital Territory.
HEALTH CARE COSTS Mrs CHILD-My question is addressed to the Minister for Health. I refer the Minister to the Hospitals and Health Services Commission's 'Discussion paper on Paying for Health Care', which, like the present Government's new health measures, expounds the user pays philosophy. I refer him also to the fact that the paper isolates higher prices for medical and hospital care as being responsible for over half-58 per cent-of the increase in health expenditures. Does the Minister not agree that the higher costs his announced policy forecasts for hospital accommodation, for transfers from public to private hospital sectors, for health insurance premiums and for reintroduced hospital charges will in fact further escalate the cost of the Australian health care system and that these increased costs will in fact benefit not the consumers of health services but the providers? Mr MacKELLAR-I think the House and the people of Australia must be aware that the cost of health care in all 'modern and developing countries is escalating quite rapidly. This is because of the developments in health technology, medical techniques and the sorts of institutions which are required and which are being utilised. What the Government has sought to do is to make people, both practitioners of health care and receivers of health care, more aware of the total costs in this area. It must not be thought for a moment that the health insurance costs cover anywhere near the real cost of a bed in, say, a public hospital, which cost is averaging between $150 and $200 per bed day, depending on the State. The cost per intensive bed day is naturally a very great deal more. Both State and Commonwealth governments subsidise the cost of health care very considerably. We not only subsidise it by direct payments to the States for hospitals but we also subsidise it-this has been announced-by payments for institutions such as nursing homes. The thrust behind the Commonwealth's approach to this whole problem of cost containment is to ensure that bodies such as the States accept responsibility for their constitutional requirements for the provision of health care-that is the general or public hospital system. It was very clearly pointed out in the Jamison Commission report that in fact there was a duplication of administrative arrangements for public hospitals. Surely, when one body has the constitutional responsibility to administer the public hospital system and the public health system it must and

does provide an impetus for that administration to be as efficient and effective as possible. At the same time, if in some way we can bring home to the receivers of health care and the providers of health care the costs of the services that are being provided, then in this way the whole community will have a better idea of the enormous cost of modern health care.
INCOME TAX Mr BUNGEY-Can the Prime Minister inform the House whether he told the Premiers on Monday at the Premiers Conference that the Commonwealth would cut income tax in the year 1981-82?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Premiers were not told that. They were told that it was the Government's objective to get into a position where realistic tax cuts would be feasible. It was emphasised that expenditure restraint not just by the Commonwealth Government but by all governments would be necessary if this were to happen in a way that Australians would find acceptable. I think it was pointed out at the Premiers Conference that slightly over 50 per cent of all the dollars finally spent by governments are spent by State and local governments combined. Because of the weight and importance of State and loc~l governments in relation, therefore, to the demands of government on the resources of Australia, their participation, and especially the States' participation, in the program of expenditure restraint is essential if Australia's taxpayers are to get the best possible deal. There is not the slightest doubt that, if the Commonwealth Government acceded to the requests of all Premiers, people's earnings could be paid to the State governments and there would be no need for those earnings to pass through the pockets of the individuals concerned because the governments would absorb the lot. I do not think anyone would regard that as a particularly sensible arrangement-certainly not the taxpayers, who were not even seeing their own income.
At Premiers conferences it is essential for the Federal Government to have very much in mind the interests of Australian taxpayers. At Premiers conferences the Commonwealth is the only government that speaks as though it has those interests in mind, because always there are requests put upon it to spend more funds. There is one Premier, in particular, who a few months ago recommended massive taxation reductions for the Commonwealth.
Mr Hurford-Who is that?

Questions Without Notice

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2025

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I daresay he will recognise himself. Those massive taxation reductions' either would have been vastly inJ1ationary by increasing our deficit or would have involved massive reductions in government expenditure-much greater reductions than the Review of Commonwealth Functions has been able to achieve. I think it was pointed out at the time, that if Premiers believed there ought to be tax reductions as a result of Commonwealth Government decisions, they would need to bear some part of that burden. At the Premiers Conference we made some progress, as a result of the final decisions, in achieving expenditure restraint, and therefore I believe the policy that we have urged upon the Premiers is intact and on course. It involves greater restraint in the Commonwealth's expenditure and in the expenditure of the States, arid I hope that that policy will be followed through in their Budgets later in the year and in our Budget later in the year. All of this is very much in the interests of Australian taxpayers. It is the only way in which to make realistic tax reductions possible.
Having said that as briefly as possible, I might add that half tax indexation does apply from I July, and that will cost half a billion dollars. From 1 July those who take out health insurance for themselves and their families at the standard or base rate will be able to claim a rebate for that expenditure in July of the year following that for which the rebate is claimed. Obviously those two things mean a reduction in the taxes that would otherwise be payable. As to other decisions that might be made, we will have to wait and see what is possible after the final expenditure and revenue figures become available to us.

Dr Blewett-The increase from 75 per cent to 85 per cent.
Mr MacKELLAR-I cannot recall precisely what that figure will be but I will supply the honourable member with it.
AUSTRALIA POST
Mr RUDDOCK-I address my question to the Minister for Communications. Following the announced abolition of the Australia Post Courier service, has the Minister seen reports about the new Australia Post Express service? Can he inform the House about this new and expanded service which, it is said, should meet all the requirements of those clients previously using the Australia Post Courier service?
Mr SINCLAIR-As the Prime Minister announced in the House the other day, the Australia Post Courier service is to be terminated. It is true that one of the charges of Australia Post is to provide an expeditious mail service. That is a responsibility which all members of the House would expect Australia Post to continue to fulfil. It is a responsibility which involves mails being delivered as soon as possible after they are dispatched to the destination identified on them. I was disappointed to see the letter reported in this morning's Press which suggests that Australia Post has in mind that the new service will be identical to the old. There is a necessity, as I have explained, for an express mail service. To that degree and with articles that are within the ambit of Australia Post's responsibilities, it will remain Australia Post's responsibility.

HEALTH CARE COSTS
Dr BLEWETT-I refer the Minister for Health to his statement of last week which, because of hasty preparation, had a certain imprecision with regard to costs. Is he now able to tell the House what is the likely cost to the Government of increasing the private hospital bed daysubsidy for surgical patients to $28, the savings in costs of reducing' the number of disadvantaged persons eligible for bulk billing, and the additional cost to the funds of increasing the medical benefit to the insured population from 75 per cent to 85 percent?
Mr MacKELLAR-The likely cost of increasing the bed day subsidy for surgical beds in private hospitals from $16 a day to $28 a day will be about $22m. The savings in cost in the disadvantaged area will be, from memory, approximately $8m to $lOm. What was the third cost?

It is intended, however, that a range of articles that were previously, as I understood, advertised as being carried by Australia Post Courier will not henceforth be carried. They include articles that, in Tasmania at least, were advertised as being across a wide range of articles and certainly not only those in the more restricted categoriesthose restricted for postage. The objective being to expedite mail deliveries, I hope that Australia Post looks at the degree to which private contractors can undertake to the maximum the work of speeding these mail deliveries. I do not know whether it was stated in the letter that was apparently written by Australia Post that it intends to extend the contract service. It is certainly the Government's objective to ensure that the private sector participates to the maximum in whatever way it can to ensure that Australia Post pursues
and completes its task.

2026 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

PUBLIC HOSPITAL CHARGES Mr SCOTT-Has the attention of the Minister for Health been drawn to the report in the AU8traliml Financial Review of 5 May 1981 indicating that the Commonwealth Government wanted the following charges levied for public 110spital services: A $15 fee for out-patient services, $80 a day for public ward beds and $110 a day for intermediate ward beds? Are these the 'appropriate inpatient and out-patient charges' referred to by the Minister in his statement of 29 April? If not, what were the 'appropriate charges' used in his calculations? Mr MacKELLAR-Those are the charges which the Commonwealth has used for the basis of its calculations.
HEALTH CARE COSTS Mr MacKELLAR-I wish to add to the answer which I gave to the honourable member for Bonython. The saving of between $8m and $lOm concerning disadvantaged persons relates both to the lifting of the refund figure for health insurance from 75 per cent to 85 per cent plus the changes to the system of definition of 'disadvantaged'.
REGIONAL AIR CARRIERS Mr ADERMANN-ls the Minister for Transport aware of the important role of the regional airline carriers in Australia? Is he aware that such carriers are the lifeline of many residents outside the capital cities and off the main trunk routes? Will he therefore do everything possible to ensure that these carriers are not disadvantaged or discouraged in any new two-airline agreement? Mr HUNT-I am aware of the great importance of regional airlines to aviation generally and certainly to regional areas throughout Australia. I am very concerned that East-West Airlines Ltd, which plays a very big part as a regional airline operating over a fairly vast network, has been going through a fairly difficult time due to a number of factors. The first was the disastrous commercial decision to take over Connair Pty Ltd in the Northern Territory. It has also suffered a downturn in revenue due t() the continuing drought over a wide area of New South Wales. It has decided to suspend what was a profitable route, the Alice Springs-Sydney route, that it established some time ago, because of competition from larger aircraft operated by Ansett Airlines of Australia and Trans-Australia Airlines. However, I must say that I was surprised at some of the statements made by the chairman of East-West yesterday. They are misleading in that

they allege that the new two airlines agreement will militate against regional airlines. Nothing could be further from the truth. Under the existing airlines agreement there is no definition of any route which is to the advantage of or which will be served by a regional airline.
Under the new two airlines arrangement the trunk routes and the prescribed routes are defined. They are prescribed in the following way: A regional operator will have the opportunity to operate over what are called prescribed routes in the new agreement. Prescribed routes can be trunk routes or part of trunk routes. Prescribed routes are defined in the agreement as including intrastate routes, intraterritorial routes, from a regional centre to anywhere in Australia, routes over which the airlines operated as at 1 July 1981 and a route over which neither TAA nor Ansett has provided a service at the request of the Minister or to the satisfaction of the Minister. There is no need to consult over the first four of those categories, but in respect to the latter category there is a need to consult with a major airline.
The opportunity is there for East-West to continue' to expand. Indeed, honourable members will recall that Ansett Airlines made an arrangement with Bush Pilots Airways Pty Ltd to take over some of its unprofitable F27 routes in Queensland. East-West claims to have a specialty in handling F27 services. East-West I think would do its cause much good if it were to negotiate with TAA and the other major airline to see whether it can take over some of the routes that the major airlines are not operating efficiently or satisfactorily from their point of view. I hope that EastWest will take a leaf out of the book of Bush Pilots which has taken a very bold initiative in Queensland. Rather than grumble and grizzle about a new airlines agreement that has not yet come into force, it ought to get on with the job and run the airline.
HEALTH CARE FOR DISADVANTAGED PERSONS
Dr CASS-Can the Minister for Health specify more clearly what were the criteria which led the Government to its definition of the disadvantaged for the purposes of free health cover? In particular, is the Minister aware that the income levels which he has given in defining the disadvantaged are such that no single person who is employed, even on the minimum wage, is eligible? Furthermore, is he aware that very few married couples are eligible since the limit of $160 is barely above the minimum wage and would be exceeded by many poor persons working overtime to keep their families?

Questions Without Notice

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2027

Mr MacKELLAR-Naturally I have consulted with my colleague, the Minister for Social Security, in relation to the definition of the disadvantaged. The honourable member has confined his remarks to only one of the categories. He has not mentioned that migrants and refugees in their first six months in Australia will be eligible for treatment. He has not mentioned that unemployed and special beneficiaries and their dependants who qualify within the pensioner health benefit limits will be eligible for free medical care.
Whilst the honourable gentleman says that not many people fall into the other category, in fact, on my information it will apply to a million Australians. As about 2 million people hold pensioner health benefit cards, this means that about 3 million Australians will come within the ambit of this scheme to help those in genuine need in this country. I do not believe that can be said to be at all ungenerous.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Bradfield having addressed a question to the Treasurer-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The question is out of order.
HEALTH CARE FOR DISADVANTAGED PERSONS
Mr MILDREN-I refer the Minister for Health to his ill-defined plans for health provision for the socially disadvantaged. Given that individuals will fall in and out of employment and that individuals will fluctuate around the arbitrary income level, I ask: Firstly, will they require reclassification on each occasion they change status; secondly, will identity cards be regularly issued and recalled; and thirdly, will retrospective classification of persons as socially disadvantaged be allowed after medical services or hospital admission?
Mr MacKELLAR-The question again concerns that third section of the disadvantaged classifications which I mentioned. Those classifications will be for six-month periods. Therefore, people who may move in or may move out just over a short period-in other words, those who could be classified as, say, itinerant workers-will have to be so classified only each six months. The period of the classification lasts for six months. If treatment takes place after that six-month period, of course it is perfectly in order for the person again to apply for such classifications.
Mr Young-Are you going to index the amounts?

Mr SPEAKER-Order! I ask the honourable member for Port Adelaide to cease his constant interjection.
Mr Young-I think he can hear me.
Mr SPEAKER Order! I warn the honourable member for Port Adelaide.
Mr MacKELLAR-I turn to the last part of the honourable gentleman's question. People who fall into these categories do not have to be so registered before treatment. In fact, it is one of the features of the Government's scheme that people who go along either to a hospital or to a doctor are billed for the services that are provided to them. They can then go to a Department of Social Security office, and if they come within the classifications as defined the costs of their treatment will be dealt with in the way that has been outlined by the Government.
CHINA: DISASTER RELIEF
Mr ROCHER-Is the Minister for Foreign Affairs able to confirm that two widely separated provinces in mainland China are suffering from the effects of natural disasters-one from severe flooding and the other from prolonged drought? Has the Chinese Government taken, for it, an unprecedented course and sought international aid to ease the massive malnutrition and disease resulting from these natural disasters? Finally, has the Australian Government been approached for assistance?
Mr STREETI can confirm that two Chinese provinces, the provinces of Hubei and Hebei, have been severely affected by .fiooding and drought respectively, as the honourable gentleman has said. The Chinese Government has sought international aid through the United Nations Disaster Relief Organisation, UNDRO. I can further confirm that UNDRO has approached the Australian Government for assistance for the nood and drought victims concerned. Bearing in mind the humanitarian aspects of the disaster, I have approved the following response to the Chinese appeal: In the first case the provision of medical supplies valued at $AlOO,OOO, and in the second case the provision of 10,000 tonnes of wheat currently valued at $A1.5m. Both the Chinese authorities and UNDRO have been informed of Australia's offer and arrangements are being made for the delivery of our assistance in accordance with the wishes of the Chinese Government.
HEALTH FUNDING
Ml' KENT-Can the Minister for Health inform the House who, under the new health arrangements, has responsibility for funding and

2028 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

oversight of the following programs: Aboriginal health centres, women's refuges and the family planning programs?
Mr MacKELLAR-There will be a statement made in the House later about Aboriginal medical assistance. Women's refuges come within the absorption area which has already been announced by the Government. The family planning programs again come within the Community Health Program.
MEAT Mr COWAN-I ask the Minister for Primary Industry: What is the effect upon the Australian meat producer of the marketing of meat from European Economic Community countries? Is there any further action that can be taken by Australia to prevent the so-called dumping of EEC meat on world markets? Mr NIXON-For some time the Australian Government has expressed concern to the European Economic Community about the effect of a common agricultural policy on agricultural production within the Community and the follow-on dumping on to Third World markets that occurs as a result of the overproduction of meat. Indeed, the concern of the Government has been at the highest level. On visits to the EEC the Deputy Prime Minister has expressed our concern in the strongest of terms. As I have pointed out to the House before, other countries are equally concerned at the common agricultural policy. Third World countries that attended the Bangladesh meeting of agricultural Ministers, which I attended a couple of months ago, drew attention to the fact that they are unable to develop their agricultural programs appropriately because they are getting so-called aid or assistance from the EEC in the form of food and fodder and this is causing a retardation of their agricultural programs. It is fair to say that there is concern amongst a wide range of countries. All we can do is continue to expose the falsity of the common agricultural policy and the agricultural program of the EEC and continue to hope that common sense will come to the Commission of the EEC in due course.
HEALTH CARE FOR DISADVANTAGED PERSONS
Mr CHARLES-I ask the Minister for Health: Firstly, under the new health scheme will doctors be permitted to charge pensioners and disadvantaged patients more than 85 per cent of the schedule fee? Secondly, what will the practical position be for patients attending private doctors who

have no card identifying them as being disadvantaged but who claim to be eligible for such a classification?
Mr MacKELLAR-As to the charging procedures of doctors, the present system will continue. Of course, what happens is that doctors very seldom charge pensioners more than 85 per cent of the schedule fee and very seldom claim the $5 which they can claim under the arrangements. in relation to the second part of the question, 1 have already mentioned this afternoon that people who claim to be within the disadvantaged groups do not necessarily have to be so classified before attending a medical practitioner or a hospital. If they are within that category and do become sick but have not been so classified, they can go to the doctor and the doctor makes a charge. Once they have been classified as disadvantaged patients, the account can be taken to a registered health fund and a pay doctor cheque can be issued or they can pay directly and receive a cheque from the health insurance fund.
AIR HOSTESSES DISPUTE Mr BURR-I address my question to the Minister for Transport. Is it a fact that the Air Hostesses Association has asked the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission to ratify a pay increase of $15 a week as a result of the settlement of last week's strike? Is such an increase within the wage indexation guidelines? Are air hostesses becoming too expensive to justify their role as highly paid waitresses? Will the Government consider altering the Air Navigation Regulations to allow safety officers to serve on passenger aircraft in place of air hostesses? Would that allow the airline companies to reduce air fares?
Mr HUNT-The air hostesses or flight attendants dispute was settled before the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. It was settled within the wage indexation guidelines. I understand that the airlines have entered into a three-year agreement with the flight attendants or air hostesses. So, that agreement, I think, would be binding on both the airlines and the hostesses.
PREMIERS CONFERENCE Mr HAYDEN-I ask a question of the Prime Minister. I refer to the Prime Minister's meeting with the Premiers last Monday at which the Prime Minister was able to force the States to accept a cut of $280m in funds from tax revenue for the coming year. I ask: Is it a fact that Cabinet had agreed to limit these cuts in State finances to $21Om and not $280m? Does the Prime Minister have any advice on what effect this additional reduction of $70m will have in squeezing State

Questions Without Notice

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2029

finances and especially on State sponsored employment? Finally, will the Prime Minister assure the House that this windfall saving of $70m, at the States' expense, will now be used to limit the 17,000 jobs his Government intends to abolish under the decisions announced to Parliament last Thursday?

in approach, it will never be able to propose policies that will advance the well-being of the Australian people.
DISALLOWED QUESTION Mr Hyde having addressed a question to the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs-

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-It has been the practice of this Government for the Treasurer and the Prime Minister to be given guidelines by Cabinet decision in relation to the negotiations with Premiers at Premiers conferences. So long as it comes out within the guidelines, that can be finally consummated without reference back to the Cabinet. The negotiation with the States was achieved within the guidelines. Obviously there is expressed to the Treasurer and to the Prime Minister a general preference as to the end of the guidelines on which the Government would prefer the negotiations to conclude. What was achieved last Monday was thoroughly in accord with the Cabinet's directions to the Treasurer and to me in relation to that matter. Therefore, there is no question of any additional windfall gain. What was saved was within the expectation of Cabinet when the decision was first made.
The last part of the honourable gentleman's question shows again that he fails utterly to understand the basic philosophical difference between the Australian Labor Party and the Government in relation to the management of the Australian economy. With every program that is proposed by the Opposition there is the underlying belief that, if the Government spends more, if the Government spends up big and if the Government puts more people on its own payroll, all Australians will be better off. The falsity of that Labor Party approach was demonstrated in Australia in the early 1970s. It has been demonstrated around the world time and again as countries have got into very great difficulties as the result of big spending governments. At a time when we have been exercising expenditure restraint for over five years now, we have been able to move our inflation rate below the average of our trading partners. The employment growth in Australia over the last two years, of over 300,000, is much more than governments would ever be able to provide on their own account. It has come about because we believe in smaller government and taxes being lower than they would otherwise be, strengthening the Australian economy and thus adding to jobs and growth and the well-being of Australian families. Until the Australian Labor Party understands that there is. a basic difference

Mr MOORE-I have read with-Mr Lionel Bowen-l take a point of order. Is this not anticipating debate? Is this matter not listed in the program for debate under the companies legislation? Mr SPEAKER-The question put in its general form is capable of discussion in the overall debate. The Minister can answer the question in the debate.
TELECOM AUSTRALIA Mr LIONEL BOWEN-My question is directed to the Minister for Communications. I refer to the section of the Review of Commonwealth Functions report which deals with Telecom Australia and the suggestion that there is to be a sale to the private sector of functions of Telecom as well as the interconnect market. Is it not a fact that the interconnect market relates to the satellite? Is this a subtle way of saying that the satellite and all its potential will be given over to the private sector? For example, does it mean that the whole of data transmission will now be the business of the private sector? As that is the most profitable sector of the satellite, does it not mean that Telecom will have to increase its charges in other directions? Mr SINCLAIR-The interconnect market basically is not the satellite peculiarly, as I understand the definition of the word. All sorts of words are used to define it. It is the add-on market. It is all those bits of equipment that go into the point in the wall of a house, office or installation where the telephone network actually plugs into each of the outlets around Australia. The interconnect market under the current jargon, as I have learned it, covers a whole range of equipment from videotex machines through to teledex and all the bits of electronic equipment, including computers, that are capable of being pinned in. As far as the satellite is concerned, it is the Government's intention that 49 per cent of the body to be established to operate that satellite should be owned by the private sector. The way and form in which that body will function and operate is still to be determined by the Government and is, of course, a matter for discussion with those involved and interested and ultimately for

2030 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

presentation and consideration by this House before it is finally ratified.
The intention in the Review of Commonwealth Functions report is that where very significant funds are required for the development of this interconnect market a judgment needs to be made as to whether or not those funds might more properly be raised in the private sector and that area operated privately. We see the demand for money to complete the network system around Australia to provide telephones and to provide adequately services that are the monopolised responsibility of Telecom as the prime capital requirement of Telecom. We are concerned that if funds are diverted into all those other areas which might be profitable it will be less possible for the telephone services that must be the prime responsibility of Telecom to be provided adequately. Therefore the decisions taken by the review committee chaired by my colleague the Minister for Industry and Commerce will in fact ensure that Telecom is more adequately able to meet its prime task, not hindered.
ECONOMY: PUBLIC SECTOR
Mr BRADFIELD-Is the Treasurer aware of a claim made on a radio program this morning in which it was stated that government in Australia is still smaller than in many other developed countries such as the United States of America and West Germany? [s that claim correct? What would be the effect on Australia if government were allowed to expand beyond its present level?
Mr HOWARD I am aware of that claim. I listened to it very carefully. I always listen very carefully to views put forward by the honourable member for Gellibrand. They are very instructive on occasions as to where the Labor Party stands on the position of the public sector. Just as he made very clear in his now famous speech to the Labor economists what he thinks of a larger public sector, he again nailed his colours to the mast this morning and said that the Labor Party stands for bigger government. We do not mind the honourable member for Gellibrand doing that as often as he Jikes. We on this side of the House believe that the national economic need at the moment and the demands of the Australian people are for less and not more government.
It is no argument in favour of the Labor Party position on the size of government to say that government in Australia is smaller than in other countries. All that means is that many of the policies which are successfully in place in this country are not being emulated sufficiently in other parts of the world. The policies of smaller government

which this side of the House has followed so successfully over the last five years have resulted in the strength of the Australian economy becoming the envy of many parts of the industrialised world. It is no accident that the rate of growth of the Australian economy is stronger than the average of the industrialised world. Ifthis is a consequence of the size of our government being smaller than that of the rest of the industrialised world, it is a case for making the size of our public sector still smaller.
ACADEMIC SALARIES TRIBUNAL
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-Pursuant to section 12DD of the Remuneration Tribunals Act 1973, I present the Academic Salaries Tribunal's review of salaries of part time tutors, demonstrators and supervisors. The Tribunal's determination and report will be taken into account in the normal way in providing funds for recurrent expenditure by universities and colleges of advanced education.
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-For the information of honourable members. I present the report of the Industries Assistance Commission on canned ham, short term assistance.
HOUSING ASSISTANCE ACT
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction)- -Pursuant to section 15 of the Housing Assistance Act 1978 I present the annual report for the year 1979-80.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-Mr Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman wish to make a personal explanation?
Mr HAYDEN-Yes.
Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed.
Mr HAYDEN-It has been commented publicly and again today in the House by the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) that it would be the intention of a Labor government after 1983-1 note for the record that the Minister was gracious enough to acknowledge that there is no doubt about that-to reacquire a particular public authority undertaking which the Government intends to dispose of. For the record and so that there will be no doubt in the future, let me state our attitude on this. It is simply that we will consider the desirability of purchasing public

Fundingfor the States

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2031

undertakings disposed of by the present Government according to whether the purchase is or the purchases are economically feasible and socially desirable in the circumstances at the time.
PARLIAMENTARY JOINT SITTINGS AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Assent reported.
FUNDING FOR THE STATES
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received letters from the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) and the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) proposing that definite matters of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion today. As required by Standing Order 107, I have selected the matter which, in my opinion, is the most urgent and important, that is, that proposed by the honourable member for Gellibrand, namely:
The severe implications of the Government's action in failing to provide adequate funds to the Slates.
I therefore call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number afmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (3.10)-Last Monday the Fraser Government revealed phase 3 of its plan to dismember the Australian public sector. In the previous week we saw the enactment of the first two phases with the announcement of a further revision to health financing arrangements and the results of the so-called razor gang's efforts in reducing government expenditures. This week we saw phase 3-a severe reduction in funds for the States imposed by the Commonwealth at the Premiers Conference. Of course, these are far from being the first attempts by the Fraser Government to reduce government expenditure, but the extent and implications of these three announcements are such as to mark a change of policy. What we are now witnessing is an attempt to bring about increased privatisation of the Australian economy by dismembering the public sector.
Let us look more closely at what happened at the Premiers Conference. In doing this we have to rely on newspapers because so far the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has made no statement to the Parliament or produced even a Press statement that I am aware of, or that his office can give my office. For information we have to rely on what has been published in the newspapers. We have to bear in mind the background to the Premiers Conference.

It was called to consider the formula to be used in the future for deciding the amounts to be allocated to States by way of general revenue payments. This is one of four forms of payments to the States. These general revenue payments to States are funds to be spent as the States like, which is mostly on recurrent expenditures. Past funding arrangements for general revenue grants provided for a percentage-just under 40 per cent-of the previous year's personal income tax receipts to be paid to the States. There was a guarantee for the four years from 1976-77 to 1979-80 that the States would get no less than the previous formula would have given them. That was a formula which became known as the Whitlam formula. This guarantee was relied on by the States in each of the four years because the percentage of tax sharing would not have given them as much as that provided under the Whitlam formula. In 1980-81 there was only the guarantee that the States would get no less in real terms than they had been given in the previous year.
Last Monday the States and the Commonwealth were considering the funding arrangements for 1981-82 and future years. As was reported in the papers, it was decided that for 1980-81 a substantial real decline in revenue grants would occur and for 1982-83 and subsequent years there would be a change in the tax sharing base from income tax to total tax receipts. It was decided also that there would be a continuance of the reduced level of payments incorporated in 1981-82 by fixing the 1981-82 payments as a percentage of total tax. If we look at the detail of the real reduction in 1981-82 we see that the States receive an increase of only 9 per cent in general revenue payments. This is an increase of 9 per cent when the inflation rate, as measured by the consumer price index, is 9.5 per cent. That is not the inflation rate relevant to the States in this matter. What is relevantto the States in regard to these kinds of payments is the implicit deflator for Government consumption expenditure because the States spend this money on goods and, in particular, on wageswhich account for 70 per cent of expenditure.
The implicit deflator for government consumption expenditure is not running at 9.5 per cent, which is the rate for the last 12 months in the consumer price index, but 13.3 per cent. This is the inflation rate relevant to the expenditures which the States have to undertake with this money. The States have been given an increase of 9 per cent general revenue payments. Therefore, there is a very substantial difference between what was granted by the Commonwealth to the States and the inflation rate faced by the States in respect of

2032 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Fundingfor the States

those expenditures. Of course the implicit deflator figure could increase even more in the next 12 months as the 'inflation rate goes up. However, ov~r the last 12 months the rate of increase has been 13.3. per cent. .
In addition, of course, there has been an increase in the population. The rate of increase is 1.2 per cent. Therefore we have a 13.3 per cent inflation rate and a 1.2 per cent population increase, which means that the States have to meet an increase of 14.5 per cent in expenditures at the current level of services-and they have been given a 9 per cent increase in general revenue grants to meet this. Obviously, there is an enormous disparity. If there is no further increase in the rate of inflation, there has been a real cut of 5.5 per cent. There has not been a minor 0.5 per cent reduction but a 5.5 per cent reduction in the real grant per head of population. It is a very severe cutback indeed. it is not a minor cutback but a severe cutback which will have severe implications for the operations of the States. I should note in passing that in addition to that, apparently an extra one per cent was given to compensate for the abolition .of some specific purpose grants to the States. Of course, that made the overall increase 10 per cent but, since that was only compensating for cuts in other areas, it cannot really be included in this analysis. If we are looking at general revenue grants we should compare a 9 per cent increase with a 14.5 per cent requirement at the current inflation rate. That severe reduction must be looked at not only on its own but also in terms of the reductions which have occurred in the past. The fact is that this Government has already brought about a substantial, if not severe, reduction in payments to the States over the last five years.
General revenue grants have been the main growth area in Commonwealth payments to the States. They account for a little under 50 per cent of total payments to the States. Two of the other three forms of payments to the States have fallen in real terms over the last five years. In the last five years general revenue grants have increased in real terms by 19.4 per cent, general capital grants have fallen by 38.6 per cent, specific purpose recurrent payments have increased by 12.5 per cent and specific purpose capital payments have fallen by 54 per cent. In the area of capital payments-that is, general capital grants and specific purpose capital payments-there have been declines of 38.6 per cent and 54 per cent. So, overall there has been a considerable decline in the funds made available to the States. There has been a 6 per cent decline in real terms or, if one takes account of the increase in population of

some 6 per cent over that five-year period, there is a decline of more than 12 per cent in real terms per head of population in .the payments by this Government to the States. A 12 per cent decline is a very considerable decline indeed, especially when one bears in mind the fact that the payments by the Commonwealth to the States account for 70 per cent of the revenues available to the States. If 70 per cent of the funds available to the States are cut by 12 per cent, quite obviously a considerable reduction is brought about in the capacity of the States to perform. Of course, they have had to cut back in various areas.
That is only what has happened in the past. In addition to that we have now a new phase in which the major growth area-the area of general revenue grants; the one area which has shown a considerable increase over the last five years-has been reduced in real tenns. That reduced rate will be incorporated in the increase in future years. This brings about a whole new ball game for the States, especially as in addition to that they have already been warned that there will be little joy in the other areas of payment apart from general revenue grants. They have been told not to expect anything great to happen---not that they would, on past experience-in the other three areas of payment to them. They have been told that their infrastructure borrowing approvals are likely to be cut back, so they will not be able to borrow as much for infrastructure development.
As a result of the decisions made last week in respect of hospital financing arrangements and the razor gang decisions, they have also been given a whole new array of responsibilities which they are expected to fund and which they have been compensated for to only a minor degree in the decisions announced on Monday. So, the States have been given a whole array of messages that their funds will be severely cut. They have been given more responsibilities and less finance and have been told that there will be less finance available in the future. This is all on top of the considerable reduction of 12 per cent in real terms per head of population, which reduction has occurred in Federal funding to them over the last five years.
The effect on the States of these cutbacks will be severe. Quite obviously the States will have to reduce expenditures or increase taxes and charges, or both. If we were to look at the aspect of reduced expenditures, we should examine the areas where States spend their money. The States spend their money, firstly, on education; secondly, on health; thirdly, on roads; fourthly, on law, order and public safety; and, fifthly, on social security and welfare. They are the five major areas

Fundingfor the States

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2033

of State expenditures. If there is a severe reduction in the funds available to them, those are the areas in which the cutbacks must be made. Let there be no doubt that this Government is deliberately bringing about, not only through its own direct actions but also through its indirect actions in respect of cutting back funds to the States, further cutbacks in these social infrastructure areas-if one might broadly term it as such-of education, health, roads, law and order and social security. In respect of increased taxes and charges, quite obviously the Government expects there will be some increases in State taxes and charges. The Treasurer said so. On the Australian Broadcasting Commission's lunchtime news broadcast yesterday he was reported as
saying:

Some price increases and rises in State charges will be unavoidable.

There we have the Treasurer saying that he

expects, as a result of the decisions which he

forced on the States, that they will have to jack up

their rates and charges. Of course, that will not

only have an impact on the people who pay them

but also it will have more general impacts which I

will come to in a moment. Certainly in the hospi-

tal area there is no doubt that the charges will in-

crease. I understand that the States were told by

the Commonwealth that they would have to in-

crease their public hospital charges by 60 per cent

for public wards, from $50 a day to $80 a day.

Whilst the Government has not denied that yet, as

far as I am aware it has not affirmed it either. It

has been reported and I understand that to be the

case. The Commonwealth also expects that the

States could utilise stage 2 of new federalism,

which will be incorporated in the future arrange-

ments. It allows for the States applying an income

tax surcharge. So we could well have, as a result of

the Government's decisions, the States applying

an income tax surcharge. This means that we

would have double income tax. The States clearly

are reluctant to impose such a tax but they may be

forced into the situation, if these cuts go on, where

they have little alternative.

.

The effect on the economy generally is that it will cause increased unemployment. About 70 per cent of government recurrent expenditure is spent
on wages. If the Government cuts back on that funding obviously it will have less money to spend on wages and so jobs will have to go. We will not just lose the 17,000 jobs as a result of the so-called razor gang's activities, we will clearly lose more jobs as a result of the Government's cutbacks in funding to the States. I ask the House to bear in
mind that in the 12 months to April of last yearaccording to the latest figures which are available,

because the Government stopped the publishing of figures which relate to the period after thatone-third of employment growth in the wage and salary earner area came from State government employment. That growth simply will not occur in the future because this Government is ensuring that it will not be cutting back these funds to the States.
Obviously we will get increased inflation from the increased charges which the Treasurer expects to occur. Obviously we will have less economic growth because there will be less expenditure in the government area. At present one of the major stimuli to economic growth is, in fact, the increase in the public sector as occurred in this current financial year. That will clearly not occur next year because of various decisions taken by the Government, including this decision to cut back funding to the States. There are several reasons for these reductions. Firstly, there is the sheer ideological belief by the Treasurer and his cohorts that the public sector is too large and needs to be cut back because of the feeling in their blood that it prefers a larger private sector. That, I think, is the overwhelming motivation which they have. In addition to that, the Government says that the States are doing well. This is obviously a false claim.
The Government said in a paper given to the States at the Premiers Conference which was held on Monday that the States had been able to increase their services by some 3 per cent per annum per capita over the last five years because that had been the rate of growth in the States' recurrent expenditure on goods and services. Of course, that was only recurrent expenditure. If one looks at the total expenditure and includes capital, one finds there was a mere one per cent growth over that period. Capital expenditure declined by 5.7 per cent in real terms per head over that period. The Government has said that there is physical crowding out, that the public sector is too large and that there is no rooin for the private sector to grow. The Government does not give any proof of that. As I have said elsewhere and as the Treasurer mentioned at Question Time in reply to a Dorothy Dix question, the fact is that Australia's public sector is one of the smallest in the Western world. Many countries which have much larger public sectors than Australia have shown much faster rates of economic growth than Australia over the post-war period. The size of the public sector apparently has been no inhibition in those countries achieving that.
Finally, the Government says that there is financial crowding out, that a large public sector causes high interest rates. The fact is that in the

2034 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Fundingfor the States

last three years the public sector borrowing requirement has declined from 5.7 per cent of gross domestic product to 3.4 per cent. Interest rates have gone up enormously while the public sector borrowing requirement, a factor which the Treasurer said we must look at, has gone down considerably as a proportion of GDP. How does he square that with his argument that we have to reduce the size of the public sector to get interest rates down? Of course, the Government also wants to make room for income tax cuts. There are other ways of providing for income tax cuts other than dismembering the public sector.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

when it operated and perhaps more than the arguments which have inevitably arisen between the Commonwealth and the States under the new revenue-sharing arrangements.
I think it is fanciful to imagine that we could ever have a Premiers conference in which there was not some level of disagreement between the Commonwealth and the States. If the representatives of seven governments meet around a table and only one of those governments is the provider and the other six are the spenders of the money it is inevitable that the spenders will want more from the provider than the provider feels it responsible or possible to give. That is the truth and the inevitable circumstance surrounding Premiers conferences.

Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.25)-This matter of public importance relates specifically to the Premiers Conference and the reasonableness or otherwise of the arrangements settled on Monday for revenue-sharing between the Commonwealth and the States. I wish to spend a little time reminding the House that the purpose of the Premiers Conference last Monday which was convened at the request of the States was to talk about the long term arrangements which will prevail after 1 July this year between the Commonwealth and the States regarding general revenue sharing. I make it quite clear that the arrangement entered into in 1976 after the election of the Fraser Government, contemplated a review of those arrangements within four years. As a result of an agreement between the Commonwealth and the States last year the arrangements were continued for a further year, with a short term guarantee.
I mention that at the outset because some suggestions have been made from various quarters that in some way the new arrangements represent an abrogation by the Commonwealth of the commitments in the agreement entered into in 1976. Plainly that is quite wrong. It was always part of the agreement that the arrangements would come under review. During that review it was open to either party to argue that there should be fundamental changes to the arrangements. I reject completely the charges made in some State quarters that because the outcome of Monday's Conference represented a significant change in certain areas of the original agreement in some way the Commonwealth has broken the agreement. Nothing could be further from the truth. In the new arrangements we have continued the concept of revenue-sharing. We have rejected a reversion to the old formula approach which was productive of at least as many arguments in the days

We approached this Conference with a desire to see the revenue-sharing arrangements persist. We approached this Conference with a view to achieving a long term arrangment which was workable. Overall we approached it with a view to achieving an arrangement which was consonant with Australia's present economic needs. That means that we approached the Conference having very much in mind the considerations that affected the Government's deliberations in its recent Review of Commonwealth Functions. We approached it, recognising that the demand of the Australian people at present is for less and not more government. If the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) says that the Government is in the business of reducing the size of the public sector then I am quite prepared on behalf of the Governmenmt to plead guilty to that charge. We are concerned to reduce those aspects of the public sector which are unnecessary, unnecessarily expensive, and unnecessarily duplicate the activities of the private sector.
Our commitment to that goal is very firm and very obvious. It has been in evidence very much in recent weeks and was in evidence last Monday. We believe the community need and the community sentiment at present are to have smaller government and to allow individuals greater command over decisions affecting the disposition of the resources that they control and the incomes that they earn. This does not mean a turning of the back upon areas of essential government responsibility. Rather it means turning our back on those areas which involve waste and duplication, turning our back on areas of unnecessary expenditure, applying far more rigorously the principle of directing welfare assistance to those who need the help most. It aids the vulnerable and the weak in our community little if we are to hitch our star to the concept of universal benefits.

Fundingfor the States

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2035

There is nothing antagonistic to the interests of the vulnerable and the poor in this community in the new health arrangements. Rather what the new health arrangements recognise is that there is something quite wrong and something quite indefensible about an arrangement that enables a person, irrespective of income or assets, to walk into the out-patients department of any public hospital in Australia and be treated for nothing. If that is humanitarian and if that is looking after the interests of the vulnerable in the community, those who argue that have a different concept of need and vulnerability from that of those who sit on this side of the House. Because, to the extent that we require people who are able to pay for the provision of services so to pay, government is in a better position to give greater help to those people who really need help. That lies very much at the heart of the sort of priorities that this side of the House has and, of course, lies at the heart of the differences that exist in priorities between this Government and the other side of the House.

the honourable member for-Gellibrand as being a reasonable bench-mark. It is neither relevant nor appropriate.
The honourable member talked about the pattern of payments to the States by the Fraser Government over the last five years. When we look at thbse payments I think we ought to remind ourselves what has happened to the pattern of overall government expenditure during that period. Of course, the levels of payments to the States were very high in 1976 because levels of all forms of government expenditure were very high in 1976 when this Government came to office. The levels had grown on average by about 10.5 per cent in real terms over the previous three years. Of course, payments to the States had been no exception. We inherited an arrangement and we applied an arrangement that involved a guarantee that provided a betterment factor of 3 per cent, that is, a guaranteed increase in real terms of 3 per cent in general revenue payments over the period that that guarantee operated.

As I said at the outset, the approach that the Government adopted at the Premiers Conference is very much consistent with the approach that we have adopted in a number of other areas in recent weeks. The honourable member for Gellibrand spoke about a figure of 13.3 per cent as being the relevant inflation figure-I do not think I get him wrong-that one has to take into account in order to determine whether we have given the States a fair deal in general revenue payments. I understand that the honourable member chooses the figure of 13.3 per cent because that is the implicit deflator for government expenditure. I say to the honourable member for Gellibrand and to the House that not even the Premiers claimed that 13.3 per cent was the appropriate figure to use. One of the reasons that it is not the appropriate figure to use is that, being the implicit deflator for government expenditure, the base contains as a very significant component of defence expenditure, for which costs are rising at a very sharp rate. So is expenditure and rightly so. It will go up by 7 per cent in real terms next year and it will go on rising until it reaches about 3 per cent of gross domestic product. Everybody knows that defence expenditure is borne totally by the Commonwealth Government. To use in a debate on the reasonableness of the financial provision for the States a deflator that includes as one of its major components an item of expenditure of which not lc is borne by the States is to use quite the wrong figure and quite the wrong measurement. That, of course, is probably the reason that the States and .their representatives, the Premiers, on Monday did not use that figure. I reject the figure given by

Between 1976 and 1980-81 expenditure by the States in real terms through general revenue payments grew by 7.8 per cent, 7.5 per cent, 3 per cent, and 3.6 per cent and 0.3 per cent. That was a consequence of the quite generous arrangements that were adopted in 1976. As long ago as the Premiers Conference last year the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and I both indicated to the States that it would not be possible for us to continue an arrangement that was as generous as that, an arrangement which had enabled most State governments to provide tax reductions in a number of their Budgets during that period. We do not criticise the governments for doing that but we remind them of what we told them, and I remind the House too because it is relevant to the question of whether the States were being treated reasonably during that period. It is also relevant to the sorts of priorities that will have to be applied by the States as a consequence of the new arrangements that have been entered into.
The honourable member for Gellibrand upbraided me for saying yesterday that some State charges may rise. Unlike the honourable member for Gellibrand, I do not believe that it is possible always to prevent certain increases in charges and costs. It is unreal to imagine that one can. Of course, as a consequence of some of the new health arrangements we expect that certain charges made by the States will rise. Indeed, the basis of the arrangements that have been proposed in respect of hospitals is to take into account the assessed revenue raising capacity of the States in the hospitals area. This is not an inflationary approach. This is not an irresponsible

2036 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Fundingfor the States

approach. Rather it is an approach that recogcommitment to fiscal conservatism, it has now no-

nises, and recognises very directly, certain realiwhere else to go and it has to cut deeply into the

ties. One of the realities is that services as expenssocial wage. It has commenced what will be a bit-

ive as health services cannot continue to be ter attack on the people and on the working famil-

provided on the basis that, irrespective of need, ies of Australia. The trend, of course, has been

they will be provided free. All that does, as I menthere. Commonwealth payments to the States

tioned earlier, is to make available to people in the have fallen by 12 per cent to 14 per cent over the

community who can well afford to pay for the last five years. Even including infrastructure,

health services themselves the same level of serthere has been a fall of 7 per cent in total funds

vices as are made available to the poor and the available to the States.

vulnerable who are supposed to be the major concern of the people who sit opposite.

The Government commenced its term of office in 1975 with an attack on Labor's urban and re-

I remind the House that the Premiers Confergional programs which meant severe cutbacks in

ence was a very significant part of the Governspecial purpose grants. It has sought to restrain

ment's program of getting the balance between the growth in Commonwealth spending in fields

the public and private sector in our community such as social security, health, public housing and

into proper perspective. We believe that as a education. In each of those areas, all crucial to

consequence of the arrangements worked out at any notion of equity on welfare in the community,

the Premiers Conference it is within the capacities it has not sought to reduce overall costs but simply

of States through the ordering of their own priorito reduce the Commonwealth's responsibility.

ties to make their judgments because under our The aptly named razor gang is now on about a

federalism arrangements there are fewer tied more profound savaging of those programs and, in

grants, there is less direction, there is less dicsome cases, their elimination as national

tation, there is a lesser emphasis by the Commonprograms. Through the cutbacks in general rev-

wealth Government on its own priorities and enue grants it is seeking to ensure that the States

there is a greater flexibility on the part of the slash programs in the area of the social wage while

States to set their priorities and to make their depressing them to introduce as widely as possible

cisions as they should. It has been a consistent the user-pays principle, which will mean that

theme of this Commonwealth Government to those who can afford to pay for services will get

provide the States with a much greater flexibility. them, those who cannot either will not get the ser-

That is once again the case in respect of the devices or will get them in an emasculated and

cisions we have made to absorb certain payments depreciated form.

into the general revenue grants to the States.

The savageness and insensitivity of the Govern-

This side of the House, this Government, stands ment's action will shock many, but not us. We

for reducing the size of the public sector in a know from bitter experience that the Govern-

fashion which protects those programs which are ment is led by people whose experience is limited

needed to protect those in the community who to the public schools, elite clubs, squatters' balls

really need assistance but reducing it in such a and corporate boardrooms. It is backed by a back

way as allows individuals to make a greater range bench of half-baked Friedmanite pseudo-

of choices over the resources they own and over economists who have been encouraged by restric-

the incomes that they earn. We have that committions to speaking engagements at blue-rinse-set

ment and we are pursuing that path because we socials and Apexian seminars, where novelty is

believe that is the economic need of Australia at required more than any serious contribution to

present. We believe that that is the requirement of economic policy. Indeed, it is the lack of a firm

the Australian people. We believe that that type policy base for these cost-cutting proposals which

of society and that type of approach will more must cause thoughtful people the most profound

likely provide to the great majority of Australians concern. There is little feeling in the coalition

the sort of incentive and the sort of climate for party room for the consequences of the Govern-

self-endeavour, self-fulfilment and selfment's decisions. There is little feeling for the

achievement which are the basis of national econproblems which have arisen and which will arise

omic prosperity.

in relation to the restructuring of the Australian

Mr HOWE (Batman) (3.40)-The Government is now beginning to face up, or at least it is forcing the States to face up, to the consequences of its own failure. It has simply failcd, after five

economy around a renewed emphasis by corporate investors, if not by the Government, on resource development and the development of high technology industries.

years in office, to produce a consistent pattern of It does not appear to be recognised that while

broadly based and balanced growth. Given its long term gains may flow from this restructuring,

Fundingfor the States

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2037

there are certainly short term and will be future long term costs. It is the short term costs which have caused the Government to move towards such draconian measures. The Commonwealth, which has been unable to encourage economic growth, and therefore growth in revenues, at a fast enough rate, is now setting out to eliminate or reduce social programs. Having already encouraged the view that we are not one nation but a mere collection of States, it is seeking in two principal ways to shift the burden of the current transition onto the States. Firstly, it is seeking to move financial responsibility to the States for higher taxes; that is, it is seeking to press the States to take on the odium of double taxation. Secondly, it is seeking to give the States the responsibility for more of the welfare bill or, alternatively, for reducing social expenditure.
The States certainly cannot win in these circumstances, and the people will lose, whatever the States try to do. But after all, the name of the game is to ensure that people are forced to reduce their standard of living without their being able to point to this unpopular Government as being responsible. Thus the States will continue to be given assistance in areas of physical infrastructure and support for the corporate sector. However, they will have funds reduced which would enable them to maintain basic housing, education, health and transport programs. We ought not for a moment buy the rubbish we have just heard from the Treasurer (Mr Howard) about how these programs will not turn on the question of basic services and basic equity in the community. These proposals are about inequity. If they are accepted by the Australian community we will be accepting a concept of two Australians, and we ought to recognise that.
One should not attempt to see any rationality in this program but rather the rationalisation of political opportunism. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), in political trouble, is implementing a program which he believes will save him and his Government. The reality of the cutbacks, as the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) has pointed out, is quite clear. Under general revenue grants, real cuts of the order of 5.5 per cent will be achieved in the next financial year. Many social programs will be affected, but let me single out some of those for special attention. Firstly, let us take health. In this area the Government has granted the same level of funding in real terms for the next financial year, less the amount the States could be expected to collect from the introduction of user charges for people in in-patient and outpatient facilities. This means that patients will have to payor get into expensive health insurance

schemes. Insurance premiums will go up because the States are being forced to increase their charges at the behest of the Commonwealth.
The States are being pressed by these measures to move towards a rationalisation of hospital programs, particularly in the public sector. On the other hand, increased subsidies for private beds will mean that the States will see private beds increasing while public beds do not increase and, in fact, decrease. Furthermore, the Commonwealth funds will come through in a way in which the States will have to choose between the funding of hospitals and the need to take responsibility for community health centres, school dental programs and other community programs. This difficult choice will be compounded by the greater pressure which can be exerted by high technology hospitals against the much weaker community health and dental health programs. In addition, the States are to get the full responsibility for much of public health, including occupational health. The Commonwealth will transfer to the States the Commonwealth laboratories' responsibility for many of the testing facilities at Commonwealth level and for a number of public health programs. Finance will be reduced even for a road safety program.
Secondly, the area of education will be sharply affected by the razor gang proposals. Not only will it be affected by the reduction of funds for school capital works but also it will be fighting for funds from necessarily reduced State Budgets. The partial demolition of the Schools Commission will mean that resources will be lost for curricula planning, assessment of needs of schools, and the maintaining of some equity between the public and private sectors of education. The States are being forced to rationalise territory education or pay for it themselves, particularly in the area of colleges of advanced education. State members will have to pay the political price, not the members of this Government. The elimination of schools of engineering is staggering in view of the Government's commitment to resource-based development, and the rationalisation of teacher education is being carried out in a way which absolves the Commonwealth from the responsibility. There is considerable debate about what the demand for teachers will be, with shifting demographic patterns, and there is no question at the present time, at least in Victoria, that many more teachers could be helpfully employed if needsbased staffing were introduced. In areas such as education the States have already been involved in activities designed to rationalise. We will have a reduction in the quality of education which will take us back rapidly to the darkest days of the

2038 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Fundingfor the States

1960s. Again, Australia is on a path different from that of almost every developed country.
Another area which over a number of years has felt the sharpness of the razor is the area of public housing. Net payments to the States, expressed in 1980-81 prices, have seen a dramatic decline since the Fraser Government was elected. Net funds have fallen from $515m in 1974-75 to $75m in the current financial year and will fall still further in the next financial year. As was pointed out by the Victorian Minister of Housing, Mr Kennett, total State repayments are likely to exceed the grant from the Commonwealth for the first time this year; that is, the States will be paying back more to the Commonwealth than they will actually receive. They will have no net money from the Commonwealth to spend in terms of meeting current housing needs. One could go on to talk about transport and the absurdity of a Government which is getting $3 billion from oil revenues cutting out the urban public transport grants which might do something about energy conservation within Australia.
Essentially, what the Fraser Government is on about is making Australians the peasants of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries. We are going to have the worst living standards in the developed world. The Treasurer shakes his head, but of course the Government is cutting out the compilation of the statistics which will enable us to measure these things. In terms of school retention rates, we have an appalling record. We have the lowest public housing sector of any country in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. No Federal government in the world is currently placing less emphasis on urban public transport in the face of the energy crisis than this Government is. In terms of health, we are being taken back to the 1950s. The Australian people will not put up with it. Members of the Government parties, wherever they go in Australia, will find increasing hostility. The Prime Minister will be swept out. I believe the whole of Cabinet will also be swept out because what they are doing is outrageous.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr LUSHER (Hume) (3.51)-We have been subjected in this place to another tirade from one of the greatest of the left wing ideologues. Never having made any money himself and never having had a need to survive in the real world, the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe) continues to pursue this profligate philosophy of hand-outs and big spending.

Mr Howe-You talk about hand-outs. What rubbish!
Mr LUSHER-He has a big spending mentality that throws all responsibility to the wind.
Mr Howe-The Country Party should talk about hand-outs.
Mr LUSHER-He brands himself for what he is, and he helps to make a major contribution to putting his party on the Opposition benches and keeping them there for years to come.
Mr Howe-You would take every cent you could get out of the public purse.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) -Order!
Mr LUSHER-I congratulate him on the contribution be has made.
Mr HoweLet's hear a little sense.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Hume will resume his seat. The honourable member for Batman will cease interjecting. The honourable member for Hume might address himself to the subject matter before the House.
Mr West-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. I suggest that the honourable member for Hume cease his derogatory remarks about the honourable member for Batman. I do not see that what the honourable member for Batman mayor may not have earned in the past has anything to do with what he might say in this debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER Order! There is no point of order. The Chair has not read anything of an offensive nature in the remarks of the honourable member for Hume. I call the honourable member for Hume.
Mr LUSHER-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I congratulate the honourable member for Batman on his contribution to this debate, because he has done more than many of his colleagues to ensure that this Government stays on these benches for years to come. I cannot let go by the opportunity to make passing reference to the fact that the honourable member for Batman refers to this Government attempting to make Australians the peasants of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. We only have to look at the record of what this country is achieving in terms of any standards of the OECD to realise that the policies of this Government, on any standard, are taking Australia far in front of those countries with which we 'choose to compare ourselves. If we look at the situation that existed in 1973, 1974 and 1975, we will see that that Government of which

Fundingfor the States

6 May 198 J REPRESENTATIVES 2039

the honourable member was a party was using the behind because they are the sorts of decisions that

international situation as an excuse for the disaswill put this country right on the road to recovery

trous performance on the part of Australia at that and keep it way out in front of all these profligate

time. This Government is demonstrating not only spending socialist economies with which the Op-

that we are able to do as well as other countries position wants us to compare ourselves.

but also that we can do better. Under the Whitlam Government we did not do as well but worse than other countries. That is the reality of the situation.

We must reverse the process of the late 19608 and the early 1970s whereby governments used the power of the purse to buy into areas of traditional State responsibility-areas such as

This morning the Opposition spokesman on health, transport, education and housing. The

these matters said on the radio that the Australian theory then rife was that there should be

Labor Party stands for bigger government. He standardisation and not differences among the

said that as recently as this morning. The story States.The Australian Schools Commission is the

does not change because Commonwealth outlays greatest example of that. The theory was: 'Let us

doubled in a couple of years under the Whitlam not have any competition among the States. Let

Administration, and tax went the same way. I reus impose a common standard on all the States

member a very interesting interview with the then and make sure that every school achieves the

Leader of the Opposition, Mr Whitlam, who subsame standard and does not get beyond it'. I reject

sequently became Prime Minister. He was asked: that proposition, and I believe this Government

'How will you finance your programs and your rejects it. We must remove duplication and Com-

promises, Mr Whitlam?' He answered: 'By the monwealth interference in areas for which we

inflationary growth in taxation'. That is the philhave no constitutional responsibility, other than

osophy that the Labor Party has been following through the back door of a section 96 grant. For

ever since, and it is the only bankrupt philosophy my money the smaller the section 96 grants and

that it has been able to put forward in the last the bigger the revenue sharing grants, the better I

couple of election campaigns and in debates such like it. The Government is moving in that direc-

as we are engaging in today.

tion and that is the way in which it should con-

The Australian people have had enough of big government, big taxation, and government interference and regulation in the lives of individuals and corporations. This Government is rejecting the Labor Party's philosophies and the Australian people are backing this Government. We only have to look at the opinion polls that came out

tinue to move. That is the way in which we will achieve the sort of growth that we need in this country-not with the dead hand of governments trying to direct people, not with the dead hands of bureaucrats in ivory towers trying to determine where every dollar of the taxpayers money is to be spent.

today to see exactly what is happening in the comWe must remove waste, where waste is defined

munity. The Labor Party is out of step and it as expenditure for which there is no justification

ought to understand that. The philosophy of this in terms of need. Any government is expected to

Government is clear. It is the philosophy exrespond to needs; not to wants. The Opposition's

pressed by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm hand-out mentality is that all one has to do is to

Fraser) to the South Australian Liberal Party beask for something and big brother government

fore Christmas. We are now seeing this philoswill hand it out. I reject that and the Government

ophy being implemented. It has taken us five rejects that. It is about time the Opposition came

years to do so but the disruption that was caused to its senses and realised that the people are fed up

between 1972 to 1975 meant that we had no with that philosophy. We must clear the way to

option but to tread softly and to implement reduce the level of taxation by eliminating dupli-

change cautiously. However, we are implementcation, waste and unnecessary government in-

ing it and we are now starting to see the benefits of volvement in the economy and in the market-

it.

place. This Government is taking the right steps

Three major decisions were made last week. I along that path.

regard last week as one of the watersheds of AusAs the Treasurer so rightly stated, we must get

tralian economic management. Changes were anthe right balance between the Government's

nounced on the matter of health, the committee share of the gross domestic product and that of

of Review of Commonwealth Functions made its the private sector. We must provide room in the

report and decisions were taken at the Confereconomy for the private sector to grow. Govern-

ence. Brilliant decisions were made on those ments have no money. They have only the money

occasions, decisions that the Treasurer (Mr that they take from people. The more money they

Howard) and the Government can stand proudly take from people, the less money people and

2040 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Fundingfor the States

businesses have to invest and spend according to their priorities. The influence of the Labor Party in the Federal sphere and in the State sphere has been throttling this economy over the years. The revenue forgone by this Government, following a long series of reductions in taxation over the last five years, is a significant amount of money, and it must continue to be a significant amount of money. We must give people responsibility for spending their incomes. What reason for incentive is there if people work harder and governments of the philosophy that the Opposition aspire to and espouse take that money and tell them that they know better how to spend it. I would have preferred a full restoration of the economy before any tax cuts were made, but I give credit to the Government for achieving both at the same time. H is one of those occasions on which 1 was wrong and the Government was right.
The States have a responsibility to play their part in this process. In the past they have just not done so. They have had real increases in their expenditure every year. The States must examine their activities, as the Federal Government has. They must reduce their Public Service, as the Federal Government has. They must accept their constitutional responsibilities and not hide behind the Commonwealth apron-strings and the section 96 grants. The States must accept the odium of raising funds if.they want to take the credit [or spending funds. There is no doubt whatsoever that the States were fat after the years of Whitlam profligate spending and they have not reduced their spending. As I said, they have had real increases every year and have gone into even further extravagances as is evidenced by the incredible situation in New South Wales, which 1 know the Minister at the table is as violently against as I am, having been involved in political organisations. The New South Wales State Government is whinging about the amount of money it is getting from the Federal Government and yet it is introducing legislation into its Parliament to provide for the public funding of elections. If there is one thing that is the paragon of privacy and of freedom of the individual it is the way he votes in an election for the party of his choice. Yet there will be a situation in New South Wales, at least, where the public purse will determine payments to political parties for elections and for party political purposes. The matter of public importance introduced by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) is a farce and a sham. It ought to be thrown out of this place for what it is.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The discussion is now concluded.

CUSTOMS TARIFF (ANTI-DUMPING) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.1)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The main purpose of this Bill is to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 to incorporate in that Act the new prov~s.ions of the revised General Agreement on Tanffs and Trade Anti-Dumping Code and the GATT Subsidies and Countervailing Measures Codt;:. These codes were included in a number of understandings reached in the Tokyo round of the multi-lateral trade negotiations concluded in December 1979. The Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 is based on the principles and requirements of the original GATT Anti-Dumping Code. Australia acceded to that Code in1975. The Government announced on 25 June 1980 that Australia should accede to the revised GATT Anti-Dumping Code. This decision took into account the views of State governments, industry associations and other interested groups within the community.
The Bill contains the minor amendments which are necessary before Australia can accede to the revised code. The amendments empower the Minister to accept undertakings. from exporters to raise their export prices to undumped levels. Retrospective dumping duties may be imposed where the undertakings have been violated. The amendments also include additional criteria for assessment of normal values of goods in countries where the. Government. substantially jnfluences domestic prices. Other amendments. are based on measures contained in the Subsidies and Countervailing Measures Code. .Principally, they empower the Minister to accept undertakings by governments of the exporting country to offset the effect of any subsidy and t6 impose retrospective countervailing duties. They also include additional criteria for determining the amount of subsidy in the case of goods exported from countries where the Government substantially influences prices.
No final decision on the question of Australia's accession to the GATT Subsidies and Countervailing Measures Code has been announced. However, the proposed amendments are desirable in themselves. The Government is of the view that the amendments will strengthen the powers to protect Australian industry against any injurious

Customs Legislation

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2041

effects of subsidised imports. The Bill also proposes further amendments designed to remedy deficiencies which have become apparent during administration of the Act since 1975. These amendments are technical and modify both dumping and countervailing provisions. They are expected to enhance the Government's ability to protect Australian industries against dumped or subsidised imports. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr West) adjourned.

CUSTOMS AMENDMENT (SECURITIES) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.

Second Reading

Mr MOORE, (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.4)-1 move:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

This Bill is associated with the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill 1981. Its main purpose is to amend section 45 of the Customs Act 1901 to vary the time for which the Customs may retain securities taken for the purposes of the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act. The amendments are consistent with the provisions of the revised General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Anti-Dumping Code and the GATT Subsidies and Countervailing Measures Code. Both Codes provide for the taking of securities as provisional measures pending finalisation of inquiries into allegations of injurious dumping and subsidisation. To conform with the Anti-Dumping Code the provisions. of the Customs Act 1901 will need to be amended to allow securities to be held for a
period of four months and for the period to be extended to six' months if so requested by the exporter of the goods. For the Subsidies and Coun-
tervailing Measures Code the period of retention is extended from three months to four months. 1 commend this Bill to.the House.

Debate (on motion by Mr West) adjourned.

,

\.

CUSTOMS TARIFF AMENDMENT BILL 1981

Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read it first time.

Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.5)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Customs Tariff Amendment Bill 1981 now before the House proposes amendments to the

Customs Tariff Act 1966. The Bill, which contains 18 schedules, is necessary to enact tariff changes which have been introduced into the Parliament at various times since May 1980, by Customs Tariff Proposals Nos. 8-20 (1980) and Proposals Nos. 1-5 (1981). In the main, the amendments give effect to decisions by the Government in respect of the following reports by the Industries Assistance Commission and the Temporary Assistance Authority: Apples and Pears; Certain Goods Made From Carbon or Graphite; Certain Soft Sided Containers; Certain Works Trucks and Stackers; Cheese; Chemical Products (Part B); Continuation of Assistance for Insulators; Crushing or Grinding Machines; Electric Motors, Generators and Rotary Converters; Fluorescent and Filament Lamps; Gearboxes, Gears and Shaft Couplings; Iron and Steel Industry; Manufactured, Tobacco; Metal Cans and Canisters of Iron or Steel; Musical Instruments and Parts and Accessories Therefor; Polymeric Plasticisers and Certain Polyester Polyols; Tanned and Finished Leather; Dressed Fur; and Textiles, Clothing and Footwear.
Honourable members will recall that when the tariff proposals were introduced into the House, a comprehensive account of the lAC's recommendations and Government decisions were outlined each time. Other amendments contained in the Bill provide for: Amended tariff preference rates for certain goods from developing countries; changes arising from Australia's commitment to the South Pacific Regional Trade and Economic Co-operation Agreement; and the addition of certain goods to Schedule A of the New ZealandAustralia Free Trade Agreement. The only amendments not already included in the proposals make provision for the removal of all remaining preferential rates for goods from United Kingdom and Ireland with effect from 1 July 1981 and for some changes of an administrative nature. A summary of amendments for each schedule setting out the nature of the changes has been prepared and copies are available from the Table Office. 1commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr West) adjourned.
INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES
AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 8 April, on motion by Mr Thomson:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr BARRYJONES (Lalor) (4.9)-This is an important Bill which extends and expands

2042 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Industrial Research and Development Bill

Australia's contribution to industrial research and development; and, one might add, not before
time. A fundamental contradiction runs through the legislation. We, on the Opposition side, award
it the sound of one hand clapping, so far as it goes;
but it does not go far enough. The Bill is grossly inadequate in scope. As I will indicate later and as
will be eloquently put by the honourable member
for Hawker (Mr Jacobi), the Bill's timing is very odd. It utterly contradicts the philosophy which was set out last Thursday in the report of the
razor gang. There are. an extraordinary number of
inconsistencies in the legislation. The Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) has
indicated that the purpose of this legislation is to
encourage industrial research and development. The Minister in his second reading speech said:

11 belong to the Department of Science and Technology. They include such bodies as the
Information Technology Council, the Advisory Committee on International Scientific and
Technological Activities, the Australian Inven-
tions Advisory Committee and the Technology Transfer Advisory Board. When we go back to
other parts of the razor gang report we find that
there will no longer be a science adviser within the Department of Foreign Affairs-one of those lis-
tening points where we might expect to get infor-
mation which could be brought back to our national advantage. Australia's scientific participation in the United Nations Educational, Scien-
tific and Cultural Organisation, for example,
where there is a lot of information to be had, is to
cease.

Funding has risen from $14m in 1977-78 to $54m in 19808I-nearly a four-fold rise within three years, despite the need for continuing expenditure restraints.
Actually if we take the factor of inflation into account it is more like a 2.7 times increase. The sum is equivalent to $37.8m in 1977-78 dollars. The Minister went on:
The rationale for government assistance rests on the proposition that there are disparities between the private and national returns from research and development expenditure. The market--
These are the Minister's words, not someone from the Labor Party-
does not provide enough incentives for firms to undertake research and development. The result is a national underinvestment in industrial research and development and a tendency for firms to concentrate on relatively short term industrial research and development. The fundamental purpose of the program is to correct this market failure.
We applaud what the Minister said. The Minister went on:

If we look at the provisions under the Defence Department we find a Government decision that defence science, research and development for di-
rect Commonwealth involvement is to be
reduced. The private sector and universities are to be encouraged to perform these activities. With
what? When there has been an enormous cutback in expenditure at the tertiary level, on what
does the Government expect them to carry out
these prodigies of research in defence when notoriously such research is extraordinarily expens-
ive? We find somewhere else under the rationalis-
ation of colleges of advanced education that an amount has been earmarked to rationalise activi-
ties for the expansion of technological and busi-
ness studies. How much do honourable members think the Government has offered? The amount is
$5m. The Government is really big-hearted. Its
argument normally is 'leave it to the market'.

Against this background, the Government has decided that, in future, an industrial research and development project will be supported only where it involves a substantial degree of risk or where a firm is unable to gain enough of the profits generated by the industrial research and development to justify the project.
The Minister went on:
To compensate for inflation as well as to strengthen the incentive to firms to undertake the industrial research and development, the Government proposes to increase ceilings from $500,000 to $750,000 per year for project grants and from $25,000 to $40,000 per year for commencement grants. The grants will remain taxable.
So the Government gives with one hand and takes away with the other. If we look at that famous document, the ministerial statement entitled Review of Commonwealth Functions, then look to see what has happened to the Department of Science and Technology and look in particular at attachment C which sets out the number of Commonwealth bodies which are to be abolished, we find that of the 18 bodies that are to be abolished

Many of the very high-minded'objectives that have been outlined by the Minister for Science and Technology in all candour and honesty, because he is perhaps the most candid and honest of the Ministers that we have in the present Government, have been destf0yed or prejudiced by the razor gang. It is virtually the old Department of Productivity which has been eliminated from within the Department of Science and Technology. All the functions that were related to the former Department of Productivity have gone. These functions were very significant because they are the very parts of the Government which might have enabled Australia to assist its fightback capacity, to assist us to move into high technologyareas.
There are extraordinary inconsistencies and contradictions between what the Government says and what it is actually doing. Sometimes it is hard to tell whether the Government is following

Industrial Research and Development Bill

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2043

the ideas of Milton Friedman or of Marty Feldman. The Government says that it has based its legislation partly on the report of the Committee of Inquiry into Technological Change in Australia. 1 think the CITCA report showed the lowest level of intellectual vitality of any report put out, even by this Government. This intellectually disreputable report dodged every major issue, particularly on questions of technology transfer. In the technologically advanced world there is no country as disadvantaged as is Australia. The star-- vation of education and research by the Fraser Government is condemning Australia to third rate status in the technologically advanced world.
Australia's future stability and development as a technologically advanced liberal democracy are already threatened by five factors: First, the prevailing lack of intellectual vitality; second, a contracting education base; third, an inadequate investment in research and development; fourth, absence of a entrepreneurial spirit; and fifth the absence of risk capital for new ventures. The Parliament is poorly informed on matters relating to science and technology and the media expresses total disinterest in the discussion of new ideas.
Mr Thomson-Is this relevant to the Bill?
Mr BARRY JONES-It is absolutely central to the Bill.
Mr Thomson-This is not relevan L
Mr BARRY JONES-It is utterly relevant. Australia has the worst informed legislature in the democratic world, lacking the resources or the intellectual curiosity to initiate a national debate on where we are going and how we are getting there.
Dr Edwards-Even though it has the benefit of your knowledge?
Mr BARRY JONES-Yes, but we are on the wrong side of the House. Parliament has retreated into an embarrassed silence on the social impact of technological change, indistinguishable from a catatonic trance, but the media has never noticed or taken the matter up. I have referred several times lately to biotechnology which seems likely to be the area of greatest economic potential in the 1980s. Australia could make a major contribution in this area. Nevertheless, the subject has been almost totally neglected. Senior Ministers of this Government feel no shame at their total ignorance. I point out, for example, the recent report on the Australian Research Grants Scheme for 1980-8l. The Australian Research Grants Committee will no longer exist in its present form. It is to be merged with the Queen Elizabeth II Advisory Committee, although what it advises Queen Elizabeth II on is not really clear. I notice

in the provisions for grants approved for 1980-81-the total expenditure provided is $16m-in the areas that might be related to the biotechnology industry, including work on recombinant DNA, the total is $59,395. This is less than $60,000 for an area which will be perhaps the most dramatic area of economic growth in high technology for the 1980s.
I point out to the House the very close relationship between expenditure on education and the quality of research and development. It is a matter of profound concern to the Opposition that Australia has a very poor performance in expenditure in research and development, although the primary culprit is the private sector rather than the government. Government expenditure relatively speaking is far higher than private sector expenditure. Here we have what is described as a private enterprise government and we fwd that private enterprise is dragging the chain. Very few technologically advancedcountries have such a small proportion of total gross domestic product directed from the private sector towards research and development. There are obvious reasons for that.
There is a fundamental contradiction between the expressed goals of the Government and what is actually happening in the area of research and development. I want to set out these two fundamental principles. The first is that in manufacturing and information based industries Australia cannot sell what it does not own. In industrial research and development areas the commanding heights are overwhelmingly not in Australian hands. In trying to get an internationally competitive motor industry in Australia it is necessary to ask whether it is possible to sell what we do not own. To what extent for example, is there Australian ownership in the motor car industry? I strongly urge those honourable members who have not read that very important book by Sir Laurence Hartnett Big Wheels and Little Wheels to do so. He tells the real horror story of the selling out of Australia's own car. There was an intention to produce a car using Australian intellect, capacity and human resources but in fact it was sold out completely.
What do we find in the Australian motor car industry? General Motors has 100 per cent overseas equity, as do Ford, Chrysler, Leyland, Nissan, Volvo and Renault. These arc the firms which manufacture or assemble in Australia. Australian Motor Industries Ltd has 50 per cent Australian equity and is the only area where Australia has a sharc. 1t would be necessary to ask General Motors: 'What is the prospect for intensive work
in research and development in this country?'

2044 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Industrial Research and Development Bill

They would argue: 'But what is the purpose of doing such research and development here? We are an international corporation. If we can get the research and development done on the Commodore car in Germany, and essentially we are using the German car as a prototype for the Commodore, what would the purpose be and to what end would there be independent Australian research and development?' That is the tragedy of the situation here in Australia.
The second proposition I want to make is that Australia cannot have a dynamic economic expansion in areas dependent on research and development if it has a shrinking educational base. It is not possible to expand and contract at the same time. I draw the attention of the House to the very disturbing figures which appeared in the last Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development economic report on Australia published in 1980. It is possible to extract from the report a table of full time school enrolments of 15 to 19year-aIds. I seek the leave of the House to incorporate the figures in Hansard.
Leave granted.

than 90 per cent of schoolleavers become apprentices and most attend part-time vocational schools until the age of 18.
t 1975 figures.
:j: 1976 figures. The other figures are [or 1977.
Mr BARRY JONES-I thank the House. I point out that in the United States 73.7 per cent of 15 to 19. year-olds are in full time enrolment. In Japan the figures is 70.9 per cent and in Switzerland 70.1 per cent. Australia is No. 14 on the list with only a 45 per cent involvement in full time enrolment. I put it to the House that it is quite impossible for Australia to develop the quality of life and level of imagination and invention to be found in other countries unless it develops a higher quality of education.
I draw the attention of the House to a very important document which has been insufficiently examined in the House. It is the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment entitled 'Jndustrial Research and Development in Australia' which was published in May 1979. The Committee made this comment on page 227 that:

The table read as follows-
OECD TABLE OF FULL-TIME SCHOOL ENROLMENTS OF
15-19 YEAR OLDS (1977)

1. United States 2. Japan 3. Switzerland 4. Canada 5. Norway
6. Netherlands 7. Belgium 8. Finland 9. Denmark 10. Sweden 11. France 12. Ireland 13. Greece 14. Australia 15. New Zealand 16. United Kingdom 17. Italy 18. West Germany 19. Spain 20. Luxembourg 21. Portugal 22. Austria 23. Turkey

Per cent 73.7 70.9 70.1 64.9 63.6 62.7
t61.3 t60.8 57.4
*56.3 54.6
*50.0 45.4
45.0 44.8
t44.6
*43.9 *41.5 :j:35.1
tp333..45
32.0 t12.7

- East Germany's educational retention rates are not listed by OECD but elsewhere it is rat)ked with the Netherlands. West Germany's low retention rate is misleading,
reflecting the traditional dual system of vo-
cational education and apprenticeship: more

Sometime during the last ten years, Australian Industry lost its entrepreneurial drive. Throughout the inquiry, witnesses remarked that while Australian managers recognise the value of conducting research and deVelopment activities, they are overall, reluctant to take financial risks. They lack what may be termed entrepreneurial spirit. Several witnesses said that they saw management's attitude to research and development as 'timid and parsimonious', generally lacking the confidence and long-range planning necessary for a sustained investment in research and development. One witness went so far as to call this caution 'a national characteristic'. Another witness observed that, while Australian investors had distinct tax advantages over their US. counterparts (US.: 50% capital gains tax, compared to Australia . . .) they are still reluctant to commit money to "risky" enterprises.
The Committee also made this point on page 30I:
It is generally accepted that the development phase of any innovation is the most costly, requiring 5 to 10 times initial research costs. From this it follows that there is little economic sense in spending $1 million on a research project unless there is a reasonable hope of obtaining a further $10 million to carry the project through development to commercial fruition. It is at this point that application of our native Australian inventive genius fails. The relative figures for 1976-77 of 44 per cent GERD to applied research compared with 25 per cent for experimental development reflect this dismal fact.
I point to the fact that notwithstanding the television programs The Inventors and What Will They Think ofNext Australia has in world terms a comparatively small number of patents granted. There are two standard tests: One is the number of patents granted per million population each year and the second is the number of patents granted per thousand million dollars of GNP. I seek leave of the House to incorporate two tables extracted from the Senate report on industrial research and development in Australia.

Industrial Research and Development Bill

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2045

Leave granted. The tables read as follows-

PATENTS GRANTED WORLDWIDE 1975 PER MILLION POPULATION

Switzerland . Sweden West Germany
USA. Japan . . Netherlands Austria UK. France Czechoslovakia Belgium Denmark Finland Poland Canada Greece Israel Australia Norway Italy Spain . New Zealand Argentina Portugal

2,486 842 763 500 500 447 421 407 368 350 315
289 210 210 176 160 145 132 125 105 79 68 53
50

(Australia ranked 18th of 24 nations listed).

Source: ICI Australia Ltd. Submission to Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment. Reproduced in tabular form in its report Industrial Research and Development in Australia, AGPS, Canberra, 1979, page 132.

PATENTS GRANTED WORLDWIDE PER $1000 MILLION (US) OF GNP

Switzerland . West Germany Netherlands Sweden UK. France Greece Belgium . Czechoslovakia USA. Argentina Denmark Spain . Norway Israel Canada Australia Brazil . Portugal Yugoslavia India

1,030 385 370 300 270 240 210 200 180 170 140 135 110 100 85 65 60 45 35 30 25

(Australia ranked 17th of21 nations listed).

Source: Broken Hill Pty Ltd. Submission to Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment, reproduced
in tabular form in its report Industrial Research and Development ill Australia, AGPS, Canberra, 1979, page 134.

Mr BARRY JONES--I thank the House. Switzerland, which heads the table for the number of patents granted worldwide per $l,OOOm of GNP, has 1,030 patents per $1,OOOm whereas Australia has 60 patents. Switzerland has

2,486 patents worldwide per million population whereas Australia has 132 patents.
Mr Jacobi-Even Liechtenstein would have more than us.
Mr BARRY JONES-That is so. As [ have remarked before, I think it is in part as a consequence of our consciousness of our minority status in the English speaking world. To some extent Australia has the advantage of being in a very large and very rich economic community but we accept much too readily a kind of junior status in the sense that we believe that when there are major developments in key industries Australia can buy them off the shelf. That is certainly the view taken by many Australian managers. That is a great tragedy.
The final paper I wish to incorporate in Hansard is a very revealing answer given to a parliamentary question in the previous Parliament when the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) asked the Minister for Productivity-a portfolio which is now defunct-the number of patents registered in Australia every year and those granted to overseas patentees. I seek leave to incorporate that question in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION No. 6289
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Productivity, upon notice, on 20 August 1980:
(1) What is the number of patents (a) registered in Australia and (b) registered in Australia which are granted to overseas patentees, in each year since 1969-70.
(2) What were the total Australian (a) payments and (b) receipts, for royalties and copyrights for the same period.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Total patents granted in Australia and Australian patents granted to overseas patentees are as tabled hereunder:

Calendar year

(b) (a) Patents Total granted to patents overseas
granted patentees

1969 1970 1971
1972
1973 1974
1975 1976 1977
1978
1979

7,127
6,130 10,641
10,922
11,670 12,828
12,161 11,074
9,636
9,038 6,479

6,366
5,479 9,662 9,991
10,906 11,898
11,236 10,164 8,868 8,337
6,012

(2) The Department of Productivity does not maintain figures of Australian payments and/or receipts for royalties or

2046 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Industrial Research and Development Bill

copyrights. Copyright is administered by the Attorney General's Department. However, I draw the honourable member's attention to the Australian Bureau of Statistics publication 'Research and Experimental Development-Private Enterprises-1976-77', which provides the following information for that year: (a) total payments made for patent royalties were $37.363m; (b) total receipts for patent royalties were $4.599m.
The Department of Science pUblication 'Project Score' gives for 1973-74 the figure of $76.98m as the purchase of rights to technical know-how (e.g. patents licences and royalties) by the business enterprise sector. No figures were given for receipts.
For the year 1976-77, the figure given for all sectors is $67.3m for the purchase of technical know-how and $1O.9m as receipts from the sale of technical know-how.
Mr BARRY JONES-I thank the House. In 1978 total patents granted numbered 9,038, of which 8,337 were granted to overseas owners. In 1979,6,479 patents were granted, of which 6,012 were granted to overseas owners. Australians are in a very dependent position. In terms of technology transfer we are essentially part of the Third World. That is a national scandal. Some 94 per cent of Australia's payments in know-how, that is to say payments on royalties, goes overseas. For all practical purposes we are a technological colony of the United States and Japan. On the basis of what happened with the razor gang I think the Fraser Government includes economic Quislings who have sold out our technological sovereignty or who, even worse, are indifferent to the question of our technological sovereignty.
As I mentioned earlier, 1 am concerned about the contraction of Australia's educational base. The report of the Williams Committee of Inquiry into Education, Training and Employment, which was discussed for a bare 40 minutes in this House in 1980, suggested the extent of the contraction of Australia's educational base. It found that in New South Wales, the State of the honourable member for Berowra (Dr Edwards), 17 per cent of school leavers were not able to read or could read only 'at a level below satisfactory comprehension of simple passages', and a further 32 per cent read 'at levels of comprehension below the levels required for a fully literate adult life'. This revelation by the Fraser Government's own committee has been received with massive indifference. I ask the Minister how Australia can expect to compete with nations that are ahead of us not just in the number of patents they have but also in the development of technology which we do not have the educational base to develop. I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not declining to give the Bill a second reading, the House-

(1) expresses its concern at-(a) the low level of Government investment in research and development compared to other technologically advanced nations;
(b) the failure of the Government to encourage significant private sector investment in research and development;
(c) the low level of Australian innovation as measured by the number of patents taken out each year by Australian individuals and companies;
(d) the failure of the Government to stimulate Australian innovation in electronics, biotechnology and other high technology industries, and
(e) Australia's disadvantageous position in relation to technology transfer;
(2) condemns the Government for losing national control over significant industries based on high levels of research and development, including motor manufacturing, electronics, the computer industry and petrochemicals, and
(3) rejects those parts of the report of the Review of Commonwealth Functions (the 'Lynch Committee') which eliminate or downgrade Commonwealth instrumentalities concerned with the collection, dissemination and application of information about high technology in industry, thereby reducing Australia's fight back capacity in high technology areas'.
Of course, the Lynch Committee is genially known, even by itself, as the razor gang. Before I conclude there are two points that I want to make. I want to commend the Minister for the fact that the grants approved by the Australian Research Grants Scheme are not narrowly technical. I applaud the fact that they are broad and cover areas in the humanities. A point I have made very often is that we should reject the often expressed concern in the business world that too many students are undertaking 'soft' subjects such as literature, philosophy and physical science rather than 'hard' subjects such as mathematics, physics and chemistry. I think this expresses the naive view that exact sciences are rigorous and studies based on value systems are not. No doubt the humanities are taught in an insufficiently rigorous way in Australia, and teacher training has much to answer for, but Australia's future will depend as much on its politicians, writers, artists and humanities teachers as on its engineers and chemists. Our primary emphasis in education must still be on the general rather than the specific and vocational.
It is no coincidence that Sweden and Switzerland, the most scientifically innovative of all nations per capita, had the highest literacy rates in Europe 200 years ago. Their excellence springs from the general standard of their education and culture. If their educational goals had been set only to meet technological objectives, they would have failed. Their particular skills are

Industrial Research and Development Bill

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2047

a consequence of rigorous levels of general eduresearch and development is carried out abun-

cation. I think the significant role played by the dantly in other countries, there has been an extra-

Scots in British economic history is also based on ordinary reluctance to spend money on it here,

Scotland's high level ofliteracy.

particularly in the private sector. The private sec-

The last thing I want to mention is that one of the difficulties that every nation faces is the problem of whether it spreads its expenditure in reasearch and development or whether it concentrates it in a particular narrow field. Whilst obviously it would be attractive to try to pick the winners and to try to get into key industries, it is extraordinary difficult to know in advance how things will develop. If we were to try to estimate what would happen in 20 years time, there is a fair likelihood that we would be wrong. Interest has

tor carries the great burden of responsibility in this country.
My colleague the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) will be talking about the educational implications of cutbacks in research and development. One cannot just look at this Bill in isolation; one has to look also at what has happened in the universities with the cutbacks they have suffered, because that is where so many of the long term implications of research and development have their genesis.

been generated lately in the area of biotechnology. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is

In February this year I had a long discussion at the there a seconder to the motion?

Salk Institution at La Jolla near San Diego with Professor Francis Crick, who is universally conceded to have been the most important figure in the discovery of the principle of recombinant DNA which has led to the implications of the biotechnological industry.

Mr Jacobi-I second the amendment and reserve iny right to speak later.
Dr EDWARDS (Berowra) (4.39)-We have just listened to a rather loud, very interesting but, in my jUdgment, biased and, to a significant extent, irrelevant speech by the honourable

Francis Crick made the point that h~, with member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones). It is imposs-

James Watson and Maurice Wilkins, made their ible for me to deal with the speech point by point

epic discovery, one of the greatest scientific disbut I will make reference to some of the points he

coveries in the last 200 years, in 1953. They shared made. The honourable member constantly came

the Nobel Prize for Physiology and Medicine in back to the so-called razor gang, the Review of

1962, nine years later. But he said it was not until Commonwealth Functions. Amongst other

1966 that it dawned on them that recombinant things, he referred to the number of bodies in the

DNA had any kind of economic potential at all, Department of Science and Technology that are

and it was not for another 10 years after that-in to be amalgamated. We on this side of the House

1976-that the matter was actively pursued. By make no apology for the review of Common-

1981, although as yet there is no large scale prowealth Functions which has been undertaken and

duction of biotechnology on the market, it is genstress that there is not a single change affecting

erally conceded by scientists and economists to be any of the Government's programs on pensions

potentially the area of greatest economic growth and other income security support measures. The

for the decade. Yet, as I have said, the father of thrust of that exercise has been to prune back the

the whole enterprise, Francis Crick, was not Public Service and to cut out unnecessary dupli-

aware of the situation and it was 13 years after the cation with the States and private enterprise.

great discovery that he first understood that it might have considerable economic significance.

One other major thrust was to come to grips with some complex problems in the very field that

There are a number of other points that we can take up at the Committee stage. However, the Opposition applauds the fact that there is increased expenditure on research and development and the fact that there is some breadth in this area, it is not being couched in unduly narrow terms. We also think the Minister has been placed in an appalling situation by the activities of the 'Razor Gang'. We believe in government inter-

attracted a lot of discussion by the honourable memberthe field of higher education, with particular reference to colleges of advanced education which are involved with teacher training. The thrust of the Government's policy is to encourage them to amalgamate and to change emphasis precisely in the direction of technology and business studies. This is the type of change that the honourable member was talking about.

vention, not wholesale intervention and not The honourable member had much to say

where it is not required. However, we endorse about technology transfer. I suggest that the col-

entirely the Minister's words, in his second readonial mentality-he made several references to

ing speech, that there are a number of areas where it-which he accused Australian business of

the market does not provide adequately. Because having, and by implication this Government,

2048 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Industrial Research and Development Bill

exists very largely in his own mind. Of course, I am prepared to concede that Australia industry is dependent to a very significant extent on imported technology, but it is natural that a great deal of technology suitable for Australian conditions will come from countries with far larger and more sophisticated industrial bases than we have. Naturally, that is reflected in terms of the proportion of patents, to which the honourable member referred, which have overseas origin. What is important is that Australian companies should have a research and development capability to originate new technology and also to be in a position to adapt technology to suit local conditions and thereby benefit this country.

The honourable member made references to the situation which exists in Switzerland. I think it ought to be noted that in Switzerland 10 large multinational companies which have headquarters there, for a variety of reasons which are not applicable to Australia, account for 60 per cent of the industrial research and development carried out in that country. If one looks at the figures for gross expenditure on research and development as a percentage of GDP in, say, Sweden, Switzerland and Australia, one will see that in Sweden it is 1.8 per cent; in Switzerland it is 2.3 per cent and in Australia it is 0.9 per cent. I recognise that that is a comparatively low figure. However, if 'one makes some allowance for the fact that 60 per cent of Switzerland's expenditure is accounted for by those 10 large companies, one sees that the situation there is much more comparable to the Australian position. 1 make this point in passing because it is necessary to say something about the range of matters which' the honourable member mentioned not directly re~ lated to the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Bill. I now wish to go back to focus the attention of the House on the Bill.

Notwithstanding a grudging approbation that

came through at the beginning of the honourable

member's speech and in the quieter moments at

the end, the 'Bill does represent a substantial

upgrading and enlargement of this whole program

of industrial research and development incentive

grants. The program is a very important com-

pon:ent of the Government's overall industry pol-

icy. The Bill is necessary basically because the

existing program expires on 30 June of this year.

The purpose of the Bill, among other things, is to

put in place a new five-year program to operate

from that date. As an indication of the import-

amnecaesurteh,atr

the point

Government attaches out that as recently as

to this 1977-78

the amount of funding for it was some $14m and

in this current 1980-81 financial year the amount

is $54m. That is a four-fold increase within those three years. This has occurred despite all the pressures placed upon the Government to contain overall expenditure-to which it is committed. I believe that is the best indication of the Government's commitment to this program. It is designed particularly to help the small and medium sized firms.
It is necessary to point out, in order to have the facts on the record, that the main focus of this program is in the area of 'project grants'. Project grants are paid to firms which have established research and development facilities in order to enable them to undertake significant projects of industrial research and development. The grants are prospective. 'An agreement is entered into between the Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives Board and the company on a prospective basis. The ceiling for such grants has hitherto been limited to $500,000 a year in any particular case. It is a measure of the Government's commitment in this area that despite its firm resolve to reduce government spending overall and the results of the activities of the so-called razor gang, to give effect to the Governments commitment to foster development based on technological advance the Bill provides for the annual ceiling to increase from $500,000 to $750,000.
Mr Barry Jones-But it is taxable.
Dr EDWARDS-It is taxable, that is correct. The program also provides for what are called 'commencement grants' as well as projects of industrial research of a' public interest character. These commencement grants are designed to encourage firms, particularly small to medium sized firms, whose research and development activities are only at an infant stage. Firms are encouraged to incur research and development expenditure on the basis that a predictable incentive payment in the form of a commencement grant can subsequently be sought to reimburse the firm for that spending, to the extent of 50 per cent of the amount incurred up to a maximum of $25,000 per annum. That is the maximum limit which applies to commencement grants on an annual basis at the moment. Now, under this Bill, that limit of $25,000 will be increased to $40,000. Again, that is indicative of the Government's determination in this area.
There are a number of other provisions in the Bill. It provides for improved administrative arrangements by restructuring the Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives Board to ensure that there is a more effective and faster decision-making process. Again, the scope

Industrial Research and Development Bill

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2049

of grants is extended beyond the mining and manufacturing spheres, to which hitherto they have been largely confined, to include industrial research and development related to some on-site activities in the building and construction industry. The Bill also provides that project grants may be payable for computer software research and development related directly to new products or to processes employed in manufacturing, mining and on-site building activities. The Government's intention is to encourage the application of new or innovative software techniques which are in line with the overall aims of the scheme. Those are the principal provisions of the Bill and they indicate the Government's firm intentions in this area.
To inject a personal note, I put forward the suggestion that from recent experience in my electorate it has become apparent to me that particularly in the case of the smaller firms, which may nevertheless have a pretty good idea, which have made a significant invention, requiring research and development, one of the difficulties that occur throughout the process of bringing a project to fruition is the cost involved in patenting the idea, especially the very high cost of taking out overseas patents. Overseas patenting can cost in the order of $20,000 to $30,000. That can represent a very significant cost for a smaller firm. Some people might argue that a patent is not part of this process, that a patent so to speak crowns a research and development project. In practice, the two go hand in hand. Of course, the possibility of achieving such a patent and reaping the benefits so conferred keeps the shoulder to the wheel, so to speak. I make the following suggestion to the Minister: It might be possible that a dis'cretion in: this matter can be introduced into the Act. If such a project goes on to become a significant commercial success, the component to cover the patent costs-perhaps even other components of these grants-could be repayable since in a sense the grant has made possible the project's commercial success.
Be that as it may, I want to stress that this measure is a key component of the Government's overall industrial development policy. It is this Government's policy to foster a manufacturing industry in Australia which is more specialised than at present, larger scale, more technologically advanced, more export orientated, energy intensive and resource based. Of course, the most significant thing that the Government has done in its pursuit of that overall objective is to establish-I should say re-establish having regard to the upsurge in inflation and costs during 1973-75Australia's international competitive position.

This the Government has done via its antiinflation and exchange rate policies. By those policies Australian industry is enabled to compete more effectively against imports and to make sales overseas. Indeed in recent years manufactured exports have expanded very significantly. They increased by the order of 30 per cent in 1979-80 and that rate of improvement continued through to the end of 1980, which is the latest available figure. It is basic that we get the fundamentals right in regard to the international competitiveness of the Australian economy.
Along with that basic thrust of overall economic policy is a complex of measures which comprise the 'positives' of the Government's industrial development policy. I refer to the investment allowance, higher depreciation rates for plant and equipment and export incentives which, after having got, things. moving in the way J have suggested, are to be curtailed somewhat, as announced last Thursday. And to come back to the Bill, there are these industrial research and development incentives. These and other positive measures are the carrots, so to speak, of industrial policy. They go along with the gradual movement towards a lower and less complicated structure of tariff and subsidy protection. I emphasise the word 'gradual'. There is no 25 per cent across-the board tariff cuts such as those which we witnessed in 1973 under the previous Administration. There is a gradual movement toward lower and less complicated tariff structure. In that connection [ believe it is worth stressing that the average nominal rate of protection afforded to Australian industry has fallen by about 40 per cent over the last decade.
So while the basic task of the Government is to set the stage to get these fundamentals right and thus release the dynamics of the unplannable forces for production and development in the economy, these specific elements of industry policy to which I have referred are also important. This measure is putting in place for the next five years the program of industrial research and development incentives the rationale of which is, as the honourable member for Lalor said, that the national returns, in tcrms of greater innovation and greater home-grown technological development, exceed the private returns. It has to be agreed that there is insufficient industrial research and development in this country, The fundamental purpose of these industrial research and development grants is to contribute in a very significant way to correcting that underinvestment. Technological innovation and the development of new and improved products are basic to industry efficiency, competitiveness, thrust and growth. A

2050 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Industrial Research and Development Bill

technologically advanced manufacturing industry with a capacity for innovation can contribute importantly to providing Australia's well-educated and growing work force with the opportunity fully to utilise its skills and talents. Accordingly, I commend this Bill which, as I said at the outset, very substantially upgrades and enlarges the program of industrial research and development incentives. I reject the amendment moved by the Opposition.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (4.56)-I support with pleasure the amendment moved by the Opposition to the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Bill. This Government's attitude on research and development technology incentives, in particular the transfer of technology, is surely highlighted in this measure. It highlights this Government's lack of vision, lack of courage and lack of purpose. At a time when mineral resource exploitation is expanding a number of critically important questions have to be answered. The most important concerns the level and control of technology in mineral extraction and processing. It is this question which will determine the Government's capacity to provide the maximum employment opportunities and the generation of the highest levels of income from the exploitation of our resources. For the last 30 years the approach of Liberal Country Party governments has been to leave such matters to market forces. An interesting article in the Institute, dealing with the United States National Science Foundation report to the White House, states:
While market forces may ultimately relieve current and future shortages . . . we believe that the innovative capacity of American industry will be severely hampered in the interim.
Since the US can't afford to wait for the 'slow workings of the marketplace,' . . . the NSF, along with the Departments of Defense Energy, Education, and other agencies anticipating personnel shortages, can encourage qualified undergraduates to transfer into the field of the projected shortage, co-operate with industry to offer post-graduate industrial traineeships in fields with projected shortages of people with advanced degrees, and study how to better project personnel needs.
How does one test the needs in this country at the present time? A Senate committee report on research and development in Australia states:
Between 1973-74 and 1976-77, gross expenditure on research and development in Australia as a percentage of the Gross Domestic Product fell from 1.29 per cent of GDP to 0.97 per cent of GDP a reduction of 25 per cent.
The Government sector increased in importance as a source of funds, providing 77 per cent of the total in 1976-77 compared to 63 per cent in 1973-74. The Business Enterprise sector's contribution dropped dramatically, from providing 35
per cent of the total expenditure in 1973-74 to only 19 per
cent in 1976-77.

Manpower employed in R & D-
Research and development-
by private enterprise fell by 40 per cent in 1976-77 compared to 1973-74.
I wish to return now to the theme that I want to advance today-the question of transfer technology and what happened in previous years. This policy vacuum resulted in three basic deficiencies in the introduction and control of mineral extraction and processing technology. Firstly, over the last 30 years there has been very little development of technology in these areas in Australia. A minimum of downstream processing of minerals has taken place, giving justification to the description that this country is nothing more than a vast quarry. The recent report of the Australian Trade Development Council on miner!ll processing summed upthe problem as follows:
In comparison with other countries, Australia's industrial research and development performance rates very poorly in terms of both incentives provided by the Government and assistance to industry for research and development.
The second major deficiency resulting from this Government's abdication of responsibility has been a decline in our technical prowess, a shortage of skilled labour and a lack of technical support servicesto the mining industry. Professor Endersbee, President of the Institution of Engineers put his finger on the problem when he stated:
All these various projects will proceed at the latest level of modern technology, simply because that is the state of the art and the reflection of costs. But this also means that if Australian engineers, industries and workers are to participate in these projects we must have engineers and firms and skilled workers capable of operating at these top levels of modern technology. Do we have this national competence?
I believe we are losing ground. As an extreme example, we can see a warning in the situation that prevailed in the Middle East, where the international oil companies exploited the oil resources in that area for some time without regard for the people of the region, simply because of their limited technological capacility. I believe we are in danger of a similar loss of opportunities, simply because we are not sustaining and improving our national technological competence.
The Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) gets up in this place and talks about government policy. The Government closed two engineering colleges in Victoria. How can we expect this area to survive? Thirdly, the absence of government policy has resulted in little effective transfer of technology from foreign corporations to this nation's control. As a consequence, foreign corporations have retained the development of new and improved technology within their corporate empires outside Australia and Australian hands. One has to look only at the motor vehicle industry, as my colleague the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) said, to see what this means. The highly skilled design side of motor vehicle production which once

Industrial Research and Development Bill

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2051

existed in this country no longer exists. It did not suit the plans of General Motors-Holden's Ltd or other transnational producers to retain these high technology areas within Australia. What are we left with? All we are left with is becoming a place for assembly of motor cars-cnothing more, nothing less. The fact that this Government and State governments accept virtually without question the package deal foreign investment proposals offered by foreign investors is a national scandal.
In a study of a number of major projects involving foreign ownership during the 1960s Professor McKern found that foreign equity participation was welcomed purely and simply because of the proven ability of trans-national corporations to execute agreed programs and find secure foreign markets. Huge bodies of ore were committed virtually in perpetuity and the question of technology transfer was ignored by governments while problems such as foreign control of key domestic resources, environmental damage, resource depletion and the opportunity cost of alternatives foreclosed went over the head or between the ears of all governments. McKern found that even the officers of trans-national corporations taking part in negotiations on foreign investment were surprised at the lack of concern shown by Australian governments and corporations about such matters. Among the reluctant bridesmaids to foreign investment Australia has been a willing harlot.
It is not difficult to find reasons why foreign corporations are anxious to impose package deals on this country. Under the proposals offered by corporations, technology is held secure under the control of the corporation and is not disseminated further. The threat of future competition against the corporation is obviously overcome. Local processing and exports are limited to suit the foreign corporation's plants in other countries. Further, favourable transfer pricing between plants and nations to minimise local tax and royalty payments is available to the vertically integrated corporations. It has taken us a long time to get around to putting some order into section 136 of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
The folly of ignoring questions of technology transfer is illustrated, as I have said before, in Australia's history in the aluminium industry and we ought to learn from it. Whenproposals to produce aluminium in Australia were first made after the First World War they had to be shelved because of the ease with which international aluminium cartels could destroy the new local industry. Even when the Second World War, and a

world-wide shortage of aluminium, forced Commonwealth Government involvement in aluminium production, the design and construction of a plant were delayed by the refusal of Alcoa to provide any expertise at all. It was left to the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation in co-operation with the British Government to develop the Australian de-
signed Bayer-Hall process. An Australian Aluminium Commission was formed in 1944 and an extensive survey was carried out in that year.
We now have the same technology~the Bayer processbeing the suhject of three separate international transfers in three difTerent direct foreign investment packages. That is, we paid for the technology three times over. Yet the same technology had been worked up and operated at full scale by the Australian Government before any of the transfers were made. Not only that, but it is clear that the technological base in each case now lies outside this country so that significant process
development no longer occurs in this country. None of these three companies operating alumina refineries in Australia is either capable of transferring or is empowered to transfer that technology to another country, least of all Australia. It is possible, therefore, to argue that massive international transfers of technology which have occurred have effectively deprived Australia of that very technology.
The same sorry story could be told about mineral sands. Wartime development could have provided the basis of an industry producing titanium dioxide pigment. But after the war this development again was by-passed when foreign corporations brought thc same technology into this country at a higher price. I suggest to the Minister-we cannot divorce this from the matter before the chamber-~that under the foreign investment packages involved any further transfers of technology to other countries could be made only by a multinational parent. The option of a viable Australian industry leading world trade in this commodity was foreclosed. It was shut off. The tragedy of these foreign investment sellouts will soon be added to with the expansion of the aluminium industry to take advantage of our cheap energy resources. Because this industry comprises a handful of vertically integrated foreign corporations the returns to Australians from their fortunate position as members of an energy and resource rich country will be far below what it ought to be.
r suppose one could go on to develop the whole
history of the Esso Australia Ltd involvement in the Rundle oil shale deposit. It clearly highlights the dangers of neglecting the technology transfer

2052 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Industrial Research and Development Bill

aspect of foreign investment. To my mind this was league. If we are to control our resource exploi-

the critical issue of the Rundle shale oil deposit. tation, we must have effective control, as the Nor-

The Government has in effect permitted what is wegians, the British, the Venezuelans and the

the world's largest oil corporation to gain a Mexicans have found, over the technology used in

stranglehold over Australia's most promising oil that exploitation. We must be prepared to put

shale reserves. It is hardly surprising that the bullgreater effort into the development of our own

ish propaganda of Esso at the time it moved into technologies and mineral processing methods. I

the Rundle shale should have dissipated into think the greatest travesty of this Government

pessimism once its supremacy over the deposit since it assumed office in 1975 is that it has not

was assured. That is not unusual; the company has spent sufficient money on the Bureau of Mineral

done that for the last 30 years. The fact is that Resources. If it had spent a few more million dol-

Esso and the world's other major countries are lars on improving its capability Australia would

flush with profits from the huge escalation in oil have been richer to the tune of billions of dollars.

prices. They are using their enormous cash flows to take control over mining companies and increase their holdings of key energy reserves throughout the world. We have no legislation at all in this country to block that; that is, we have no anti-monopoly legislation. There is such legislation in England currently but none in Australia.

Another aspect of mineral research and development should be faced by the Government. With the rapid escalation in the depletion of the level of our natural resources, the reality which must be faced is that we will progressively be forced to derive many minerals from non-conventional sources, from very low grade deposits or, in the

case of oil, from secondary or tertiary recovery

No guarantee whatsoever was given by Esso, levels. If our consumption remains constant we

and none was asked for by the Government, that will reach this position with some minerals in the

the company was serious about proceeding to ultinext ten years. No better example of this can be

mate development before it was allowed to secure found in this country at the moment than the

control of the resource. It was not even thought domestic oil situation. New technology required

of. It was not even asked for. The use of techto exploit unorthodox sources will not be cheap.

nology by Esso as a weapon to bludgeon this It will be extremely expensive. The need for re-

Government into submission began when the search is urgent because the lead time in develop-

feasibility study for Rundle was undertaken. ing any new techniques in this area varies from 10

Esso's costing of the Rundle project was sigto 20 years. The necessary research and develop-

nificantly in excess of that undertaken by interment could be funded by a levy on resource ex-

national consultants acting for the original ploitation. The Treasury supports this proposal

Australian partners in the project. The Australian but this Government, because of the ext' nsive

partners also claimed that Esso's estimates mining lobby, refuses to implement it.

appeared to involve a lot of plant additives which were believed to be unnecessary and expensive. The point is that the Austr~lian Government is not in a position to judge these allegations but Esso is using the fact that it put up $30m for the feasibility study to gain control over further oil shale leases adjacent to Rundle. Esso's aim is to slow down the development of shale oil while the price of oil internationally remains static. Meanwhile, it manoeuvres to gain control over as much of the world's shale oil deposits as possible. This went on in the United States Colorado Basin 30 years ago. Now it has been repeated in this country.

Unless funds are allocated for research and development we, along with most of the West, will face a severe shortage of materials. Those that are available will be available at steeply escalated prices. Areas where such research funds are vital are the exploration and exploitation of the sea bed, deep buried mineral deposits, methods to process low grade and conventional ores, reducing the energy requirement of current processes and the, use of alternative materials. I suggest to the Minister that if your Government's policy continues in the next decade you will do nothing for this country in relation to technology selfsufficiency. You have put all your eggs--

While the technology transfers are firmly in Esso's grasp it has total control over how and when Rundle will be developed. Australia's national interest is now irrelevant to any decision on oil shale in this country, as the Government has learned to its great embarrassment. This Government is an amateur in the professional

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! I suggest that the honourable member address his remarks through the Chair. I would be very pleased if he got on with the Bill.
Mr JACOBI-The Bill deals with technology. Research and'development are technology. That is what I am dealing with. In conclusion, let me

Industrial Research and Development Bill

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2053

say that if we fluff the chance that our fortuitous The Australian Science and Technology Council

endowment of natural resources has provided, we has estimated that of the research supported

will have only ourselves to blame. The Governunder the programs administered by the ARGC,

ment will bear the burden of that. If we continue 30 per cent are in the category of pure research

to leave it to others to provide the skills and and 70 per cent are in the category of strategic re-

know how for the development of our resources search. It is to some people difficult to justify in

we must inevitably expect that the benefit of these economic terms the importance of pure research.

resources will also be taken from us. It is with At the same time, it is terribly important to em-

pleasure that I support the amendment.

phasise that it is fundamental that we support

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I must apologise to the honourable member for Hawker. I have been reminded that the amendment moved by the honourable member for Lalor broadens the scope of the Bill considerably. I hope the honourable

pure research as well as strategic and, of course, later applied research before we can have the important breakthroughs and discoveries which will make a real contribution to the economy of this country.

member will accept my apology.

I emphasise to the Government and the Minis-

MrDAWKINS (Fremantle) (5.15)-1 want to contribute briefly to this debate to support the remarks of my colleagues, the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) and the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi). I refer particularly to that part of the amendment which suggests that this House express its concern at the low level of government investment in research and development compared with technologically advanced countries. I refer specifically to the lack of support for basic research in universities. That is where most of the basic research is undertaken in this country. I emphasise the importance of supporting basic research as a vital prerequisite to the sort of applied research and development

ter for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) that if they want sensible and effective research programs under their administration they must not ignore the very important role of the kind of pure research which is conducted in universities. They rely on the ARGC for support for basic research. That Committee is the single most important source of funds for basic research in Australia. I think it is an absolute tragedy that a decreasing contribution as a proportion of total federal outlays has been made to this very important area. Over the last 15 years it has fallen by almost 50 per cent. In its reports for 1980 and 1981 the ARGC has pointed to the effect of this decline. In 1980 the Committee stated:

which this Bill seeks to encourage.

The Committee . . . sees an urgent need to increase the real level of funds available to the ARGS. This urgency

Since 1966 the Commonwealth has had a arises for two reasons

program of supporting basic research under the Australian Research Grants Scheme which is

(a) The reduction in the average grant in real terms means that the Committee is unable to recommend sufficient

administered by the Australian Research Grants Committee. However, the amount of funding which has been made available through that scheme has deteriorated markedly. For instance, the amount made available in 1980-81, which was

support to enable the best investigators to achieve their research potential.
(b) The fact that an increasing number of investigators whom the Committee has assessed as proposers of good quality projects (112 in 1980), are being cut out completely from ARGS funds.

$16m, was less in real terms than the amount made available when the scheme was introduced in 1966. If we were to restore the amount to an

In 1981 the Committee indicated that the position was even worse. It stated:

equivalent amount in real terms to that which was made available in 1966 the next Budget would have to appropriate $22m as opposed to the $16m which was appropriated last year for this purpose.

The extent of the withdrawal of support for worthwhile projects can be gauged from the increased number of proposals judged by the Committee's external assessors to be of good quality which could not be supported. In 1980 there were 112 such cases; in 1981 this figure has risen to 296.

One of the organisations which has taken up this point is the Federation of Australian University Staff Associations, otherwise known as FAUSA. It is concerned that a number of its members who have viable and exciting projects which would otherwise be supported are not being supported due to the lack of funds made available to the ARGC for allocation mainly to the universities.

It is very alarming that the ARGC, which is highly respected throughout the academic community, having made its assessment of projects which are put up primarily by individuals and sometimes by teams for short term support, has been unable to support 296 proposals which it thought were worthy of support. I say again to the Minister: If the Government is going to miss out

It is important to make the point that basic reon the work of 296 legitimate investigations and

search has two parts, pure and strategic research. research projects I cannot see how it can reap the

2054 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Industrial Research alld Development Bill

t,ue rewards from the sorts of proposals he is putting forward today in this legislation.
There is one other matter in this regard that I
should refer to, and that is this: Before the election the Government indicated that it was going to provide special assistance for what I think it rather impertinently called centres of excellence. I prefer to call them centres of concentration because there is no way in which it can be said that one group of research workers is excellent because that implies that all the others working in that area are somewhat deficient. T do not think those sorts of assessments can be made and I certainly do not think this Government is in a position to make them. But I think it is legitimate to provide extra and special assistance to centres of concentration where teams working on more complicated and long term research projects can be supported over a longer period. The alarm which exists in the academic community-I think it is a legitimate alarm-is that the funds available for centres of concentration may come out of the funds which would ordinarily have been made available in other ways.
I think it is fundamentally important that there should be no diminution-in fact there should be an increase-in the amount of funds available to the ARGC at the same time as the centres of concentration are being supported under this new proposal. If the Minister were able to say that that was the case and that the centres of concentration would not compete for funds with the ARGC, I think he would find his proposal welcomed with much greater enthusiasm in the universities around this country. I emphasise again that it is important to continue the sort of funding which the ARGC has been involved with because we cannot predict where important discoveries will be made. It may be that some groups, in particular universities, have made important contributions, but we cannot say that nobody else will make just as important or even more important contributions in other universities. Therefore, I think there is very important justification for continuing to support investigators and researchers on a project basis and on an individual basis and to encourage them to pursue their interests on the short term basis, which is what the ARGC is particularly concerned with.
I mention another matter which relates to this aspect. It is not simply a question of providing funds for researchers to continue their current work. The other important thing-my colleague
the honourable member for Lalor has referred to this matter as well-is to ensure that we continue to have enough people who will be involved in research work. We must ensure that increasing

numbers of people are going into universities and staying there to participate in this important research work.
The awful truth is that we have appalling levels of participation in tertiary education and in higher secondary education compared with those of some other countries. This situation is deteriorating. If we look at the Tertiary Education Commission report and at what has been happening in the last three years, therc has been a phenomenal decline in the number of school leavers who have gone straight into tertiary institutions. Whereas three years ago 54 per cent of school leavers went straight on to some form of full time tertiarv education, the number has now fallen to 42 per ~cnt, at a time when we should be encouraging more and more people to be involved in full time higher education. Yet we have seen this decline. One of the reasons for this decline, which the TEe points to, is the lack of adequate student financial arrangements.
J do not want to get on to that aspect, except to say that the Government is now making a deliberate and specific assault on the major research body-that is, universities-around this country. The Government intends to apply fees to those people involved in post-graduate study in universities. The fact is that the major contribution to research work in universities in a manpower sense is in fact conducted by post-graduate students. There are about 20,000 full time and part time post-graduate students around Australia. We do not really know to what extent those students or new students will be discouraged from postgraduate studies as a result of these fees. It is clear however that many people will be prevented from carrying on this work, not because they are not good enough but because they cannot afford to, simply due to the fact that the Government is applying a quite inequitable and quite unjustifiable fee on the people who are primarily involved in basic research work in universities around Australia.
I want the Minister to realise that at least his colleague the Minister for Education (Mr Fife) seems to have partially realised the lunacy of this proposal because in a Press statement that he released on Sunday we see the first evidence of backsliding in relation to the razor gang's report. In relation to tertiary tuition fees, the report of the razor gang reads:
Tuition fees to be introduced in universities and CAE's for students undertaking degrees and diplomas subsequent to an initial tertiary qualification, except for recognised double degree or diploma combination,

Industrial Research and Development Bill

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2055

postgraduate students receiving Commonwealth Government Postgraduate Awards to be exempted from fees.
In the Press statement that he issued on 3 May the Minister for Education said that he had been misrepresented. He said that it was perfectly clear what the Government was doing in relation to tertiary fees. He said, inter alia, when talking about tertiary tuition fees:
Students in receipt of Commonwealth Government or university Postgraduate awards will be exempt.
There was no misrepresentation at all. It was perfectly clear in the beginning what the Government intended, but maybe as a result of some flash of brilliance on the Minister's part, on Saturday, 2 May-that may not be unrelated to the fact that the Minister on that day was at the University of Sydney and was button-holed by the ViceChancellor of the University, Professor Williams-the Minister obviously realised that the Government had made a serious mistake and to a very small extent tried to unravel the mess it had created. But that in itself will not be sufficient because both the Commonwealth Government and the university awards are granted primarily on the basis of merit, not on the basis of need. So we are going to have a lot of prospective postgraduate students-perhaps not the best but nevertheless promising-being denied an opportunity not only to further their education but also to participate in university research simply because this Government has decided to penalise them for wanting to continue in that direction.
I conclude by saying that the honourable member for Lalor is !ight when he says that we cannot look at this proposal in isolation from the basic research work which is being done in the universities. We particularly cannot look at it in isolation from the success or failure of the education system as a whole. I urge the Minister for Science and Technology, if he is genuinely interested, and I believe he is-I think he is having an awfully hard time of it at the moment, being beaten around the head by this Government--
Mr Kerin-What has the Government got against him?
Mr DAWKINS-I do not know. Perhaps it is because he is from north Queensland; one never knows. I think the Minister is genuinely interested in this area but he will never succeed if he allows the other Ministers, particularly the Minister for Education, to undermine his efforts.
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology) (5.29)-This has been a very wide-ranging debate. The debate is really about the Industrial Research and Development

Incentives Amendment Bill. The honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) mentioned the Bill in a very cursory way and then he went on to deal with a great number of other matters. The honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) and the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) did not mention the Bill at all. I think you were very patient in allowing them to continue, Mr Deputy Speaker. Of course, their excuse was that an amendment had been moved and that they were talking to the amendment.
Mr Barry J onesWhich 1 hope you are going to accept.
Mr THOMSON-Certainly not. The honourable member for Lalor has been yapping in a very loud voice but he has really produced no alternative policies. He has made no suggestions; his whole speech has been a knocking speech; he has produced no details of an alternative policy. Perhaps the Opposition does not have an alternative policy. Ii did nothing in this field when it was in government. This Government has encouraged industrial research and development. This Government has done a great deal to encourage new technology in Australia. The Opposition did nothing about industrial research and development in the three disastrous years it was in office. This Government is doing a great deal to help and encourage high technology industries in Australia. We have consistently supported industrial research and development.
The honourable member for Berowra (Dr Edwards) said that in the last three years the amount spent to support industrial research and development incentives with which this Bill is concerned has increased from $14m three years ago to $54m today. That is a very considerable increase. This legislation is good legislation. No Opposition members who spoke on this legislation complained about it in any way; they admitted that it is a good Bill. The honourable member for Fremantle spoke about the money spent on industrial research. The Australian Government has allocated about $180m to the Australian Research Grants Committee, the National Energy Research, Development and Demonstration Council, the Tertiary Education Commission and universities, and for marine science research. That is a considerable amount. That amount is much more than has ever been spent in this field in
Australia. r think the Government deserves great
credit for its realisation of the need to encourage high level research in Australia. Of course, there is an immense amount to be done. There are limited resources and those resources are being used in the best possible way. This is a good Bill. That has

2056 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Industrial Research andDevelopment Bill

been admitted by all Opposition members who have spoken in this debate.

Mr Barry Jones-Nqw tell us about the razor gang.

Mr THOMSON-The razor gang has nothing to do with this Bill. I reject the amendments put forward by the Opposition as good talking points. They have little to do with the Bill. I commend the Bill to the House.

Question put-'

That the words proposed to be omitted (Mr Barry Jones's amendment) stand part of the question.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-'-Mr G. O'H. Giles)

Ay~

61

Noes

43

Majority

18

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baume,M.E. Birney, R.I. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A: Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen
Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, II. G. P.
Coleman, w. p,
Cowan, D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards. H. R. ' Falconer, P. D. Fife, w.c, Fisher, P. S. (Teller) HalI,Steele Harris, G. MeD, Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W, M. Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J, D, Hyde,J. M,

JarmanjA. W. Jull,D,.F,
Katter, R. C. Lloyd,B.
Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R.
McLean, R, M. McMahon, Sir \ViUiam McVeigh, D. T. Millar, P. C. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P, J. O'Keefe, F, L.
Peacock, A. S.
Porter, J. R.
Robinson, Ian Rocher, A, C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F.
Sinclair, 1. MeC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G, E. J.
Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey, C. W. White,P.N.D. Wilson, 1. B. C.

Armitage. J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert
Campbell, G. Cass,M.H.
Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cohen, B.
Cross,M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Free, R. V.
Fry, K. L. Hawke, R, J.. L.

NOES

Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J.
Kelly, R.J. Kent, L. Kerin,J. C,
Klugman, R. E.
McLeay,Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J, B.
Milton,P. Morris,P,F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G.
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L.

NOES

Holding, A. C. Howe,RL Humphreys. B. C. (Teller) Hurford. C. J. Jacobi, R.

Uren, T. "Wallis,L.G.
West,S.J. -\Villis,R. Young, M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Amendment negatived.

Original question resolved in the affirmative..

Bill read a second time.

In Committee
The BilL
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (5.40)---1 raise one point that relates to the definition clauseclause J of the Bill. The explanatory memorandum on the Bill states:
The effect of sub-clauses 2 (0 and 2 (g) is that computer software Rand D will be eligible where it relates directly to the development of new products 'of, or new or improved
processes-employed in manufacturing, mining Or (In:site build-
ing or construction activities. However, where software Rand D has been eligible under the commencement grant scheme, that eligibility is retained.
I would like the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) to explain why it is necessary to exclude the broader category of software production. The restrictions involved in subcl<\use 3 (I) (f), which seeks to insert the new definition of eligible software research and development, are far too narrow. At this stage we will not move an amendment but, depending on how the Minister answers the, question, we may propose one in the Senate. J put it to the Minister that perhaps in the period between the Bill leaving this place and being introduced in the Senate he might reconsider.
Let me put this argument to him: There seems to be a strong case for a general eligibility for providing industrial research and development incentives grants to software development where appropriate. After all, the Australian Industrial
Research and Development rncentives Board will
presumably have a discretion. It can pick and choose between applications. We think software should be regarded as a significant form of enterprise per se. Software requires intellectual skill, it has considerable IP lrket potential and is relatively labour intensive. Great Britain, for example, is not doing particularly well in the computer hardware area, but is successful in the computer software area. Why should there not be a broad capacity to include software where, in the opinion of the Board, it is warranted? If the Board can exercise a discretion as to what it provides grants for, that seems to be perfectly satisfactory. There is very likely to be a considerable development in the volume of software that will be

Industrial Research and Development Bill

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2057

required throughout the 1980s. 1 point out to the Minister that most packaged software in Australia is imported. This, again, is an area where we are suffering from a considerable technology imbalance. I would suggest to the Minister that he delete from paragraph (f) of sub-clause 3 (1) the words following 'software for computers or for similar equipment'. He might also delete paragraph (g) as well.
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology) (S.4S)-It seems that the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) does not really understand the purpose of this Bill. The original legislation was restricted to research in both manufacturing and mining. We have extended the scope of the legislation to onsite building. We do not wish to expand it beyond that at the moment because the amount of money is limited. We believe they are the three most important sections in which we should be encouraging industrial research and technology. Software which is related to these three areas is eligible. If we opened up a whole new field which the Bill is not intended to cover we would find that similar amendments would be sought in all other areas. It would open up the Bill to any sort of industrial reasearch and development. We wish to restrict the operation of the Bill to these three major areas.
There is another point. Most software development is development. It involves a very small amount of research. This is a research and development Bill. The Australian Industrial Research and Develepment Incentives Board, when assessing applications, takes into account both research and development. In most cases software development does not contain a purely research element. Therefore the Government decided that this was not the best area in which to support the software iridustry. I must say that I agree with the honourable member that the software industry is a very important industry in Australia. I think it employs about 12,000 people at the moment. It is growing very fast. The industry does have problems in getting venture capital. We are looking at that. I propose to have a meeting with representatives of the software industry as soon as it can be arranged to discuss how the industry might be assisted in areas in which it is having real problems.
The Government considered very carefully this question raised by the honourable member. It decided that the Bill was not the most appropriate way in which to assist the software industry if it needs assistance. The industry is doing very well at the moment. However, there are areas in which it is experiencing problems. The Government will

try to assist the industry in this respect after consultation with the industry itself.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (5.47) ~The answer given by the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) is extremely disappointing, and perhaps not properly thought-out. First of all I point out that the definition of'industrial research and development' in the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 is broad enough. It states:
'Industrial research and development', in relation to a company, means systematic experimentation or analysis in the field of science or technology carried on by the company, or procured by it to be carried out, in Australia with the object of-
(a) acquiring knowledge that may be of use for the purpose of devising or developing new or substantially improved material products or new or substantially improved processes for or in connection with the production or use of material products . . .
Then it states:
(h) applying knowledge for the purpose referred to in paragraph (a) . . .
What we have in this Bill is a narrowing of the principal Act, which was broad enough, by confining software incentives in effect to mining and construction operations. The position seems to be absolutely indefensible. One might say: 'Ah well, it might require too much money and it might be far too broad'. The answer is to say to the Government: 'What is your Board doing?' The Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives Board, after all, receives applications. If it considers an application and says 'We do not think a grant is merited, we do not think there is enough evidence for it' it can reject the application. We could say to the Board: 'Oh yes, once upon a time under the 1976 Act you would have included a broader variety of software'. Now we are told that although the Government is enlarging the range of industrial research and development broadly, in this area it is cutting down. If software development is needed for construction or mining, it is in. If there is any alternative form it is out. The Government is not even giving the Board the opportunity to express a choice as to whether something ought to be included or not. This seems to me to be absolutely arbitrary.
I suggest to the Minister that instead of coming out with what for him is an uncharacteristically peremptory reply he might give some consideration to this and in the period between now and when the Bill is transmitted to the Senate examine whether the present wording is too narrow. He might read the definition of what is meant by eligible software research and development in

2058 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Quarantine Amendment Bill

conjunction with the definition of industrial research and development that is in the parent legislation.
Mr THOMSON-(Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology) (5.50)-Under the previous Act software could be funded only when it was related to hardware development. This Bill has broadened the area of eligibility. The Bill provides for the extension to certain categories of mining, manufacturing and on-site building operations. That is a considerable widening of the Act. It is not as much as the software industry wants but under the legislation, the industry will now be eligible for grants in those areas-manufacturing, mining and on-site building operations.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (5.51)-1 wish to make the point, in contradistinction to what the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) has just said, that software research and development has been eligible under the commencement grant scheme.
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology) (5.52)-The software industry continues to be eligible. Where it was eligible under the commencement grants scheme it will continue to be eligible.
Bill agreed to. Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr Thomson)-by leaveread a third time.
QUARANTINE AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 9 April, on motion by Mr MacKellar:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (5.53)-1 am not quite sure of the procedures here but I understand that the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) has an amendment to move to the Quarantine Amendment Bill 1981. The Opposition wishes to move an amendment also. I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not declining to give the Bill a second reading, the House is of the opinion that the maintenance of efficient and comprehensive quarantine arrangements is vital and that any transfer of remaining operational responsibilities to the States would jeopardise this and therefore should be opposed.'
The Opposition moves this amendment because since the Bill was introduced the Government has brought into the House a statement on the review

of Commonwealth functions. In referring to quarantine the review stated:
The Government will also explore with State Governments the appropriateness and feasibility of transferring to the States the remaining Commonwealth operational elements of the administration of quarantine. That would leave policy matters in relation to quarantine with the Department of Health for people and the Department of Primary Industry for animals and plants.
I want to refer to two matters in respect of that statement. First of all the Bill says nothing about splitting quarantine arrangements between the Department of Health and between the Department of Primary Industry. The Opposition is very much opposed to transferring further operational aspects of quarantine to the States. People are already well aware of deficiencies pointed to by, for example, the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources in, for instance, northern Australia. We believe it is a rather poor show when the review of Commonwealth functions statement directly reflects on a Bill before the House. If the statement is not in fact in opposition to the Bill then certainly it downgrades the importance of it. We all realise that if the review goes ahead the Department of Health will have hardly any functions to perform.
The report on the review of Commonwealth functions of the razor gang indicates that the function of quarantine was not reviewed. The Government in its razor gang report did not look at the best, the most efficient, the most effective or safest quarantine system or service. It simply looked at ways and means of foisting functions on to the States, doing away with some functions or selling off any functions that happen to pay. In very few cases did the razor gang look at the functions themselves. For example, the committee did not look at what was best for soil conservation, what should or should not be done, or whether there should or should not be a national program of soil conservation. It simply looked at ways and means of foisting functions on to the States. It did not look at soil conservation per se just as it did not look at quarantine per Se. It did not look at what was best for quarantine. The razor gang's report simply is ideology masked as fiscal responsibility. The razor gang's report is really the ideological outpourings of a frugal and mendacious government. The Minister in his second reading speech said that part of the measure before the House was-
to give effect to outstanding recommendations for legislative change put forward by the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources in its report on the adequacy of quarantine.
The Government does that but many other recommendations in the report are not picked up. In

Quarantine Amendment Bill

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2059

the razor gang's report many recommendations are not looked at in terms of the Quarantine Amendment Bill. The Minister also said that the Bill is a reflection of the Government's strong commitment to an efficient quarantine service. As I said earlier, 1 think that the razor gang's report does not look at what is best for an efficient quarantine service but simply at foisting off quarantine functions. [ seek leave of the House to incorporate the recommendations in Hansard because they He good and well thought through recommendations.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
CHAPTER 10
Recommendations
The order of the following recommendations does not indicate any priority or order ofimportance.
The Committee recommends:
The Quarantine Act
1. that the Quarantine Act be amended as a matter of priority to eliminate the problems in relation to the effect of granting pratique, and lack of powers of Animal or Plant Quarantine officers as detailed on pages 53 and 54;
2. that action be taken to amend either the Quarantine Act or the Aboriginal Lands Act to guarantee the legality of quarantine operations, while fully protecting the rights of the Aboriginal occupants of the land; (page 54)
3. that the Quarantine Act be amended to provide legislative support necessary to handle contemporary quarantine situations which are not currently covered by the Act; (page 55)
4. that a complete redrafting of the Act be undertaken as a matter of priority; (page 58)
Location of Quarantine within the Commonwealth's administrative arrangements
5. that an Australian Agricultural Health Service be established as an independent service within the Commonwealth Department of Primary Industry, and include the existing Animal, Plant and General Quarantine Branches of the Department of Health, the Bureau of Animal Health and the proposed Plant Protection Service; (page 65)
6. that the new Agricultural Health Service, the Quarantine Service and the Plant and Animal Health Service be headed by officers with technical qualifications relevant to their responsibilities; (page 66)
7. that more resources be made available to the Plant and Animal Quarantine services generally with the specific objects of increasing public awareness of the purpose and necessity for quarantine, of providing more thorough quarantine surveillance at air and sea ports and enabling the Quarantine Service to carry out tasks which at present are not done adequately; (page 64)
Administrative arrangements relating to quarantine
8. that in future a comprehensive functional breakdown of receipts and expenditure be maintained in respect of quarantine activities; (page 9)
9. that consultative committees be formally incorporated into the operation of the General, Plant and Animal Quarantime Branches so that industry and producer groups have the

oportunity of providing regular comments and suggestions to the Department in respect of quarantine policy and operational procedures; (page II)
10. that the Chief Quarantine Officers' conference be given a formal basis under section II of the Quarantine Act and that the provision of consultative machinery to give access to industry groups and organisations be developed; (page 11)
11. that Quarantine Officers be given the same powers of search as Customs officers; (page 12)
12. that a separate quarantine check be incorporated in the existing customs and immigration checks; (page 12)
l3. that international representation relating specifically to quarantine should be the responsibility of the Quarantine Service; (page 13)
14. that the Department of Transport provide quarantine facilities at all first port of cntry airports and that this requirement be incorporated in the basic design and construction of all future first port of entry airports; (page 14)
15. that technical committees on quarantine be established with neighbouring countries and that establishment of such committees with Indonesia and Papua New Guinea should be a matter of priority. Overseas aid programs should be extended to both involve greater numbers of Australian veterinarians and plant scientists, and to give them practical experience in handling exotic diseases such as foot and mouth disease and to allow representatives from the same disciplines to train in Australia; (page 14)
General quarantine
16. that Quarantine officers be given similar powers of search to Customs Officers and that a separate quarantine check of passengers be instituted at ports of entry; (page 18)
17. that some aspects of the coastal surveillance program be reviewed immediately, particularly in regard to the training of observers, the need for staggered flight times and the provision of the necessary facilities to respond to surveillance sightings; (page 21)
18. that the Quarantine Act 1908 be amended to give the Quarantine Authorities discretionary power to confiscate, destroyor otherwise dispose of abandoned vessels as a quarantine measure; (page 18)
19. the proclamation of Torres Strait as a quarantine area or zone; (page 23)
Plant quarantine
20. that the Quarantine Division improve its supervisory and consultative procedures to ensure that quarantine requirements are applied uniformly throughout Australia; (page 28)
21. that the effectiveness of the present inspection method for cut flowers be tested in a research project which would carry out a thorough search and dissection of a representative sample of flowers from all sources of supply and which should be carried out over a period of one or more years and at different times of the year; (page 28)
22. that the systematic survey and listing of weed species present in Australia be given increased emphasis and that the noxious weed list currently prepared by Plant Quarantine be brought up to date at regular intervals; (page 29)
23. that entomological research with the aim of compiling reference collections of potential endemic and exotic pests should be co-ordinated and monitored by Plant Quarantine or, if established, the proposed Plant Protection Service; (page 30)
24. that a program to determine the extent of these weed and disease organisms be a continuing feature of plant quarantine precautions in Australia; (page 34)

2060 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Quarantine Amendment Bill

25. that the existing collation of plant research information by Plant Quarantine be continued and that manuals and indexes of pests and diseases be brought up to date regularly; (page 34)
26. that research on the wide range of plant sciences be encouraged and increased in all sectors; (page 34)
27. that public education on plant quarantine emphasise the reasons for Australia's strict plant quarantine laws and that publicity material be distributed to all international travellers and intending migrants travelling to Australia; (page 34)
Animal quaral\tine
28. that the Queensland and Federal Governments produce a joint plan embracing Customs, Immigration and Quarantine to control movement in the Torres Strait area; (page 37)
29. that the Commonwealth initiate arrangements with the Queensland Government to prepare for all aspects of an outbreak of screw worm fly; (page 37)
30. that Quarantine should select a separate sample of incoming passengers, using a similar sample size to the Bureau of Customs, and carry out searches specifically for breaches of quarantine; (page 38)
31. that the Department of Science and the Environment acting in consultation with the Quarantine Service and industry groups be responsible for producing and maintaining a list of prohibited and permitted fish species for use by the Customs Bureau and the Quarantine Service; (page 39)
32. that a comprehensive procedure for the importation of aquarium fish be developed including:
(i) licensing of overseas exporters to guarantee standards of health and cleanlines of consignments;
(ii) pre-import identification of fish, i.e. all consignments to carry a clear description and illustration of contents; fish to be of a minimum size or age;
(iii) licensing of selected private aquariums which meet required standards as post-entry quarantine facilities, where fish may be examined more thoroughly than is possible at present;
(iv) development of procedures in these facilities to ensure safe disinfection and disposal of water in which fish are transported;
(v) Quarantine authorities to train officers in identification of fish species and recognition of diseases. If necessary officers with the required skills should be employed for this function;
(vi) regular inspection of quarantine facilities to ensure their security and the observance of regulations; (page 39)
33. that the Bureau of Animal Health or, if established, the proposed Australian Agricultural Health Service co-ordinate research into exotic diseases, acting as a central reference point which cali bring together results of research already underway and where necessary commission research aimed at producing a comprehensive picture of Australia's disease status; (page 40)
34. that detailed contingency plans be discussed publicly allowing full debate and involvement of those affected by the plans; (page 41 )
35. that the Bureau of Animal Health take the initiative in organising exercises to test the efficiency of contingency plans; (page 41)
36. that the Bureau of Animal Health undertake a study of all aspects of compensation policy for exotic disease outbreaks and that the study be made public; (page 42)

37. that the control and eradication of feral animals, particularly pigs, is an area where the Commonwealth should be actively involved both through research undertaken by CSIRO and in providing the impetus and partially funding national eradication campaigns; (page 42)
Quarantine facilities
38. that if maceration/sterilisation proves to be as effective as is expected from the work undertaken to date then no more incinerators be constructed and that when existing incinerators are due for replacement macerator/sterilisers be installed; (page 45)
39. that in future enclosed greenhouses be the minimum requirement for licensed plant quarantine premises; (page 45)
40. that the licensing of private premises as post-entry fish quarantine facilities be introduced; (page 47)
41. that further investigation be undertaken into extending the licensing of laboratory facilities as quarantine premises and the relationship and access of research establishments to the high security facilities of the new Australian National Animal Health Laboratory; (page 47)
42. that access to a portion (say 50 per cent) of the Cocos Island Animal Quarantine Station should be offered to recognised Commonwealth and State government animal research establishments, and 'that an Expert Committee on Import Priorities be established to apportion the facility between those research establishments; (page 48)
43. that access to the remaining portion of the facility be by strict order of application; (page 48)
44. that the completion of the National Animal Health Laboratory project receive high priority and that the Government ensure that there are no further delays in construction due to budgetary or other constraints; (page 50)
A.M.THOMAS Chairman
Mr KERIN-I thank the Minister and the House. The Senate Standing Committee which examined the adequacy of quarantine procedures wanted a strong Australian quarantine service. The Government senators on that CommitteeSenators Thomas, Maunsell and Teague~ unanimously agreed that Australia needs a strong quarantine service. The recommendation for the organisation of this new structure for an Australian quarantine service appears at page 66 and 67 of the report. It is quite obvious from that report that the members of the Committee, after a searching inquiry, do not want more quarantine functions to be foisted on the States. They want to see a strong Australian quarantine service. They propose an Australian quarantine service covering animal, plant and health services under the aegis of an organisation to be known as the Australian Agricultural Health Service within the Department of Primary Industry. In other words, this would mean an upgrading of the present situation. Again it is quite clear that that searching examination by the Senate resulted in a proposal for a strong Australian quarantine service.
The Australian Labor Party has no objection to the concept of putting quarantine procedures

Quarantine Amendment Bill

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2061

within the Department of Primary Industry. Administrative arrangements are nowhere near as important as trying to get the best and most efficient quarantine service. We are opposed to the remaining quarantine operational powers to the States, as the razor gang recommended. The Senate Committee report quite clearly showed just where the deficiencies were, particularly in northern Australia, where some arrangements involved quarantine inspections by private contractors as a 9 to 5 operation. The Senate Committee reported that some inspectors had been dumped on beaches and left for 24 or 36 hours. There are all sorts of problems with the States in handling some aspects of quarantine. It is downright irresponsible, in the Opposition's opinion, to hand any more facilities and operational aspects of quarantine over to the States.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr KERIN-Perhaps I should inform the House what the Quarantine Amendment Bill is all about. The broad purpose of the Bill is to incorporate the Cocos (Keeling) Islands into Australian quarantine arrangements so as to provide a secure off-shore quarantine station, to extend quarantine powers and activities provided for in the Act to remove the liability of the Commonwealth to pay compensation for imported livestock and certain other classes of animals destroyed in accordance with the Act where those animals have been in quarantine since importation. Before the suspension of the sitting for dinner I informed the House that the Opposition has no objection to this Bill. The only reason it has moved a second reading amendment is that it objects to the implications of what is contained in the razor gang's report.
The Bill draws together changes resulting from the decisions to establish an off-shore quarantine station on Cocos (Keeling) Islands, which is expected to be completed in September of this year; the 1979 findings of the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources in its report on the adequacy of quarantine; and various other measures which the Government considers necessary to continue Australia's geographic isolation from many of the worst human, plant and animal health risks found in nearby and distant countries. Mass international air travel, Australia's participation in large volume international trade and the unauthorised landings in Australia of refugees and others have contributed to the growing quarantine risks Australia faces. In economic and/or social terms the establishment in Australia of particular diseases such as foot and mouth disease, rabies or oriental fruit fiy could be

disastrous not only for the individuals immediately concerned but also for the community at large.
In terms of interrupted production and trade, the Minister for Health stated in 1980 that an outbreak of foot and mouth disease would result in a loss of $2,500m in rural output in the first year alone. In June 1980 the Government announced a national quarantine publicity campaign intended to inform the one million Australians who travel overseas and the 800,000 visitors who arrive here each year of the need to co-operate with quarantine regulations. That commitment by the Government gave me and the Opposition a clear indication that it regards quarantine as a national responsibility. We congratulate and encourage the Government in that. But this is a time when the country is being scoured by children and parents engaged in the hunt for some 250 gerbils and hamsters, due to the failure of interception procedures by our quarantine service. People are calling for the reactivation of the Army Veterinary Corps to deal with an outbreak of exotic diseases. It is very appropriate that the Parliament should devote time to a critical but constructive discussion about Australia's quarantine procedures.
I wish to devote my remarks to three areas: Firstly, the difficulty of the problem of completely quarantining Australia from the entry of that which is undesirable; secondly, the fact that we have not had more outbreaks of exotic diseases is due more to good luck than to good management, although I would say that on the evidence it is hard to prove that because we have not had much of a problem with such outbreaks; and, thirdly, the question of administrative arrangements and the need for Australia's quarantine service to be located within the Department of Primary Industry. I am leading for the Opposition in the debate because my major concern is in regard to the Bill and its relationship to the primary industries rather than human health.
As an aside to the three main points I will be addressing, I want to make some reference to the debate on whether we should have the Australian National Animal Health Laboratory and whether the quarantine station at the Cocos (Keeling) Islands is really necessary. I hope I understand the technological arguments that put both those facilities under a cloud if looked at scientifically, taking into account the progress likely to be made in the next few years. One of the first speeches I made in this place, as the member for Macarthur, was on the need for a maximum security animal health laboratory. 1 have been critical of the

2062 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Quarantine Amendment Bill

Fraser Government for its tardiness in not proceeding with the construction of the laboratory as quickly as possible.
In recent outbreaks of vesicular disease in pigs it has been seen that we are still dependent on overseas diagnostic facilities, and the chills that pass down the spine of Australia's livestock industry every time an outbreak occurs would be lessened if we had more experts and facilities on the spot. I believe the ANAHL has a place, and will have a place even given advanced technology. In particular, the production of non-infective synthetic vaccines is the technology that gives people reason to say that we do not need the laboratory. I think we very definitely need the laboratory, particularly to meet the need for diagnosis, research, training, the quality control of vaccines and the need for scientific exchange. There is a range of lesser roles that it could carry out.
I am not so sure about the life or the utility of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands facility but there still seems to be an argument advanced that semen and ova imports can be carriers of a number of viruses. If one looks at the functions of the Bureau of Animal Health it is apparent that the ANAHL will be the focus of activity and the major facility at its disposal. It may be a negative argument, but even if technology does overtake the need for the laboratory in its original form, I believe such a facility will readily be able to be used for other scientific purposes such as research and training.
As I have mentioned the Bureau of Animal Health and the ANAHL, it may not be a bad time to itemise the responsibilities of the Bureau because it will fit very much into Australia's quarantine arrangements and into the whole area of the prevention of exotic diseases coming into Australia. As well as providing the Commonwealth Government's meat inspection services the Bureau of Animal Health provides a professional and technical advisory service on all matters relating to animal and poultry health, reports on the effects of animal health and breeding, undertakes research and investigation into epidemiology, operates a national disease recording system, supervises livestock export health testing, provides technical advice and representation at national and international meetings, provides the secretariat for the Animal Health Committee and the Cattle Tick Control Commission, co-ordinates major national animal disease programs, coordinates exotic disease contigency planning, provides advice on standards of export meat inspection and operates veterinary services within the Australian Capital Territory. Itemising the role of the Bureau of Animal Health provides another very strong reason for putting all these matters

under discussion into the Department of Primary Industry. The human part of quarantine is no longer as important as it once was.
I return to the three matters to which I said I would mainly address myself. I think the amendments contained in this Bill should be used to tighten considerably quarantine restrictions at major points of entry of people. However, the problem still remains of people entering Australia unchecked-for example, the refugees or boat people, or fishermen landing on isolated stretches of coast for short periods. I am talking about the problems of actually having a 100 per cent quarantine service. It is a massive task to do anything about unchecked entries and it is very much a case of catch as catch can. But I would say that there seems to have been no assessment of the costs versus the benefits of the actions we are taking. There is a need for a government to make that assessment and to make the results public. As it is, I often have the feeling that I am not quite sure what is happening or whether the measures taken are adequate. A moment ago-the Minister for Health agreed with me-I said that it is a common view that it is more by good luck than by good management-
Mr MacKellar-I did not agree with that.
Mr KERIN-This is what the Minister agreed with: On the past record that cannot be proved because we have done very well. As the threat gets larger-I think it is a growing threat-we have to be constantly vigilant in this area. Another problem that will remain concerns viruses borne by non-human carriers such as the wind, birds and insects. Page 36 of the report of the Senate Committee on National Resources on the adequacy of quarantine refers to this matter when it mentions the problem of the screw worm fly. The report reads:
In the field of animal quarantine probably the most immediate known threat is the introduction of screw worm fly from Papua New Guinea. This fly is a threat particularly to the cattle industry-it lays its eggs in open wounds . . .
I will not go on with that since we have all just had dinner. Anyhow, it is hard to stop the flies flying across the border. It is a particular risk. Again, preventing entry is an impossible task. The Government needs also to develop a system which will ensure early detection and isolation of' any viruses which do enter Australia and which are a threat. It needs to have worked out a strategy for the control of disease if an outbreak occurs. Again, this strategy should be made public. The compensation provisions of any strategy would also need to be worked out carefully and made public. Producers need to have their economic viability restored. For example, in a recent case in

Quarantine Amendment Bill

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2063

Tasmania the compensation paid did not cover its proposed amendments to modernise the Quar-

the replacement cost of the destroyed property. antine Act. The Quarantine Act currently is

We must acknOWledge that there will be gaps in administered by the Commonwealth Department

any quarantine system, but we need to be aware of Health, with that Department assuming overall

of what the gaps are and to know that Australia responsibility for the administration of not only

has a second line of defence ready to be human but also plant and animal quarantine. One

implemented in the event of an outbreak of glance at a chart of the organisational structure of

disease. Finally, we need to recognise that, be the quarantine system indicates the unnecessarily

cause of the export orientation, livestock procumbersome procedures created by this allocation

duction in Australia is much more vulnerable to of responsibility. For the plant and animal quar-

the adverse effects of exotic disease emergencies antine services the line of authority moves from

than is the case in most countries. For example, the Commonwealth Department of Health to the

the discovery of foot and mouth disease in State departments of agriculture, which then

Australia would disrupt the export of 90 per cent effectively run the services. Only the human quar-

of meats normally exported, and some reaction antine service functions totally within the Depart-

could be expected even against Australian wool, ment of Health.

despite the technical evidence relating to the virus being unable to survive in wool.

Since World War II the thrust of our quarantine system has shifted significantly away from

In am trying to stress that this is a very serious human diseases towards plant and animal dis-

matter. I have already given some qualification of eases. This reflects both a greater understanding

this view, but I repeat that, to date, Australia's of plant and animal quarantine problems and

quarantine system has operated on a basis of good changes world wide in the human disease situa-

luck rather than good management. For example, tion. Quarantine in Australia is now primarily

in a keynote address to an exotic disease emergconcerned with preventing the entry of agricul-

ency seminar held last year, the director of the Butural pests and diseases and not human disease, as

reau of Animal Health pointed out that our was the case when the Quarantine Act was

national luck in avoiding most major exotic disintroduced in 1908. At the point of entry humans

ease influences might be wearing a bit thin, as the are now more important as carriers of animal and

last five years had seen a series of eight exotic displant diseases than as carriers of human diseases.

ease incidents and scares affecting various Exotic human diseases are rarely discovered at the

livestock-based industries. The Minister stated in point of entry because they tend to appear later,

his second reading speech:

when the traveller is out in the community. An

The Bill is a reflection of the Government's strong commitefficient and effective quarantine system is vital to

ment to an efficient quarantine service.

the continued prosperity of Australia's rural

To achieve this efficient service, the Governindustries.

ment's strategy is as follows: Firstly, to establish a high security animal quarantine station on the Cocos Islands, at an estimated cost of quarantine of about $15,000 per animal, and to extend the application of the Quarantine Act to take in the Cocos Island. Secondly, and I quote from the Minister's speech:

I conclude on this note: The outbreak of any new animal disease in Australia could result not only in the loss of a significant proportion of our livestock but also in a very serious and possibly complete reduction of opportunities to continue trading in overseas markets, which currently take the bulk of Australia's livestock production. Be-

. . . to make . . . changes to overcome deficiencies experienced in the administration of the Act and make it more responsive to modern situations.
One of those changes is to remove the liability of the Commonwealth to pay compensation for imported livestock destroyed in accordance with the Act where the animal has been in quarantine since importation. The Government's attitude is that that is an insurable risk, and again I can take quotations from the report of the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources which back the Government in that regard.

cause of its export orientation, Australia's livestock production is particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of exotic disease emergencies, and I have already given some figures on that. In response to a recognition that it is Australia's industries that stand to lose the most from an inefficient quarantine system, in recent years there have been a number of suggestions that the Commonwealth's administrative arrangements for quarantine should be reorganised to reflect the changed priorities which I have just set out. The suggested rearrangements were put forward

One of the major deficiences of the existing mainly in the report of the Senate Standing Com-

quarantine system relates to the administrative armittee on National Resources, but other reports

rangements. This is ignored by the Government in have dealt with this matter. The rearrangement

2064 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Quarantine Amendment Bill

referred to in the report relates to a formal link Mr Cunningham-I second the amendment

between agricultural quarantine and other Comand reserve my right to speak later.

monwealth responsibilities for agricultural matters.

Mr LLOYD (Murray) (8.19)-The honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin), who was

The Labor Government initiated a proposal for a unified quarantine service to be operated solely by the Commonwealth. It is not so much the Bill before the House but the so-called razor gang report which seems to want to put it almost entirely into the State sphere. A second proposal was put forward in 1977 by the Australian Agricultural Council that animal and plant quarantine should be given to the Department of Primary Industry. In early 1978 the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) advised that there would be no change in the existing arrangements. As I have already pointed out, the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources inquiry into the adequacy of quarantine concluded that an Australian quarantine service located in the Commonwealth Department of Primary Industry should be created. True to the Prime Minister's word, the Quarantine Amendment Bill does not incorporate that recommendation.

once tbe member for Macarthur, made the point that, when he was the member for Macarthur, in one of his early speeches in this place he made reference to the need for an animal health laboratory to be established at Geelong. My second or third speech in this House was a little similar in that I referred to the need for a maximum security quarantine station. As I had been a director of the largest artificial breeding co-operative in Australia. I had a considerable interest in the subject of animals and I have maintained that interest. I commend the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) on these amendments to the Quarantine Act. Together with the 1979 amendments, they indicate that great progress has been made by this Government in updating the Quarantine Act to make it more appropriate for our present circumstances.
I also want to commend the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources for its report on the adequacy of quarantine procedures. That

At the outset of these brief comments I said that we are not concerned very much about the administrative arrangements, except to say that the arguments are very strong. We are very concerned by what We read in the razor gang's report about handing over further functions to the States. We believe that the most important thing for Australia is to have a first rate quarantine service. Instead of the razor gang looking with an accountant's pen approach at how it can foist a few functions on to the States, we should be looking first of all at what is the best quarantine service for Australia and working out what the administrative arrangements should be. I believe that the Senate Committee looked at that. It proposed

has been quite a catalyst in the updating of necessary legislation. The Minister pointed out in his second reading speech that this legislation covers several distinct sections of the Quarantine Act. The Cocos (Keeling) Islands Territory quarantine arrangements need to be made appropriate prior to the arrival of the first shipment of cattle from North America which I understand will be in November of this year. Those arrangements provide additional powers for quarantine officers, remove compensation for animals which have to be destroyed at a quarantine station and generally implement the remaining recommendations of the Senate Committee which the Government considers it can actually implement.

another structure that did not diminish the ComThe Cocos (Keeling) Island Territory generally

monwealth's role but seemed to be much more must have adequate quarantine regulations if

sensible. Now that the razor gang's report has there is to be an effective working of the high se-

come down, I hope that the Minister in his reply curity quarantine station. I believe that is a very

to the various points made in the House will take appropriate part of the amendments. The ad-

up this point. Will the quarantine arrangements ditional powers which this legislation gives to

be the main concern of the Government or is it quarantine officers will give them the same

simply and cold-bloodedly trying to work out powers as Customs officers with the exception of

some way of getting rid of the quarantine service the power to order a body search. Officers should

and making the States pay for the officers now have adequate power to apprehend and con-

involved in quarantine surveillance? It is for those trol animals and plants which may be brought to

reasons that I moved my amendment, and I will Australia either legally or illegally by ship or other

not read it again. It is before honourable vessel. I particularly congratulate the Minister on

members.

his decision to amend the Act to require the mas-

ters of all ships and aircraft travelling to Australia

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-ls the to advise all those on board of Australia's quaran-

amendment seconded?

tine requirements. There has been a conscious

Quarantine AJnendment Bill

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2065

effori. over the last few years to inform Aush~~e this power a random quarantine search ad-

tralians and those on flights entering Australia of dItIonal to the self-declaration procedure should

the reasons for our Quarantine Act and to inform be introduced. It would please me to hear the

them of the requirements on flights into Australia. ,tvIinister ~tate whether that procedure is already

Generally the more that people are told the more m operatIon. On my recent return from Japan I

that people will co-operate.

saw n~ evidence of it at the Sydney airport. If it is

not bemg used at present I believe it is essential

Until now information for those flying into that this procedure be instituted if we are to have

Australia has been passive; that is, by pamphlet. A any effective quarantine procedure for entry to

considerable step forward is an authoritative anthis country.

nouncement by the captain of a vessel which is far more positive, effective and certain. There are two weaknesses in the system at the port of entry J want to refer to and draw to the Minister's attention. I believe adequate power already exists to overcome these two weaknesses. The first concerns the purchase of a souvenir overseas which is made from plants or animals, the entry of which will not be permitted for quarantine or endan-
gered species reasons. Recently I dealt with a case of this nature in which people tried to bring back stuffed tortoises from the Philippines. I was advised that travel agents have booklets which give to those leaving Australia details of what i.hey sh~uld or should not bring back. Unfortunately, qUlte often the person going overseas leaves Australia without being given such a booklet. I suggest to the Minister that the most likely person to purchase such a souvenir is an Australian tour-

Those whether

who are put in the quarantine it is because of self-declaration or

lrianne~

dom sampling, should be required randomly to

have a Customs search to overcome this wide-

spread feeling that in order to avoid Customs one

~hould put oneself into the quarantine line by stat-

mg that one has been on a farm somewhere. A

further Senate Committee recommendation to

which I wish to draw the attention of the

,tvIinister.-l realise it is not his responsibility but it

I~ mos.t Importa~t in the prosecution of quaran-

tme vlOlators-ls the Committee's reference to

the fact that Australian surveillance aircraft had

an unfort~nate habit of flying along the coast at

the same tIme every day. While they followed this

procedure everybody knew the time at which this

to?k place and adjusted their entry or exit from

thIS country accordingly.

ist. If that booklet could be given to tourists Mr MacKellarAnd watches.

together with their boarding pass-in other words it is forced into their hands at the time of departure when they are more likely to read and consider that sort of thing rather than relying on the travel agents giving them this booklet-this would have a beneficial effect. If my understanding of the presentation of that booklet is not correct I would welcome the Minister's correction.

Mr LLOYD-I believe some of them were even that regular. I hope that now -as this was
pointed out some time ago in that Committee
report-that problem has been overcome by some form of staggered or random flying. I would wel-
come the Minister's comment on this point. The rel~ted iss~es of development of the Cocos quarantme statIOn and the Australian National Ani-

The second and more serious problem with which I wish to deal is the passive and casual way ~n which people entering Australia and proceedmg through Customs direct themselves to the
quarantine section and the seemingly equally cas- ~al way in which those quarantine officers quesi.lOn those people. There is a widespread belief among passengers that the best way to beat Customs and avoid a baggage search is to get into the quarantine line because once they get into the quarantine line they are safe from Customs and can bring in all the illegal or over the limit goodies that they want to bring in. The Senate Committee report recommended that quarantine officers be

mal Health Laboratory at Geelong at last have become a reality or are on their way to reality a.fter ye~rs of discussion and debate. The quarantme station at Cocos is about to commence. The laboratory at Geelong is well under construction. These two centres were the subject of some controversy recently at the cattle council seminar on quarantine. The point was correctly made in reports on the seminar which I have read that
after .talking and planning for many years it is questJ.onable whether these facilities are now approprIate or even necessary. Professor Morris as reported in various newspapers, challenged their relevance and value.

given powers of search and that a separate ranThe honourable member for Werriwa has

dom sampling technique for quarantine pointed out that the Geelong laboratory is redun-

purposes-separate but similar to the random dant because of synthetic vaccines. However, my

searches for Customs purposes-be initiated. This understanding of the reportin the newspaper is

is a sensible suggestion. As quarantine officers that Professor Morris ignored a major function of

2066 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Quarantine Amendment Bill

the laboratory at Geelong which is the diagnosis of foot and mouth disease in cases such as the Tasmanian scare and the New Zealand scare. Irrespective of vaccines of any type, until the laboratory at Geelong is operating we will require the material to be sent to the Purbright laboratory in the United Kingdom and will experience time delay problems. Following upon that is the necessity for the development of particular strains of vaccines. This could be done more appropriately and quickly in this country if an outbreak ever occurs. The honourable member for Werriwa referred to the bad geographic positio!1 of the Cocos facility and the developments with semen and ova transplant technology et cetera. He pointed out also that semen can carry foot and mouth disease, bluetongue and other diseases of tremendous danger to this country. At least in the period ahead our best protection will be by obtaining live animals through Cocos.
Honourable members might remember the problems associated with the choice of the site for the animal quarantine station. It had to be sufficiently far away from the Australian mainland to be free of insect carriers et cetera. This brought with it the problem of under-utilisation because of costs. The geographical problem together with increased oil prices mean that transport costs to get an animal to Cocos are very high unless there is a full load. There would be problems also with the viability of bringing numbers of animals from a particular country or region and the fact that there is no backloading from Cocos. Putting aside the transport costs, I was reassured by the Minister's statement that due to the way in which the station is constructed and being managed the J973 estimates of operational costs will still apply. That is quite an achievement. I understand that due to this problem of transport costs the first consignment of cattle from Europe has been cancelled. There does appear to be a need for a co-ordinated transport operation to make, if we like, the best use of the station as possible. Perhaps, the Australian Registered Cattle Breeders Association could act in some co-ordinating capacity for the stud breeders groups or the commercial groups.
It is recognised that the Cocos (Keeling) Islands station probably will have sporadic use. Initially there will be utilisation from North America and western Europe. Then there will probably be another period of greater activity once Geelong opens for those breeds from Africa and elsewhere which are not considered safe to bring in at the present time. I am pleased that earlier problems with the priorities committee and disputes between stud breeders and animal

scientists on the question of priorities and use of the Cocos Islands have been satisfactorily overcome. I support the legislation and acknowledge the work of the Minister and the Department and after so many years the commencement of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands station.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (8.31)- Australia is one of the few countries that are virtually free of serious animal plagues, plant pests and disease. This could very well be because of the position of the country, because we are an island continent. That has given this country great advantages in the past. One of those great advantages of being an island continent no longer exists. We must realise that there have been changes in quarantine in that human disease is no longer the threat that it was when legislation on quarantine was first introduced. Exotic human diseases are rarely found at ports of entry because of the speed with which people are able to travel from place to place. Many factors have led to a changing philosophy in human quarantine in recent times. Medical science has advanced and, whilst quarantine is still vitally important, for humans it does not any longer have the same characteristics as quarantine does for animals.
The Quarantine Amendment Bill is almost totally related to animals and plants. In supporting the amendment moved by the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin), I am concerned at the changes that will take place with the implementation of the Lynch razor gang reportthe Review of Commonwealth Functions. The Government appears to be hell-bent on shifting responsibility to the States and to others to carry the costs of the burden. The Senate Standing Committee on National Resources considered in its report:
That in meeting the new challenges facing quarantine steps should be taken to improve the status of the quarantine service, and to increase public awareness of, and respect for, quarantine requirements.
I am sure that when that report was brought down the Senate Standing Committee was not intending to increase public awareness in the way that it has been in the last couple of weeks. I quote from a couple of reports in newspapers from Victoria. There were reports in newspapers from all over Australia. On 30 April 1981 the Sun had a headline: 'Womble hunt for thousands'. The article read:
The hamster hunt along the eastern Australian coast took on a new twist yesterday when it was learned up to 22,000 'wombles' could be involved.
Here we have a situation in the recent past-in the last week or two-where the quarantine measures of this country, the very nature of the

Quarantine Amendment Bill

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2067

health of human beings and of animals, have been placed at risk. On 29 April 198 I the Age stated:
Quarantine officials have seized more than 250 pet hamsters and gerbils in Melbourne, Brisbane and Caloundra which they believe could be infected with rabies and meningitis.
Rabies is a disease that this country is free of. Yet, we have a situation where we have these creatures in this country at the present time. They have been brought in illegally. That shows that somewhere along the line there has been a very bad breakdown in our quarantine situation.
I refer to a method that apparently this Government has decided to use to overcome this problem. 1 refer to a joint Press statement by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) and the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore). This apparently shows a new way of how we will protect this country with quarantine measures. The Press statement is headed: 'Children and parents asked to find hamsters'. The statement reads:
It is estimated that approximately 600 of the animals are at present in Australia. The Ministers said investigators had learnt that hamsters had been offered for sale in Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria in the guise of cartoon characters known as 'Wombles '.
A few questions need to be answered as to how these creatures were able to get into the country. Why were they able to spread so widely before anybody realised that the whole future perhaps of agriculture in this country had been placed at risk as well as the fact that rabies could be sprcad throughout the country? I think the Minister should clearly answer in this debate the question as to why those wombles-as they are called were able to get through the system. It shows a very poor weakness in the system and the way it works at the present time.
Mr Humphreys-They are laughing about it.
Mr CUNNINGHAM-They may laugh, but it is a very serious situation. I am sure that the public of Australia is taking a very serious interest in this. The messages I have been receiving show this. Luckily the public is doing this. Maybe we will find all the animals before they start to breed because they breed like rabbits. We know how many rabbits there are around the country.
I refer again to the report of the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources. It stated:
The creation of an Australian quarantine service located in the Commonwealth Department of Primary Industry would reflect the changing priorities of quarantine and elTectively link quarantine to the overall agricultural health responsibilities of the Commonwealth.
Whether the policy section of the Australian quarantine service is located in the Health Department or the Primary Industry Departmcnt is

not the crucial issue. There may be good reasons for a decision to move the service to the Department of Primary Industry for administration benefits. However, what is important is how the quarantine is managed. To me, the alarming fact is that this Government, by its obsession with cutting out spending which can be publicly accounted for and by transferring responsibilities to private enterprise, is placing agriculture in this country at risk. I quote again from the Minister's second reading speech. On page 6 he stated:
During coastal surveillance operations, a number of unauthorised landings in Australia have been reported. In the main, these breaches of quarantine legislation have been by foreign lishing vessels. These quarantine breaches by small craft in remote areas of Australia pose grave threats to the introduction of major exotic diseases.
Maybe they also allow wombles to get into the country. The Minister continued:
Foot and mouth disease, Newcastle disease and rabies are some of the diseases from which Australia is free but which are all well established in adjacent countries.
We would not think so from some of the actions of this Government. The Minister continued:
Much of our northern coastline of this country is backed by economically important livestock areas which are also abundantly populated with feral animals and insect vectors capable of transmitting any introduced exotic disease.
These are all very important statements. The Minister went on:
For this reason any reports of an authorised landing evoke a quarantine investigation of the landing place and appropriate measures to minimise the possibility of disease introduction.
The Minister mentioned coastal surveillance. Here, I think, we are seeing where the greatest weakness is. This Commonwealth Government, this Fraser Government, does not want to take its full responsibility. First of all, coastal surveillance is done now by private enterprise. It is done on a tender system which means that the people who are doing the surveillance are cutting costs according to their budgets as much as they possibly can because they have to make a profit.
That tender system leaves a very large weakness in the whole system. It is open to infiltration. The staff who work for the private companies cannot be vetted by anybody in any public position. If this function were done by a navy, army, air force or some government body there could be vetting of the staff. As we know, surveillance is done on the basis of a five-day week. It is not done at weekends. Everybody in Darwin knows just when the planes are flying. It would not be very hard for the staff of an organisation to let those who wanted to import things into Australia know when to do so. The Government is letting the country down by not taking its full responsibility, by handing this matter over to private enterprise.

2068 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Quarantine Amendment Bill

Looking aftcr the coastal surveillance of this country is not a private enterprise job. The planes fly set routes. Everybody knows what the routes are. Ask anybody in Darwin and they will soon say just when the planes are flying. It would not be very hard to bring in a boat load of wombles but we would need only a few because they breed like rabbits. I would like the Minister to tell us clearly how this legislation will improve our quarantine situation in any way at all. In the next paragraph of the Minister's second reading speech, he said:
Quarantine actions of this type have highlighted serious practical deficiencies in the relevant enforcement and penalty provisions of the Act.
It is fair enough that we should tighten up the Act, because it has weaknesses. But we have to catch the culprit before we can take him to court. If the surveillance system is to work on a roster of eight hours a day or consist of a run down the coast and back which everybody knows about I do not think that we will be using this Act very often to prosecute many people. They will very easily dodge the surveillance system. That is a very poor situation for the Government.
I have a few questions that the Minister can perhaps answer for me when he replies to the second reading debate. In the Senate Committee's report reference was made to the need for facilities for poultry as well as animals on the Cocos Islands. [ would like the Minister to let us know what is going on in that regard. Another question relates to an incident which has occurred in the last few days. A B52 bomber has landed in Darwin. Are those aircraft subject to quarantine? If so, will the officers of his Department who have to go on board to fumigate the aircraft be notified if the bombers are carrying nuclear weapons? I would also like the Minister to tell us his attitUde to the possibility of people entering Australia directly from Bali being treated as though they had been on a farm and having their shoes placed in disinfectant. The number of people coming to Australia from Bali could have very dangerous implications for Australia's quarantine laws. Australia's favourable disease status is of vital importance to its overseas trade in agricultural products. If we need proof of that we have only to look to the other side of the House to see who will be speaking in this debate tonight. Two members of the National Country Party, not the Liberal Party, will be speaking.
Freedom from major exotic diseases is a prerequisite for access to many markets which are of vital economic importance to this country. We have only to recall the range. of restrictions imposed on Australia's exports as a result of the

bluetongue scare in 1977-78. Freedom from exotic disease also enables many agricultural industries to minimise their costs of production. Being free of disease is a great asset for this country. 1 think it is the responsibility of the Federal Government to see that it stays that way. In recent years there have been a number of suggestions that the Commonwealth administrative arrangements for quarantine should be reorganised. The Labor Government of 1972 to 1975 initiated proposals for a unified quarantine service operated solely by the Commonwealth. The reason that the Opposition has moved this amendment this evening is that it is concerned that the Government seems hell-bent on switching functions to the States and not picking up its own responsibilities. Exports worth $5,000m depend on the Government's taking-up its responsibilities in respect of quarantine. Let us consider the seriousness of what could happen if we had a plague of hamsters and gerbils running around the country like rabbits. Our total quarantine situation could be placed in jeopardy. Those animals would travel, breed and spread disease. The so called Fraser federalism or razor gang proposals do not equate with a sensible approach to quarantine. An industry with exports in excess of $5,000m should be able to rely on Commonwealth support. It should not be fragmented and handed to private enterprise or broken up in such a way that there is no security. Another Bill relating to the beef industry will be introduced in this session. That industry has been handed $118m in concessions over the last three or four years. If the Commonwealth can make handouts to the industry for political purposes, surely it can make money available to guarantee the future of the industry. Money needs to be invested by the Commonwealth to guarantee the agricultural industry and the health of the people of this country. It is a shame that this Government is prepared to opt out of its responsibilities. I solidly support the amendment moved by the honourable member
for Werriwa.
Mr COWAN (Lyne) (8.46)-1 would like briefly to support the Quarantine Amendment Bill and to compliment the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) on bringing it before the House. I appreciate that the Opposition has moved an amendment to the Bill but, broadly speaking, we are all in accord with one thing, and that is that we must jealously guard the stock and the people of Australia in our quarantine measures. The amendments in the Bill before the House are principally concerned with tightening up the Act. They give to the officers concerned greater powers in relation to inspections. I am vitally concerned

Quarantine Amendment Bill

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2069

with the operation of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands arrival, but as far as we are concerned they are not

quarantine station. Over the years we have witadequate.

nessed our beef and dairy cattle breeders import-

ing large quantities of semem. We appreciate that

we are unable to import livestock from most of

the primary producing countries. This legislation

will enable us to do so.

.

We feel that it is important that this Act is tightened up. The Government appreciates the responsibility it has to look after the quarantine of this country. I think that the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) said that if foot and

We cannot let this Bill pass without emphasismouth disease broke out in Australia it would cost

ing its very great importance to the primary indusus $2,500m in the first year. There is no need to

tries of Australia. It tightens our quarantine emphasise that this is basically a primary produc-

measures and gives the people of Australia an ing country and that we have to protect and assist

awareness of their responsibilities in relation to in the building up of our national herds and plant

them. We are virtually free of the major diseases life. We must not forget that a growing number of

that are present in most other countries. Those tourists visit Australia yearly, and that greater

diseases are very close to our shores, not so much numbers of these are coming from countries to

in Papua New Guinea, but within a couple of our north. I am very pleased that the Minister has

hours by air and a day or so by ship. We are trying indicated in the Bill that more information will be

to keep out exotic diseases such as bluetongue and available to people entering Australia, both by

foot and mouth. We cannot afford to be careless. plane and by ship, on the quarantine measures we

are conduting.

.

Mr Scott-You cannot hand over responsi-

bility to the States.

There is one particular matter appertaining to quarantine that I would like to stress this evening.

Mr COWAN-The honourable member Last Thursday night I spoke on the adjournment

should not interrupt. The honourable member for debate about the dangers one can see in relation to

McMillan (Mr Cunningham) spent most of his the disposal of garbage from visiting ships, ap-

speech not only criticising the Prime Minister (Mr preciating the fact that these ships carry with

Malcolm Fraser) but also talking about the gerthem food from their countries of origin. I stressed

bils that we have been reading about in the Press the point then that in the Newcastle area one can

of late. If honourable members opposite were to generally see at any time anything between a

concentrate on agriculture, as the honourable dozen to 4O-odd large container ships anchored

member did only towards the end of his speech, off the harbour. If one goes to Wollongong, Port

there might be some substance in what they say. Kembla and, I dare say, other ports around

I stress that this country has a very long coastline. From Geraldton to Cairns is only half the coastline of Australia. It takes tremendous surveillance to protect us from ships and people coming into Australia. I do not agree with the honourable member for McMillan, who majntained that surveillance is not being conducted in a proper manner. Certainly, we would all like to see greater surveillance of the Australian coastline, whether it be in the north or the south. My information is that these surveillance flights are staggered. It is the Government's policy that they be carried out by private enterprise in most cases. That is a better way to carry out this task because these private enterprises have the aircraft and the

Australia, one will find the same situation. I have been informed that the quarantine measures ensure that the garbage is sprayed before it leaves the ships. These ships that are at anchorage at various ports around Australia and those traversing our coastline are tipping garbage into the sea. That garbage is landing on our shores. I know that there are wild pigs and wild dogs in the Newcastle area because it is adjacent to bush land which runs to the forestry land in the areas of the Great Dividing Range. These pigs and dogs are able to get through to the coast and, if exotic disease were contained within the ships' garbage, it would certainly be spread around the Australian countryside.

facilities to do it. I do not think we can expect our I was informed only this afternoon that it is the

armed forces to carry out this necessary work feeling of the quarantine authorities that the gar-

around the entire Australian coastline. The bage found in these regions is basically from the

Government is concerned about the number of Newcastle area and not from the ships. This is

boats under 45 metres in length landing on the hard to believe because only the other day the

shores of Australia with people from other lands shire council concerned informed me that it be-

on board. They land here without letting us know lieved after inspecting the area that the majority

before hand. I appreciate that under this Act of the garbage came from the boats that were

there are quarantine measures carried out on their anchored off-shore. I stress that point because I

2070 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Quarantine Amendment Bill

believe it is very important that we are aware of this problem.
I. suppose that ships are basically the means by whIch we can expect diseases and animals to be brought into Australia. When I speak of animals I mean poultry. There have been reports that poultry has been landed on the shores of Australia from some of the fishing vessels from the East that have been fishing off-shore. Naturally, these vessels are hard to detect. Although quarantine measures are conducted on container ships which are tied up at the wharves in any of the ports of Australia, there is a possibility that unless a close inspection is made, rats and other animals from the ships will trot off onto the wharves, get onto the trucks and distribute themselves around the farmlands and cities of Australia. We have to be aware of these things. I can assure honourable members that any measures that this Government can take to strengthen this Quarantine Act will be very important to the primary producers of Australia. They look to us to take the maximum measures that we possibly can to ensure that these measures are taken.
I said something earlier concerning the Cocos (Keeling) Islands quarantine station. As the honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) said earlier, the station will be open from approximate.ly November. I know that this is welcomed partIcularly by the breeders of pure bred animals within Australia. Previously, semen imported from America had to come through great Britain and to comply with its quarantine regulations. It was required to remain in quarantine for two years before it was allowed to come into Australia. Although the Cocos (Keeling) Islands station at this time does not actually have the facilities for the quarantine of semen, it certainly does have the facilities for the quarantine of animals. The breeders of this country will be able to import beef stock, dairy stock and horses from the best breeds throughout the world. With artificially inseminated semen being available we have been able to improve the herds and we will certainly be able to do more so in the future.
When the Minister is replying I ask him to say something about the future plans of the Department of Health so far as the quarantine of AI semen from overseas is concerned, both for the dairy herds and for the beef herds of Australia. I think many of our growers are interested to know just what the future will be in this respect. As I said earlier, this Bill contains most important amendments to a very important Act and certainly gives to the officers of the Department concerned every assurance on the tightening up they need. It brings the responsibility to the State, and

rightfully so. It is a matter of philosophy as to whether the Commonwealth should control these things, and whether it should be the only body in this field. Certainly, it is the duty of the Commonwealth to initiate the legislation. But we believe that the experts in the various departments of agriculture in our States are the people who understand on the farm agriculture and the measures that have to be taken to protect it.
Mr Scott-You are wrong. That is not why the Government is handing responsibility to the States.
Mr COWAN-The honourable member wants to get his facts right. I am afraid he is not correct on these things. I welcome this Bill, as I am sure do the bulk of Australians.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (8.58)-Quarantine is too important a matter to be the subject of small party debate. Some very serious concern has been shown in this House about its administration and effectiveness. I have to challenge the suggestions of the previous speaker, the honourable member for Lyne (Mr Cowan), that the present scrutiny of the Australian coastline is satisfactory. It is anything but satisfactory. Substantial proportions of the Australian coast are policed in the most cursory manner. I understand the difficulties associated with extending that policing in any form. I want to make one request of the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar), and that is that he makes a clear statement of the Government's intentions under the razor gang's recommendations of handing quarantine facilities over to the States. If it did that it would be a disaster for primary industry in Australia because the States are neither competent nor capable of carrying out that function, nor would the State governments expend the funds necessary to do it properly. The honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) would probably confirm this, but in Victoria and New South Wales there are quarantine safeguards regarding fruit fly. At Yarrawonga there are two bridges over the Murray River with approximately the same distance-physical, not political-between them as now exists between me and the honourable member for Murray. One bridge is manned from nine until five and the other is not manned at all. So those who do want to bring in a case of oranges or some other goods--
Mr Good luck-Or apples!
Mr SCHOLES-No, not apples, oranges. We fixed the apples. They have to get across the sea, and the Commonwealth inspects them. Quite seriously, there is no real quarantine facility nor capacity. Those who often walk down the concourse at Melbourne airport will be aware that

Quarantine Amendment Bill

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2071

the last time it was manned for quarantine purposes was in about 1966. One is asked to comply with regulations on an honour system. Quarantine is important. The problems which this Parliament experienced over a number of years largely arose out of the Toomer case but also out of the maladministration which was disclosed in the numbers of inquiries which took place into that case. They indicated quite clearly that the Commonwealth must handle the quarantine laws in Australia. It is not a matter which can be left to some political, theoretical position. It is real. Damage that would be done from any back-off would also be real. In the past the quarantine laws have not been administered as well as they should nor as tightly as they should. That is not the fault of any government. We have had problems over a long period with quarantine. It is a difficult matter.
I ask the Minister to assure the House that the Commonwealth intends to accept its responsibilities to protect Australia from the dangers of breaches of quarantine. I do not agree that the policing of the Australian coastline is satisfactory. I wish to raise a question which was raised by the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham). A civil aircraft landing in Australia is sprayed for insects and all other materials. I do not intend to labour the point, but I want to know whether military aircraft are subject to the same quarantine provisions.
Mr MacKELLAR (WarringahMinister for Health) (9.4)-1 thank all ofthose who took part in the debate this evening. I believe, as all speakers have said, that this is a most important matter. The Government is committed to a strong and efficient quarantine service. That is demonstrated by the comprehensive Bill before the House which must continue to play an effective and major role in Australia's social and economic well-being. We are all concerned to ensure that the quarantine service is strong and effective and that it does protect Australia's plant and livestock industries as well as our health. I assure the House that no decisions will be made by the Government which would weaken the quarantine service or compromise the quarantine controls on which we, as a nation, rely so heavily.
The report of the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources, which has been mentioned by various speakers, was welcomed by the Government. This was made abundantly clear in the Government's response which was tabled in another place in September 1980. This response, I remind honourable members, indicated acceptance of substantially all of the Senate Committee's recommendations. The Senate Standing Committee on National Resources strongly

endorsed the long-established practice of delegation of animal and plant operational quarantine functions to the States. The Committee states in the summary of the report that:
The delegated role of the States in undertaking the operational role in respect of plant and animal quarantine has been very successful and should be continued.
We on this side of the House do not have the contempt for State governments and State administrations which is very evident in the contributions which have been made by honourable members opposite. But, in view of that point, it must therefore be regarded as totally responsible and in accordance with the spirit of the Senate Committee report to examine the feasibility-l underline that statement, to examine the feasibility-of extending an arrangement which the Senate Committee so heartily endorsed. I would also like to make brief reference to page 59 of the Standing Committee report which states, in respect of delegations to the States, that:
. . . the advantages of State involvement are numerous-particularly access to expert local knowledge, cooperation in policy making, and uniting operational responsibility for quarantine and disease control within the States.
I remind the House that, as stated in my second reading speech, the amendments contained in the Bill, taken in conjunction with the amendments effected in the Quarantine Amendment Act 1979, do meet the specific concern raised by the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources which is appropriate to quarantine legislation. Some other matters were raised by honourable members. The honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) mentioned a number of matters. After his speech he asked me what would happen in relation to avian genetic material. I can assure him that the matter is under active consideration at present. It will not be going to the Cocos (Keeling) Islands quarantine station. We are looking at a mainland station for quarantine requirements in relation to the importation of avian material.
I am grateful to the honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) for his contribution to the debate. He injected a note of perhaps unintentional levity when he spoke about staggered and random fiying. I hope that it was not too staggered or random in the surveillance of the Australian coastline. I take the point that he was making. We do not need to have and we do not have the situation in which planes are undertaking surveillance of the Australian coastline at the same time each day. The point is well taken, and was well taken some time ago and has been very much understood and catered for by the arrangements which are presently in place. He mentioned also the

2072 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Quarantine Amendment Bill

question of random checks of people coming into Australia through airports and particularly those who claim to have been in contact with farm animals or farm material. In fact, random checks are made of all passengers coming through Australian airports. So we are alive to the situation which has been mentioned by the honourable member for Murray and we seek to overcome any procedures which would allow a person or persons to try to get around our quarantine procedures.
The honourable member for Werriwa said that it is only by good luck that Australia has been so successful in relation to quarantine matters. !fit is only good luck that we have been successful then we have had good luck for a long time. I think the runs on the board are such that we can truthfully claim that the quarantine procedures are, in fact, working remarkably well. The honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) was concerned about animals he called wombles. Like so many people in the Australian Labor Party he has been reading a lot of fairy stories lately. There are no such things as wombles. They exist in people's imagination. In fact, there are animals called hamsters and gerbils. He is worried about their breeding like rabbits, but, in fact, they breed a little bit more quickly than rabbits. We are extremely concerned about this question of hamsters and gerbils. There has been no breakdown in quarantine arrangements. It is easier for persons operating outside the law to hide a hamster, which is being sold as a womble, in Australia than it is to detect it. It is a fairly small animal, after all. It is unrealistic to expect that any quarantine system could exclude all risks at the point of entry. What is essential is that once a risk is detected there is a rapid follow-up to overcome that situation.
We have received information which suggests that the joint Commonwealth-State control program has been extremely effective in apprehending-if one can use that term about these small animals-or in bringing to light the majority of these animals. I stress that our task is to respond quickly and effectively to any disease situation which does arise. This has been done and is being done. Further events are in the pipeline which, I believe, will add to the success of the campaign which has already been undertaken.
The honourable member for McMillan also raised the question of B52 bombers, and that point was echoed later by the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes). I would just like to assure these honourable gentlemen and the House that B52 bombers are subject to quarantine regulations

and are routinely disinfected. We are not going to abandon our quarantine procedures lightly or
inadvisedly. In fact, and r make this point again,
the quarantine procedures have been extremely successful over the years, and we will ensure that we keep those successful quarantine procedures.
I am grateful to the honourable member for Lyne (Mr Cowan), who has had extensive experience in this area as a State member of parliament. I am quite sure he would not agree with any of the denigratory remarks about State governments which emanated from the Opposition side of the House. The honourable member for Corio talked about the question of handing over quarantine requirements to the States. I have outlined the situation which applies, and I think that that situation is a totally responsible one. It is one which has at its heart the continued operation of an effective quarantine organisation.
The honourable member for Werriwa raised the question of the location of the administration of the quarantine system. Of course, the administrative arrangements are a matter for the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). However, I point out that there are close links between human health, human quarantine and agricultural quarantine. Essentially, these links exist hecause people, goods, materials, animals and plants and the vessels or aircraft in which they arrive and travel are possible avenues of diseases of humans, animals or plants. It is a fact that unfortunately many diseases are transmissable between animals and man by a variety of means. The factors I have outlined demand co-ordination of policies, operational strategies and procedures between all the branches of quarantine, and that need is catered for in a simple, all-embracing Quarantine Act. I believe it is very well catered for under the current arrangements.
I do not think it is fair to say,' as has been implied by the honourable member for Werriwa, that we have only been lucky. I think great credit is due to those people who over the years have operated the quarantine service in Australia. That is in no sense a complacent statement. I am as much aware as anybody of the dangers of the introduction into this country of exotic plant and animal diseases and human diseases. As long as I have responsibility for the quarantine service I will be doing all I, can to prevent any such introduction.
Question put-
That the words proposed to be omitted (Mr Kerin's amendment) stand part of the question.

Quarantine Amendment Bill

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

66

Noes

44

Majority

22

AYES
Adermann. A. E Anthony.J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney.R.J Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield. J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey. M. H. Burr, M.A. Cadman. A. G. Cameront Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton. J. J. Chapman.H. G.P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D:B. Dean,A.G. Dobie. J. D. M. Edwards. H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife. W.C. Fisher, P. S. Giles. G. O-H. Good luck. B. J. Hall. Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks. N.J. Hodges. J. C. (Teller) Hodgman. W. M. Howard. J. W. Hunt.R.J.D.

Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W.
Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C.
Killen,D.J.
Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip
MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. (Teller) McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian
Rocher, A. C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F; Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A.
Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W.
Viner,R.L White,P.N.D. Wilson, J. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley. K. C. Blewett.N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown. Robert Campbell.G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B.. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins,J. S. Duffy, M. J;, Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R.J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller)
Jones"Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R. J. Kent,L. .
Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. MiIton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Uren, T. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young, M.J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H Connolly, D. M.

Darling, E. E. Innes, U. E. ,

Question so resolved.in the affirmative.

Amendment negatived.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2073
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
The Bill.
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health) (9.21 )-by leave-I move:
(1) In clause 15, page 6. line 25, omit "and".
(2) In clause 15. page 6, after paragraph (b) insert the following word and paragraph:
"and (c) by adding at the end thereof the following sub-section:
"(2) The'master of an overseas vessel arriving in Australia or the Cocos Islands shall not, except by reason of stress of weat,her or for other reasonable cal!se, cause or permit the vessel to be-
(a) beached in Australia or the Cocos Islands. as the case may be; or
(b) moored, anchored or otherwise secured in waters on the landward side of the low-water mark around the shore of the continent, or an island. forming part of Australia or of an island forming part of the Cocos Islands, as the case maybe.
otherwise than at a port.
Penalty: $5,000 or imprisonment for 2 years.".
Section 20 of the Quarantine Act makes it an offence for the master of an overseas vessel arriving in Australia to enter any port other than a port which has been declared to be a first port of entry. Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to extend those provisions to the Cocos (Keeling) Islands. The further amendment would insert an additional paragraph (c) in clause 15 of the Bill to extend the provisions of section 20 to make it an offence also for the master of an overseas vessel to beach the vessel or to anchor or moor the vessel above the low water mark around the shore of Australia or the Cocos (Keeling) Islands, excepting from stress of weather or other reasonable cause. This amendment would ensure that the detention and forfeiture provisions provided in clause 38 of the Bill would adequately cover all unauthorised landings in Australia or the Cocos (Keeling) Islands that preserita quarantine risk. I commend the amendments to the Committee.
Amendments agreed to.
Bill, as amended, agreed to.
Bill reported with amendments; report-by leave-adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr MacKellar)-by leave-read a third time.
HEALTH FUNDING
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health)-by leave-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a short amendment to an answer that I

2074 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Census and Statistics Amendment

provided to the House earlier in the day. I answered a question asked by the honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent) in relation to Aboriginal health centres, women's refuges and the family planning program. I feel that my reply in relation to the family planning program may have been a little unclear. Therefore, I would like to clarify the position of the program under the new health funding arrangements. Whilst it is true to say, as I said, that the family planning program comes within the Community Health Program, it is also a national program and therefore will not be funded through general revenue grants. This program will continue to be directly funded in the next financial year by the Commonwealth Government. As stated this afternoon, women's refuges will be funded in future through the general revenue grants. A statement on Aboriginal medical assistance will be made to this House at a later time.
CENSUS AND STATISTICS AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 30 April, on motion by MrHoward:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (9.25)-The Census and Statistics Amendment Bill seeks to amend the Census and Statistics Act to give effect to some of the recommendations on privacy in the census made by the Law Reform Commission some two years ago. The Government, through the Treasurer (Mr Howard), commented in November 1979 on these recommendations. The Bill gives legislative effect to those parts of the recommendations which the Government sees fit to adopt. The principal amendments involved are designed to make clear that Australian Bureau of Statistics staff-collectors and interviewersinvolved in the census are bound by the secrecy provision of the Act. It ensures that former officers of the Bureau are bound by the secrecy provisions.

from $100 to $1,000 or six months gaol or both. These large increases in penalty are obviously designed to ensure that in fact we have a census which accurately reflects the real situation in the nation. It seeks to ensure that we get full compliance by the population with the census and that the information provided is accurate and correct.
However, the increase in fines is very considerable and has given the Opposition some concern. We have decided not to oppose the legislation, bearing in mind the extreme importance of ensuring that the census is in fact very accurate and able to be relied on. However, the Law Reform Commission recommended in another report a general review of penalties applying in all Federal law to make them consistent. In report No. 15 of the Law Reform Commission entitled 'Sentencing of Federal Offenders', recommendation 24 called for a sentencing council to be established to consider standardising penalties for Federal olfences. At present there are no clear standards for setting penalties; it is simply a rule of thumb. This is clearly not sufficiently specific to provide a rigorous, fair and equitable basis for setting penalties.
The Bill fails to give effect to some of the recommendations of the Law Reform Commission on privacy in the census. I wish to refer to two of those recommendations which have not been adopted by the Government. The first of those is that census returns should be kept in the Archives with access, for most purposes, prohibited for 75 years. The second is that the precise wording of census questions should be included in regulations so they can be debated by Parliament. The second recommendation is one which does not concern us so much. I think it is regrettable that the Government did not adopt it, but the Opposition is not particularly upset about the fact that it is not in the legislation. I note that in a statement made by the Treasurer in November 1979 it was indicated that perhaps at some future date, for the next census, the Government would adopt this recommendation.

The Bill substantially upgrades all penalties, as the Law Reform Commission recommended although it did not recommend any particular level of penalty to be applied. In fact, the increases in penalty are quite substantial. For failure to supply information to a census collector, failure to fill in a census form or refusal to answer all questions asked by Bureau officers the penalty is increased from $20 to $500, which is a very sub-
stantial increase indeed. For unauthorised disclosure of census information by Bureau officers or for supplying false information on a census form or in answer to a census officer the fine is increased

The other recommendation is of more importance. It is that returns should be kept in the Archives with possible access to them for medical purposes within 75 years. The fact is that at present Australia does not keep the census form returns. We simply destroy them. Up until 1971 we kept the census forms for the previous two censuses but in 1971 the Government decided to destroy all previous census records, and after the
1971 census had been processed the records for that census also were destroyed. In 1976 the census was, of course, only half processed as an economy measure-an absurd economy if ever I have

CenSllS and Statistics Amendment

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2075

seen oneand then all the returns were destroyed. So, we have had a history in the last decade or so of not keeping our census records, of destroying the census returns, and the only records of censuses are those which are compiled on the computer tapes and in the documents published from the original census returns.
Identified census returns would be of obvious benefit to historical, genealogical and sociological research because they would provide a unique snapshot of the Australian society at the particular time when the census is taken. I do not think it needs elaboration from me to sec that in future years it may be of great benefit to researchers to be able to go back to the original documents and analyse them to get a much better idea of society at the time than would be available from the tabulations made by us now. In fact, the idea of keeping the census forms in the past -when we kept themas 1 said, for the two previous censuses up until 197 J--was to enable us to make further cross-tabulations after the original crosstabulations had been made if it seemed sensible to do so later. Of course, in future years when we may wish to make those cross-tabulations in respect of years past we will not be able to do it because we will have destroyed the records. Obviously it would be of benefit for us in that regard but also, and probably much more importantly, it would be of benefit for researchers in the historical, genealogical and sociological areas to be able
to make those researches. r am here talking of
many years hence.
It has also been pointed out by the Law Reform Commission that census returns can be of great benefit for environmental medical research. It mentions in its report an example of the way in which that environmental medical research can be assisted by identified census returns. The evidence to which it refers was given to the United States House of Representatives Sub-committee on Census and the Population in 1975. On page 38 of the Law Reform Commission report on privacy and the census, it states:
The evidence examined by the House Committee included examples of the medical research uses to which census information might bc pul. A simple example is provided by the difficulties associated with proper location of cancer concentrations Chot spots') in the United States.
The Commission then quotes the United States House of Representatives committee report, which states:
For some 'hot spots', the explanation is widespread pollution by industry; for others, direct hazards on the joh. Other 'hot spots' are difficult to interpret for several reasons. One reason that demonstrates the need for census data relates to the extreme mobility of the US. people. The latent period for cancer is known to be long; that is, in man, ten to thirty years

may pass from the time cancer is induced by an agent to the time it appears clinically. 1f a twenty-year-old man had livcd for years under the carcinogenic plume of a smelter, then moved to Los Angeles and, five years later, died of lung cancer, Los Angeles would be credited with a case oflung cancer. Under present regulations, his earlier residence-the one more relevant to the cause of his cancer-would be unknown. Census data may help resolve this difficulty.
The Law Reform Commission continues:
In a similar manner, identified census information might supply crucial information in the study of the relationship between cancer, on the one hand, and occupational hazards and hereditary factors, on the other. One prominent cancer specialist went so far as to say that 'it is only by relating medical information on individuals to census information that proper epidemiological studies can be undertaken'.
It is quite obvious from that quotation from the Law Reform Commission report and from the other evidence which is given in the report that environmental medical research could be greatly assisted by access to identified census returns. Yet, here we are in this country destroying our census returns as soon as we have processed them in the way that we do, by putting them on to computer tapes and also by publishing various reports.
Because of the great potential benefit of identified census records for these purposes, the Law Reform Commission recommended that they be left in the Archives with access forbidden for 75 years except for medical research purposes, when such information could clearly be of assistance, and made available on a strictly controlled basis to protect privacy. It recommended that the Director-General of Archives be given discretion to allow access for approved medical research within the 75-year period. In regard to that recommendation, the Law Reform Commission states:
The Commission recommends that the Director-General of Archives should be given discretion to allow access for approved medical research within the 75-year period. In all cases, access should be subject to such terms and conditions as to use and disclosure of the information as the Director General lays down. In the case of access within the lapse period, unauthorised disclosure to third parties should be totally prohibited. A breach of the conditions laid down by the Director-General should be punishable as a serious offence, in the same manner as unauthorised disclosure of census information by an officer of the Bureau. In this manner, the confidentiality of identified census information should be ensured.
That recommendation seems very reasonable. It seems to be a fair balance between the important aims of protecting the privacy of the individual and of enabling socially beneficial research to be conducted. At present we simply cannot ensure that socially beneficial research can be conducted in the future, because the identified information is destroyed. However, even if one objects to any access being allowed for any purpose within a 75-year period, surely it is not unreasonable to

2076 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Census and Statistics Amendment

keep the records and allow access after such a period.
We should realise that our practice of destroying census records is not normal in other COUlltries. In Canada, the United States and the United Kingdom, all census forms are preserved. In New Zealand, every second census is retained indefinitely. In the United States, census forms are made available for historical, genealogical, sociological and medical research after 72 years. There have been various recommendations that for medical purposes the access should be available sooner than that. In the United Kingdom a similar situation applies, but after 100 years. Here we simply destroy our records. Certainly, this guarantees privacy but it destroys a unique opportunity for future research. In our view it is not necessary to destroy census records in order to ensure privacy. Accordingly, we agree with the Law Reform Commission recommendation. I move as a second reading amendment:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not declining to give the Bill a second reading, the House is of the opinion that the Bill is deficient in that it fails to give effect to the recommendation of the Australian Law Reform Commission's Report 'Privacy and the census' that indentified census information should be held in Archives with access forbidden for 75 years, except for strictly limited access for purposes of medical research'.
It is not surprising that a Government which is so uncaring about preserving valuable research material should also be uncaring about gathering statistics to enable worthwhile contemporary research to be conducted and about information relating to the workings of our society being made available. The Fraser Government has shown its lack of concern in this regard in various ways--for example, by processing only half of the 1976 census so that it was not a full census at .all but simply a large sample and therefore subject to sampling error. Since many other research exercises are based on census material, if the census material has some error then the error which can occur in the subsequent research is exacerbated. A very serious destruction of the accuracy of census records occurred at that time in order to save $2m. An amount of $2m is an awfully small portion of total expenditure. To destroy the accuracy of the census to save such a small amount was, in our view, a disgusting activity by the Government.
The Government has also shown its lack of concern for ensuring full information by refusing to allow the Bureau to conduct various planned surveys. One of those was the consumer finance and expenditure survey which was planned when this Government came into office. This would

have provided invaluable material. This Government has forced the Bureau of Statistics to abandon statistics on foreign ownership and control so we will not know from now on-we have nol known even for the last couple of years-to what extent our industry and resources are foreign owned and controlled. The Government does not want us to know the extent to which we are foreign owned and controlled.
More recently, we have seen the razor gang's decision that 27 series of statistics be discontinued and another 29 be reviewed. Of the 27 to be scrapped there are certainly quite a few which are fairly inconsequential. I do not want to be seen to be going in to bat hard, for instance, in relation to the survey on rock lobsters which are in cold storage in Western Australia. J do not find that particularly helpful, but perhaps some people in the community regard that as an important series. I do not object vehemently to the scrapping of a series such as that or a series on eggs set and chickens hatched.
Some are more important. For instance, included in that 27 series to be scrapped are five series relating to real estate: Transfers and conveyances and mortgages or real estate mortgages of real estate in Victoria, real estate transactions in New South Wales, land for housing in New South Wales and sales of land and houses in New South Wales. We simply do not have enough information in this country about real estate. To be scrapping a series on real estate is, in our view, not wise or sensible. It is also interesting to note that in the group of series to be discontinued is one on the production of minerals and mineral products. I find it amazing that at a time when we are moving into what we are told is a resources boom the Government is scrapping the collection of statistics on minerals and mineral products. It seems an absolutely extraordinary series to scrap. I would have thought it was a very important series to continue to compile. The same comments could be made about the series on forestry and workers compensation.
In the group of 29 series which are to be reviewed, there are many which I believe to be worthwhile. For instance, the survey of selected private pensions funds seems to me to compile very important information. There is not nearly enough information available at present about pension funds in Australia. To be scrapping one of the few sources of information which we have in this area seems extremely unwise. The agricultural census is to be reviewed. The agricultural census, surely, is important. I would have thought that all members of the National Country Party would have been very concerned to ensure that an

Censlls and Statistics Amendment

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATlVES 2077

agricultural census was retained. Apparently they are quite happy to see it scrapped and to know much less about the agricultural industry. The life insurance series is to be reviewed. Life insurance is surely an important aspect of our society. We should know what is happening in this area. We will not know to anything like the degree that we should what is going on if life insurance statistics are no longer compiled.
Then we have the labour costs survey. The labour costs survey is to be reviewed by this Government. The Government insisted that the Bureau undertake a labour costs survey last year. The Bureau was anxious not to rush into such a survey although, as I understand it, it was not unwilling to undertake such a survey eventually. The Bureau did not want to be pushed into it because it had not had time to prepare properly for it. It was forced by the Government to rush into that survey during the latter part of last year without being able to refine its questionnaire and without being able to undertake a pilot survey, with the result that the survey has been an absolute shambles. As [ understand it only some 30 per cent of the returns are useable. An enormous number of complaints were received from businesses about the difficulty they had in following the questionnaire and so on. This was all because the Bureau was pushed into conducting the survey by the Government. Presumably the Government wanted to get information which it thought it could use against the unions in national wage cases. Now, having forced the Bureau to undertake a survey in a hurried and highly unsatisfactory way the Government has announced that it will review that survey.
The fact is that we need much more information that we have at present. Ralph Nader was right when he said that information is the currency of democracy. Governments which hide information from their people lose the right to be able to claim that they are democratic governments. In our view, very important statistics about our society are not being made available to the Australian people. Unless they are made available to the Australian people we cannot know what is going on, nor can the Government properly conduct the affairs of the nation if it does not fully understand the nature of society and the economy which it is administering. It is extremely important in our view that we have a greatly increased list of statistical series and collections.
I mention some of those statistics which we regard as being important to collect because they represent enormous gaps in our statistical collections at the present time. One of these is integrated economic censuses and surveys which

are required annually for all industries. We need to know what is happening in each industry. Another is employment statistics by industry and occupation. We need detailed information on employment levels by industry and occupation at least quarterly. The previous source on employment levels, civilian employees, is no longer published. I understand that it is compiled by the Bureau but the government will not allow the Bureau to publish the figures. This is an extraordinary situation. The reason the Government will not publish them is that the figures coming out of this series do not show anything like as large an increase in employment as those figures coming out of the labour force series. Therefore, this series was scrapped. We do need these figures to be provided on a basis that I have mentioned; that is, by industry and occupations and at least quarterly. We cannot simply rely on information which is available from the labour force surveys.
In regard to unemployment, we need details of unemployment on a monthly seasonally adjusted basis instead of having to rely on the labour force survey as it is at present. It would be useful also to have the figures published on a regional basis. That information is not supplied at present. I now refer to the ownership of wealth. There are no statistics in Australia on the ownership of wealth. We need information on the amount, distribution and type of assets which individuals and families own so that we can see how our society is structured-how equal or unequal the distribution of wealth in this country is. Surely it is of importance to governments and the nation at large to know that kind of information. The same situation applies with respect to income distribution. Statistics are required annually on the level and source of income, family type and number of dependants, particularly in respect of pensioners and beneficiaries. We need statistics on household expenditure. The last survey was conducted in 1975-76. We need data to be collected on a more regular basis than every five or six years. 1 think no survey is underway currently. Certainly, it would be desirable to have such information annually.
I now refer to the consumer price index. Most other Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries publish a consumer price index every month. Australia publishes its consumer price index every quarter. We are one of the very few countries that do not provide monthly consumer price index figures. We have to wait for three months to find out what our inflation rate is, whereas other countries can monitor that movement on a monthly basis. In regard to labour costs, we need statistics on non-wage

2078 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Census and Statistics Amendment

labour costs which are required to assess the effects of changes in employment conditions. We need statistics on industrial accidents and absenteeism. Uniform statistics need to be collected on time lost through industrial accidents. There is no uniformity in the current statistics. Statistics are ~equired on working days lost through absenteeIsm. We need statistics on occupational skills. Statistics are required on occupational skills possessed by the labour force. I have already mentioned foreign ownership and control of our in-
?ustry and resources. The absence of those figures IS an absolute scandal. It is absolutely essential that those figures are compiled.

Comprehensive statistics on capital raised in

Australia and capital raised overseas. by Aus-

tni.lian corporations are required. Present stat-

istics are restricted to listed companies and there-

fore, are inadequate. We need complete statistics

on the amounts borrowed by levels of government

and types of borrowings because current infor-

mation on government borrowings is not ad-

equate. We need to know the level of government

debt and interest liability of all sections of govern-

ment. need

s.Wt~titihsticr~egoanrd.

to the

goopv~erarntimoensnt

offinasntacte~towrey

authontles. LIttle mformation is available about

statutory authorities at present. It would be desir-

able to have the national accounts on a State basis

so that we can monitor how each State is perform-

ing economically. We simply cannot do that at

present on a gross domestic product basis. We

have to use other estimates. It is very important to

have comprehensive statistics on house and land

prices by regions.

I mention those figures as being what we regard as important gaps in the statistical series presently published by the Government. Doubtless there are other series which would also be of import-
ance. Tbelieve this is an area which, although it is
?ot likely reatly to excite the Australian public, IS of great Importance to the Australian nation. If
those of us who are interested in analysing what is happening in the society do not have that inform~tion we simply cannot know what is going on in thiS country and the Government cannot conduct
the affairs of the nation properly because it simply does not know exactly what is happening in the
economy and the nation over which it presides. If Australia is to be a democracy the Opposition believes it is terribly important for that information
to be made available on as full and as comprehensive a basis as possible.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)-Is the amendment seconded?

Mr John Brown-I second the amendment and reserve my right to speak.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (9.53)-The comments which I wish to make tonight will be somewhat different from those made by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) who took the opportunity of this debate to make wide-ranging references to the recent report of the committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions. I make the observation that perhaps one of the greatest documents of understatement that can come before this Parliament is that which is read by a Minister and is described as a second reading speech. If one were to examine the contents of the second reading speech of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) when he introduced the Census and Statistics Amendment Bill last week one would hardly understand the scope of the changes to be brought about by these amendments to the Census and Statistics Act 1905. I am not for a moment being critical of that Minister because this is common to most second reading speeches. However, I believe that I am entitled tonight to reflect on almost a decade of campaigning for alterations to the procedures which have been used in the past in the collection of information for a census. When I realised that this Bill was coming on for debate this evening I asked for some quick research to be done on my own efforts to bring about changes. The Brisbane Telegraph of 1 July 1971 reported me as saying:
. . . people were entitled to absolute protection of personal information.
That was in relation to the 1971 census. Twent on to make some other references. The Sun Herald of 4 July described my campaign as 'fiddlesticks'. The Courier-Mail of 7 July reported me as saying that I would:
. . . try to bring about changes in the method of census collection.
During the 1971 census I led what might be described as a minor revolt in terms of some of the requirements which were being foisted upon the public.
Mr Humphreys -Take your hands out of your pockets.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-If that is the most that the honourable member for Griffith has to offer he is not even a shadow of the former honourable member for Griffith. At that time. I was accused of being disruptive. When one looks at the penalties which this Bill carries-a citizen who refus~s to provide all the information supporting the form can be fined as much as

Census and Statistics Amendment

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2079

$500-one can see that it will take a lot of inflation and many years before a person such as my self would dare to suggest to people that they buck the system. I notice that the Law Reform Commission report observes that a census penalty has never been invoked. Therefore, I pose the question: Why should we raise the penalty from $20 to $500 if it is never applied? I notice also that the Law Reform Commission notes that the actual census form never contains a reference to the penalty. I wonder why we have to adopt these procedures of introducing penalties which are probably more akin to the penalties that might be applied to criminal charges of some consequence. I do not believe we should spend too much time indulging in history but I do not think it is inap propriate for me to refer to some of the insensi tivities which exist from time to time in government. Often the Australian Bureau of Statistics is only doing the biddings of the government of the day.
I remember a survey commissioned by the Labor Government in 1975 which was called a household survey. A personal diary which con tained 25 pages was given to people to detail in which areas their money was spent. There was also a 48-page expenditure questionnaire and an income questionnaire of 13 pages. Those surveys had the audacity-I carefully selected that word-to request that people state the exact amount of their tax refund. They were even asked how many cheques they wrote in the previous month. They were asked also to provide the names of members of the family who had lent them money. That was bureaucracy gone mad. It is little wonder that at times people are apprehen sive and suspicious of forms thrust into their hands for the purpose of the collection of data. I remember that in 1975-this shows how changes come about-the Bureau of Statistics conducted a survey into unreported crimes. It was even inter viewing prostitutes and the like, but no one could get a copy of the questions that were being asked. How times change! Only a few weeks ago, as a member of this Parliament I was presented with a sample of the 1981 census form which is only weeks away. Even though it had 'In Confidence' and 'Sample Only' stamped across it, at least we were given an opportunity to see the form. That it was too late to do anything about the contents, is another matter altogether.
When the 1976 census was conducted I was well satisfied that the game was going to be played properly, that envelopes were to be provided for those who objected to having to leave their completed forms, which contained all their private information, in a letter-box or meter-box or

under a doormat. These people were to be provided with envelopes in which to put the completed form and were to leave it at a pre determined place for the collector to pick up. At the time the census was under way in Queensland, I discovered that thousands upon thousands of these envelopes were stored away in boxes in some government building or storehouse in the city of Brisbane. Again, I cut loose. Whilst I do not derive any satisfaction from disruption, it is not improper to recall that the census collectors took another 10 days beyond the time which had been anticipated to collect all the forms. Once again, I was subjected to abuse, et cetera, for my quaint ideas.
The House will see that for me there is con siderable satisfaction in seeing this Parliament to night legislating into the Census and Statistics Act on a permanent basis corrections to some of those things which l saw as being a risk to personal priv acy. This Parliament is again indebted to the work of the Australian Law Reform Commission and to Mr Justice Michael Kirby and those who served on the Commission during the preparation of report No. 12, which deals with privacy and the cen sus. I also wish to commend the attitude which now prevails in the Statistician's office. Although it may have taken years for it to become more-is the word 'sensitised'?
Mr John Brown-That will do.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-For the Statis tician's office to become more up to date in terms of the recognition of the changing values of so ciety and the right of people to command privacy, it is obviously making a major effort to comply with the wishes of the community. Indeed, when one looks at the way the people reacted in 1976 in refusing to answer some questions, as reported at page 13 of the Law Reform Commission's report, it was obvious that changes had to be made. I sin cerely hope that this time we will not see any reason to object to the census once it is under way and that, for the first time since about 1966, Australia will have a census carried out without public objection.
Once again I commend the Law Reform Commission for its job. I commend the former Attorney-General, Mr Ellicott, now Mr Justice Ellicott, for his reference to the Commission. I hope that this little piece of history will not be lost or forgotten. No doubt the message is that many of us in this place sometimes will stand alone in the pursuit of a cause, but after a number of years success can be forthcoming if the cause espoused is of value and of worth. I notice that the Leader

2080 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Suspension ofStanding Orders

of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) and the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) are both in the Parliament at the same time. I appreciate their listening to my contribution. I recognise that this unusual display of unity by that duo is not in appreciation of my comments. Obviously something of note is about to happen.
Debate interrupted.

SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS

Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (10.7)-1 move:

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Prime Minister making a statement to the Parliament forthwith concerning the manner in which he has unfairly and deceitfully deprived the States of $70m and to justify his discreditable behaviour in leaking details to the Press on this matter with the aim of humiliating the State Premiers.

There has been an extraordinary series of events
in the last few days but more particularly in the Parliament this evening. A series of Press confer-
ences has been called by, respectively, the Treasurer (Mr Howard) ~d the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). They are aimed at in some
way exculpating these two gentlemen from behaviour which, at best, can be described only as
sordid.

What the Government has done through its
tactics is to deprive the States of $70m to which they are justifiably entitled. It is clear that ~he Premiers Conference should be recalled not so
that justice can be established to the State Prem-
iers or to the State governments as such, but so that the proper entitlement of the people of the
States can be provided by the national Government. What the Prime Minister did in arranging
on Monday night through the Treasurer, because he approved the Treasurer doing it, to give a back-
ground briefing to the Press-we would call it, less euphemistically, a leak-and in doing it himself
yesterday, was not so much to give technical de-
tails of how savings were made but to sneer and jeer at the Premiers, to humiliate the State governments.

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) put:

That the Leader of the Opposition be not further heard.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker--Hon. Ian Robinson)

Ayes

64

Noes

4S

Majority

19

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D.

AYES

Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C.

AYES
Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. O. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P.
Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Hall, Steele Harris,G.McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Hunt,R.J.D. Hyde,J.M.

KilIen,D.J. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh,D. T. Moorc,J.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. OXeefe, F. L. Peacock,A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, 1. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley. K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown~ Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Free,R. V.
Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W.G. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Jacohi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Los (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, p, J.
Kelly, R. J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.C.
Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G.
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Uren, T. West, S. J.
Willis,R. Young,M.J.

Drummond, P. H. Connolly, D. M.

PAIRS

Darling, E. E. Innes, V. E.

Indivision-- -

Mr Morris-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a

point of order. Is it in order for the Treasurer to

absent himself from a division without a pair

having been granted?

.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no point of order.

.Mr Killen-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. A 'member of this House who raises a
point of order with frivolity and facetiousness, and clearly so, should be named by the Chair.

Suspension ofStanding Orders

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2081

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair is not presuaded that the honourable member for Shortland was of mischievous intent.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?

Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (10.17) - The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has cheated the Premiers of $70m--

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) put:

That the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith be not further heard,

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

65

Noes

45

Majority

20

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E, Birney. R.I. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A, G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman,H.G.P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, II. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W,C, Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G, O'H.
Hall, Steele Ilarris, G. McD, IIicks, N. J. Hodges, J. e. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Hunt, R. J, D, Hyde,J,M, Jull,D,F,

Katter, R. C.
Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B,
Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar,M,J.R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William
McVeigh, D. T.
Millar,P.C. Moore,J.C. Newman, K, E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S, Porter, j, R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D,
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G, E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,C. W. Viner, R. I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I, B, e.

NOES
Duffy,M.J. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R, J, L. Hayden, W, G. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C, (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Morrison, \V. L. Mountford, J. G.
Scholes, G, G. D. Scott, J. L. Uren, T, West,S,I. Willis,R, Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. Connolly, D, M,

Darling, E, E. Innes, V.E.

Question SO resolved in the affirmative.

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

63

Noes

45

Majority

18

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baumc,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,I, J.
Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D. B.
Dean,A,G .. Dobie,J,D.M, Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W,C.
Fisher, p, S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Hall,Steele
Harris, G. M~D. Hicks,N,J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. HUnt, R, J, D. Hyde,J.M, Katter, R. C.

Killen,D,J,
L1oyd,B.
Lushet, S, A. Lynch, Sir Phillip
MacKellar,M.J. R. MacKenzie, A, J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William
McVeigh,D, T.
Millar, P, C. Moore,J,e.
Newman, K, E, Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A, S. Porter,I, R. Robinson, Ian Rocher,A. C. Ruddock, p, M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, p, D.
Shipton, R. F, Sinclair, I. Mee, Spender,J. M.
Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J, Thomson, D, S, Tuckey, C. W, Vincr,R. T. White, P. N, D. Wilson, I. B:C.

Armitage, J, L Beazley, K. C. Blewelt,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G,
Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J,
Cohen,B. Cross,M. D.
Cunningham, B, r.
Dawkins, J. S.

NOES

Jacobi,R.
Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J.
Kelly,R.I.
Kent, L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E.
McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris,P.F.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett;N. Bowen. Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G,
Cass,M.H.
Charles, D. E, Child,J,
Cohen. B. Cross, M,D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, 1. S.

NOES

Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A.
Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, p, J.
Kelly,R,J,
Kent,L. Kerin,J,C. Klugman, R. E, McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P,
Morris,P.F.

2082 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Suspension ofStanding Orders

NOES
Duffy,M.J. Free,R. V. Fry, K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. C. Howe, B.L. Humphreys B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Uren, T.
West.S.J. WilIis,R.
Young,M.l.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. Connolly, D. M.

Darling. E. E. Innes, V.E.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Question put:

That the motion (Mr Hayden's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Han. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

45

Noes

63

Majority

18

AYES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,]. Coheo,B. Cross, M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Free,R. V. Fry,K. L Hawke. R. J. L. Hayden. W. G. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys. B. C. (Teller) Hurford. C. J.

lacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A.
Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry
Jones, Charles Keating. P. J. Kelly.R.J.
Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Lea Mildren, I. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L.
Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Uren,T. West, S. J. WiJU.,R. Young,M.J.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony. J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R.I. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen
Cameron, Jan
Carlton, J. J. Chapman,H.G.P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D.B. Dean.A.G. Dobie,J.D.M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer. P. D.
Fife. W. C. Fisher. P. S. (Teller)

Kilien.D.J. Lloyd. B.
Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir PhiJUp MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. I. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh,D. T. Millar.P.C. MooretJ.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon. P. J. O-Keeffe,F.L.
Peacock, A. S.
Porter, J. R. Robinson. Ian Rocher, A. C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury. M. E. Shack. P. D.
Shipton. R. F.
Sinclair. I. McC.

NOES
Giles, G. O-H. Hall, Steele Harris. G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,I.M. Katter, R. C.

Spender. J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J.
Thomson. D. S. Tuckey,C. W. Viner, R. I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

PAIRS

Darling, E. E. Innes. V.E.

Drummond, P. H. Connolly, D. M.

Question so resolved in the negative.

ADJOURNMENT

Campbelltown City Council

Mr SPEAKER-It being past 10.30 p.m., 1 propose the question:

That the House do now adjourn.

Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (l0.38)-Am I supposed to speak on the adjournment?

Honourable members interjecting--

Mr KERIN-Well, I have never before had such a big audience when speaking in the adjournment debate. I want to talk about Campbelltown. Last night the town planner for the Campbelltown City Council which is in my electorate--

Honourable members interjecting--

Mr KERIN-This is not a very funny matter.

Honourable members interjecting--

Mr SPEAKEROrder! Honourable members will resume their seats.

Mr KERIN-I will sit down as the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) wishes to speak.

Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (1O.40)-We have seen the rather undignified circumstances once again--

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

62

Noes

45

Majority

17

Adermann. A. E.
Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney,R.J. Bourchier, J. W.
Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown.N.A.
Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G.

AYES

Hyde, J. M. Katter,R.C. Killen,D.J. L1oyd,B.
Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. I. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M.
McMahon, Sir William McVeigh,D. T.

Adjournment

AYES

Cameron, Donald

Cameron, Ewen

Cameron, Ian

Carlton,J.J.

Chapman, H. G. P.

Coleman, W.P.

Cowan,D. B.

--'

Dean,A.G.

Dobie, J. D. M.

Edwards, H. R.

Falconer, P. D.

Fife,W.C.

Fisher, P. S. (Teller)

Giles, G. O'H.

Hall, Steele

Harris, G. McD.

Hicks, N.J.

Hodges, J. C. (Teller)

Hodgman, W. M.

Howard, J. W.

Hunt,R.J.D.

NOES
Armitage, J, L. Beazley, K. C.
Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M. J. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L.
Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Millar, P. C. Moore,J. C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. ~ Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, 1. McC. Spender,J. M.. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.I. White,P. N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.
Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson. Los (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R. J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Uren, T. West,S.J. WiIlis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. Connolly, D. M.

Darling, E. E. Innes, U.E.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Original question put~

That the House do now adjourn.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

63

Noes

45

Majority

18

Adermann, A. E. Anthony,J.D. Baume,M.E. Bimey;R.J. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G.
Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian

AYES

JulJ,D.F.
Katter, R. C. Killen, D. J. Lloyd, B.
Lusher, S. A.
MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T.
Millar,P.C. Moore,], C.
Newman, K. I:!.

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2083

AYES
Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, \V. P. Cowan.D.B. Dean, A.G. Dobie, J. D. M.
Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, O. 0'11. Hall,Stcclc Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges. 1. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.
Hyde,J. M.

O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R.
Robinson, Ian Rocher. A. C. Ruddock, P. M.
Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack,P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. 1. Thomson. D. S. Tuckey, C. \V. Viner, R. L
White. r. N. D.
Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett, N. Bowen. Lionel Brown, John
Brown, Robert Campbell,G.
Cass, M.II. Charles. D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M. J. Free, R. Y.
Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Lcs (Teller) Jon!!,.", Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. 1. Kelly,R.J.
Kent,L.
Kerin,J.C.
Klugman,R.E. McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G.
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Uren, T.
West,S.J.
Willis,R.
Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. Connolly, D. M.

Darling. E. E. Jnnes, U.E.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

House adjourned at 10.52 p.m.

NOTICES
The following notices were given:
Mr Nixon to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Wool Industry Act 1972.
. Mr Nixon to present a Bill for an Act to proVIde for the granting of proprietary rights to persons originating new plant varieties, and for related purposes.

PAPERS

The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 6 May 1981, pursuant to statute:

Family Law Act-Regulation Statutory Rules 1981 No.

96.

'

Public Service Act-Appointment-Department of Social Security-D. J. Mallet.

Seat of Government (Administration) Act-Variation of plan of lay-out of City of Canberra and its environs, dated 6 May 1981.

2084 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981
ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Co-operative Farmers and Graziers Direct Meat Supp\yLtd
Mr Howard-On 31 March ]981 (Hansard, page 1090), the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) asked me a question, without notice, about the present situation with regard t.o the Commonwealth's guarantee of $4.5m of a $9m loan from Barc\ays Australia Ltd to the Cooperative Farmers and Graziers Direct Meat Supply Ltd (CF & G). I responded by outlining in a general way the considerations which led to the Government's provision of that guarantee but said that I would further inform him as to the precise situation.
The Commonwealth guarantee, together with the Victorian Government guarantee for the remaining $4.5m of the loan, was aimed at assisting CF & G to meet its receivership obligations and to trade out of its financial difficulties so that the farmer ownership of the facility could continue. The CF & G abattoir is a large and modern meat works whose slaughtering capacity represents a significant proportion of total capacity in the Melbourne metropolitan area. It has demonstrated its capacity to operate profitably on the basis of reasonable throughput.
Since 1978, however, the CF & G abattoir, like many others, has experienced a sharp reduction in throughput as a result of a severe reduction in livestock numbers in southern Australia. Eventually the abattoir had to cease operations as the Cooperative's shareholders were not prepared to provide the necessary additional funds to enable it to survive in the circumstances of a depressed meat processing industry.
Messrs J. M. Poulton and D. A. Crawford of Peat, Marwick, Mitchell and Co were appointed Receivers and Managers of the Cooperative in December 1980. The Receivers are at present attempting to sell the abattoir at the best available price. Whether and to what extent there might be a call on the Commonwealth's guarantee will depend on the price achieved for the sale.
Vietnam: Chemicals
(Question No. 31)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
Has the Department of Veterans' Affairs and the United States Veterans Administration had frequent exchanges of information concerning various chemicals sprayed in Vietnam

during the war there; if so, can the Minister state (a) how many liver biopsies has the US Veterans Administration conducted on US Vietnam veterans, (b) whether those biopsies showed levels of arsenic to be present; if so, what levels of arsenic were present, (c) whether any other chemicals were shown to be present in abnormal levels, and, if so, (i) what those chemicals were and (ii) what the levels at which they were present at the time of those biopsies were and (d) when those biopsies were conducted.
Mr Thomson---The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Under arrangements with various government agencies in the United States the Australian Department of Veterans' Affairs has been provided with details of research studies being carried out in the US. on possible health effects of herbicides and their contaminants. The details which have been provided make no specific reference to studies involving liver biopsies on US. veterans.
It is understood that a registry has been established by the Veterans Administration in the US. to document base line medical information on individual veterans who are concerned about possible health effects resulting from exposure to herbicides in Vietnam. The information in the registry is derived from answers to a questionnaire, a physical examination and a set of baseline laboratory tests. As at December 1980, data from approximately 12,000 veterans had been entered into the registry. It is understood that a task force has been established to examine various aspects of the registry in order to evaluate its current and future usefulness.
Lead Levels
(Question No. 130)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the article in the Committee for Lead Free Petrol Newsletter No.6 of July 1980 headed Lead in Food Survey.
(2) Has (a) he, (b) his Department or (c) any agency under his control made any examination of the recent study of lead levels in Melbourne by Dr Frank Burden of the Chemistry Department, Monash University; ifso, have the findings of Dr Burden's study been confirmed.
(3) Is any Federal or State Department or agency continuously monitoring environmental lead levels in any or all of Australia's II largest cities where the 1976 census showed 69.69% of the population (9,698,200) to be living; if so, (a) which Departments or agencies are carrying out the monitoring, (b) what is the (i) frequency, (ii) type, (iii) nature and (iv) location of that monitoring and (c) are the results of that monitoring publicly available; if so, from where can they be obtained.
(4) Has his attention also been drawn to the article headed Whoops-Only Testing on page 4 of the newsletter referred to in part (I); if so, can he say whether Victorian Country Roads Board measurements have shown the average for a month was 5.6 micrograms per cubic metre (nearly 4 times the Environment Protection Authority standard) and the highest daily average was 8.1 micrograms per cubic metre.
(5) Can he also say whether the Country Roads Board has ceased monitoring lead levels near freeways or other major roads.

Answers to Questions

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2085

(6) Has his attention been drawn to the article Lead as an Occupational Health Risk in the newsletter referred to in part (l); if so (a) can he say whether the United States of America Occupational Health and Safety Administration has set a maximum level of 60 micrograms per 100 millilitres for blood lead, (b) similar levels in Victoria are set at 80 micrograms per 100 millilitres, (c) workers exposed to lead in Victoria are not considered as being lead poisoned until their blood lead levels reach 120 micrograms per 100 millilitres and (d) 70% of workers in Victoria who have been found to have excessive lead levels, were found to exceed the level again after treatment.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes. Dr Burden's study has been examined by officers of my Department, and it was, in fact, one of the documents considered during the revision of Metals-in-Food Standards.
As to confirming the results of Dr Burden's study, there has been no follow-up study done on fruits and vegetables as carried out by him. Dr Burden's study compared lead levels in fruits and vegetables grown in Melbourne suburbs with those available from retail outlets. Data are available, however, on an Australia wide basis from the NH & MRC Market Basket Survey. This survey shows that lead levels in those fresh fruits and vegetables sampled were below I mg/kg. Approximately 95% of samples showed lead levels ofless than 0.5 mg/kg.
(3) Information supplied to my Department by the Department of Home Affairs and Environment indicates that:
(a) Atmospheric lead is regularly monitored by the following State/Territory authorities:
State Pollution Control Commission, NSW, Environment Protection Authority, Victoria, Department of Local Government, Queensland, Department for the Environment, South Australia, Department of Health and Medical Services, WA, Department of the Environment, Tasmania, Capital Territory Health Commission, ACT.
(b) (i) A sample is taken over a continuous 24-hour period repeated at intervals of six days. This is a recognised standard and has been adopted by many countries including Australia and the USA.
(ii) and (iii) Monitoring is carried out by using an instrument called a high volume sampler which draws a measured quantity of air through a filter. The deposit on the filteris then weighed and chemically analysed.
(iv) Monitoring sites include the following:
New South Wales-Sydney-Lane Cove, Rydalmere, Silverwater, Sydney City, Randwick (previously Kensington Station) Port Kembla, Wollongong, Stockton, Albion Park, Warrawong.
Victoria-Melbourne-Science Museum, South Caulfield, Alphington, Port Melbourne.
Queensland-Brisbane-Hamilton, Petrie, South Brisbane, Wooloongabba, Normanby, City.
South Australia-Adelaide-West Terrace, Thebarton, Port Adelaide.
Western Australia--Perth-Wellington, Murray Street, William Street, Adelaide Terrace.
Tasmania-Hobart*-- -Murray Street, Liverpool Street, University.
* Stations now discontinued.
ACT-Canberra-Woden, Civic.
(c) Results of monitoring are publicly available from the following:

(i) State Pollution Control Commission, Union Carbide Building, Liverpool Street, Sydney, NSW 2000
(ii) Environmenl Protection Authority, 240 Victoria Parade, East Melbourne, Vic. 3002
(iii) Air Pollution Control Division, Department of Local Government, 484 Adelaide Street, Brisbane, Qld 4000
(iv) Department for the Environment, Ansett Gateway Building, 150 North Terrace, Adelaide, SA 5001
(v) Department of Health and Medical Services, 60 Beaufort Street, Perth, WA 6000
(vi) Department of the Environment, GPO Box 1396P, Hobart, Tas. 7001
(vii) Capital Territory Health Commission, PO Box 825, Canberra City, ACT 2601
However, I suggest that any further details required in relation to this should be addressed to my colleague, the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment.
(4) and (5) Yes. My attention has been drawn to this article. The question on the activities of the Country Roads Board should be directed to the responsible Victorian authorities.
(6) Yes. My attention has also been drawn to this article, in which there seems to be some confusion. The United States of America Occupational Health and Safety Administration has set a maximum blood lead level of 60 micrograms per 100 grams, not 60 micrograms per 100 millilitres as stated in the Newsletter. However, again the specific issues raised are the responsibility of the Victorian authorities.
Human Rights Bureau
(Question No. 523)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) What did the Attorney-General mean when he stated in his address to the first meeting of the Human Rights Bureau at the University of Sydney on 28 November 1980 that the establishment of a ministerial meeting on human rights among ministers of all governments was a very important link if the Commonwealth is not to apply its legislation to the States.
(2) Who are the members of the Human Rights Bureau and whom do they represent.
(3) Is the Attorney-General able to state whether the Queensland Government has been included on a list of governments violating human rights and civil liberties, compiled by the State Department in the United States of America; if so, has this matter been raised at any meeting of the Human Rights Bureau and if it has not been raised will the Attorney-General do so at the next meeting.
(4) If the Queensland Government does not propose any change to laws relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders and to laws governing freedom of assembly and procession, does the Attorney-General intend using the authority invested in the Commonwealth Government by the external affairs power to encourage States to amend their legislation in conformity with international covenants to which Australia is a signatory, such as the United Nations Charter on Human Rights, and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The meeting to which the hono].lrable member refers was the first consultation between the Human Rights Bureau

2086 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Answers to Que.~t;ons

and national non-government organisations in the human rights field. In his address to that meeting the Attorney General referred to the operations of the Meeting of Ministers on Human Rights which is a consultative body of Commonwealth and State Ministers responsible for human rights. All Governments. Commonwealth, State and Northern Territory, have responsibilities and interests in the field of human rights and the Commonwealth Government has adopted a policy of working with the States in matters of mutual concern. The Ministerial Meeting is the forum to which human rights matters affecting Australia are discussed.
(2) The Human Rights Bureau was established within my Department on 5 August 1980, and is staffed by officers of the Department. The Head of the Bureau is Mr Peter Bailey, OBE.
(3) The United States Department of State submits an annual report to the United States Congress called 'Country Reports on Human Rights Practices'. The latest of these reports, which was published on 2 February 1981 contains a summary of human rights practices throughout the world. The part of the report which deals with Australia summarises Australian law and practice under a number of headings. The report makes no criticism of the human rights position in Australia.
(4) The present Government's attitude to use of the external affairs power is well-known. Under the policy of cooperative federalism adopted by the Government, the Commonwealth and the States work together on matters of shared jurisdiction and interest. In matters of human rights the. Meeting of Ministers on Human Rights is the appropriate vehicle for such consultations.
Air Transport Isolators
(Question No. 715)
Mr Cadman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 March 1981:
(1) Did his Department recently purchase 12 Vickers Air Transport Isolators specifically for transport of patients suffering from viral haemorrhagic fevers from remote areas to Fairfield Infectious Diseases Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria.
(2) If so, what was the cost to the community of the purchase of these pieces of equipment.
(3) Where are the units maintained.
(4) On whose advice as being a specialist in the field of Medical Air Transport did his Department rely in deciding on the purchase of this equipment.
(5) [s he able to say what other countries (a) have purchased similar equipment and (b) decided not to purchase the equipment after investigating the equipment offered.
(6) Is he also able to say on what occasions, world wide, the isolators have been used for the transport of patients who actually were suffering from viral haemorrhagic fever; if so, what was the outcome of that transport.
(7) Has a special isolation unit been constructed in the heart of Melbourne at Fairficld Infectious Diseases Hospital to house any patients transported in the isolators; if so, what was the cost to the community of construction of this facility.
(8) On whose advice as a specialist in infectious diseases did his Department rely in its decision to transport highly infectious diseases from geographically remote areas into a major population centre such as Melbourne.
(9) Is he able to give an assurance that the isolators are secure and that there is no possibility of leakage during (a) working of the isolator, (b) transport to the aircraft, (c) flight, (d) unloading of the aircraft and (e) transfer to Fairtleld Hospital.

(10) Are steps taken to ensure that decontamination of equipment is secure; if so, what steps, and does this include decontamination of (a) road transport vehicles and (b) aircraft.
(11) Have the air carriers been informed of the necessary steps for decontamination and that these may cven require incineration of their aircraft.
(12) Have the air-crew and their trade union been fully informed as to the .possible consequences of a leakage occurring in flight.
(13) Are air transportable isolators available which could be transported to the patient in order that the patient could be nursed without transport.
(14) Are the viral haemorrhagic fevers as explosively contagious as first thought; if not, what justification can be given for the transport of these cases.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes. The purchase was made in 1979.
(2) The purchase price of the units was $334,268.
(3) Air transit isolators (ATI) are located at the following places:
Sydney (North Head Quarantine Station)-2
Brisbane (Royal Brisbane Hospital)- J
Darwin (Darwin Hospital)-2
Perth (Queen Elizabeth II Medical Centre)-2
Adelaide (Northfield Wards, Royal Adelaide Hospital)-l
Canberra (Central Hospital Services Complex, Mitchell)-l
Melbourne (Fairfield Hospital)-3
Routine maintenance is carried out by local bio-medical engineers. Readiness of the ATIs is ensured by an inspection team from Fairfield Hospital officially examining each-ATI every six months.
(4) The acquisition of ATIs was approved by Government as a precautionary measure against the viral haemorrhagic fevers (VHF) which havc been identified in recent years in Africa. In recommending this measure to Government, the Department of Health was aware that similar systems for the management of these diseases were being implemented at that time in the United States, Canada, Great Britain, Holland, Japan and Germany. Advice was sought from experts in Canada, South Africa, the United States and the United Kingdom. Before purchasing the isolators, the Department exhaustively tested a prototype specially brought from England for the purpose. Incorporated into the specification for the supply of the units in Australia were a number of modifications the need for which emerged from the Australian trials.
(5) (a) 1 am informed that the following countries have a mix of ATis (long journeys), ambulance stretcher transit isolators (short journeys) and static isolators at one or more centres-Canada, Holland, South Africa, United States, USSR. The following countries have a mix of ambulance stretcher transit isolators and static isolators at one or more centres-qreat Britain, Belgium, Germany, Denmark, Japan.
(b) I understand that New Zealand decided not to purchase such equipment.
(6) Statistics to answer this question are difficult to obtain. The isolators in Great Britain undoubtedly have the greatest use. The only two published uses of isolators of which my Department is aware are:
November 1976 Africa-a case of VHF (Ebola) was transported in an ATI from Bumba to Kanshasa, Zaire by

Answers to Questions

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2087

Fokker Friendship aircraft. The patient and transit isolator were subsequently transferred to a US Air Force Cl41 'Starlifter' for transport to Johannesburg, after which the patient was transferred to a static bed isolator. The patient
recovered.

June 1977-Canada-A six-year old boy who had recently returned from West Africa was suspected to be suffering from a VHF (Lassa).

The boy was transported from Toronto to Ottawa using a transit isolator. Lassa fever was not identified and the boy recovered.

(7) An eight-bed high security ward is under construction at the Fairfield Infectious Diseases Hospital. Estimated costs are as follows:

Building construction Equipment purchase High security laboratory extension-
Building construction
Equipment purchase

$ 2,104,000
103,000
430,000 150,000

2,787,000

The capital cost of the ward and laboratory is being met by the Commonwealth. When not required for use by the Commonwealth for quarantine purposes, the ward will not lie idle but will be operated by Fairfield Hospital as an infectious diseases ward as an integrated part of the Victorian State health service. When required for quarantine purposes, the ward will be evacuated of patients and, by bringing into operation special air-conditioning systems, activating special alarm systems, automatic door closers, et cetera and the sealing of some doors, the ward can be quickly converted for high security use.
(8) Information available to my Department indicated that the bulk of international opinion favoured prompt transfer of VHF patients to a central specialised facility for containment of the disease and its treatment. The reported air evacuation in 1976 of a case of VHF from Zaire to Johannesburg in South Africa prompted inquiry into the practical use of an ATI. South African authorities recommended, in the light of their experience, adoption of the Canadian approach. Contingency plans developed in Australia to allow secure transportation of a case of VHF from geographically remote areas to a containment centre in a capital city are in line with these and other approaches in a number of developed countries. The Queen's Memorial Infectious DiSeases Hospital at Fairfield in Melbourne catering for the infectious component of Victoria's hospital system was chosen because it is unique in Australia for its total commitment to the management of highly infectious diseases, and has the capability to cope with the problemsofVHF.
(9) (a) to (e) Absolute assurances cannot be given. However, in close consultation, Commonwealth, State and Fairfield Hospital officers have developed plans for the operation and maintenance of the air transit isolators. Continuous training in the operation of the units is undertaken by doctors, nurses and maintenance engineers. All conceivable problems, including leakage, have been examined and contingency procedures developed and practised. Each six months a training flight is undertaken simulating an emergency airlift of a patient. Training flights have been held as follows:
29 May 1979-Familiarisation exercise 13 December 1979-- Melbourne to Hobart and return 30 May 1980-Melbourne to Sydney and return 8-9 March 1981*-Melbourne to Adelaide and Perth and return
- Deferred from December 1980 due to airlines industrial problems.

The above arrangements and exhaustive prior testing of the ATI design and capabilities have reduced any risks associated with their use and transportation to minimal levels.
(10) (a) Yes. Procedures for the decontamination of road transport vehicles are included in the 'Handbook on Measures to Control Marburg Virus Disease, Ebola Virus Disease and Lassa Fever' issued by the Department of Health in November 1979. The procedures are based on those adopted by the United Kingdom in 'Memorandum on Lassa Fever' issued by Her Majesty's Stationery Office---1976.
(b) Any decontamination of an aircraft will be carried out in accordance with procedures set out in a World Health Organization publication-'Guide to Hygiene and Sanitation in Aviation'.
(11) Air carriers have been issued with appropriate sections of the publication mentioned in (10) (Il) above. Incineration of the aircraft would not be required; decontamination procedures as set out are more than adequate.
(12) On 17 November ]978 a meeting with representatives of the following unions took place at Fairfield Hospital:
Australian Federation of Air Pilots Federated Clerks Union Australian Licensed Airline Engineers Association Australian Airline Flight Engineers Association Transport Workers Union
The air carrier, its insurer, Fairfield Hospital and the Departments of Transport and Health were also represented. All present were fully informed of the Government's proposals and their implementation. No objections have been received.
(13) If a patient suffering from, or suspected to be suffering from, VHF is too sick to be moved, a static isolator held at Fairfield could be taken to the patient for management of the patient until he is well enough to be moved. Experience has shown that the patient could be infectious for up to 38 days. Transfer of the patient in an ATI to the high security facilities available at Fairfield must therefore be undertaken as soon as possible. Overseas experience has shown that it is not practical to manage a VHF patient in a static isolator for long periods.
(14) VHF are explosively contagious in situations where appropriate facilities and expertise in management are lacking. VHF, for which contingency plans for management and containment have been developed, are endemic to Africa. These fevers emerge spasmodically, spread very quickly and have a very high mortality rate. They have an incubation period of 3-17 days. As a result, a person infected with the disease could have left Africa and be located anywhere in Australia when the disease becomes apparent. The safeguard of the health of the Australian people and the prevention of the spread of these diseases are paramount in the planning and facilities in hand. With the adoption of the Australian contingency plans the main hazard of contagion is not envisaged to the public but rather to medical personnel in their attendance and nursing of such patients and from examination of infected material such as blood and ur;"e for diagnostic and therapeutic indications. The Fairfield Centre is the only Anstralian unit which will be equipped to the standard to provide safety to medical personnel in the performance of these duties. Expertise also exists at the Fairfield Centre to ensure that the high levels of containment required can be maintained.
Pathological Testing
(Question No. 730)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to allegations that practitioners of orthomolecular medicine are ordering many estimations of body fluid chemistry.

2088 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) Is the scheduled fee for each quantitive estimation of most substances $24.
(3) What is the estimated total cost to (a) the Commonwealth and (b) insurance funds of such large-scale pathological testing.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes. (2) The Schedule fee for one of the items of service that may cover many of the estimations of substances is $24. (3) This information is not available. It is believed that the practice of orthomolecularmedicine could include many pathology tests, of which one service n!lmely Items 1345 and 1346 (specialist and non-specialist respectively), may cover many. However, the purposes for which pathology tests are rendered is not recorded. Accordingly, the number of occasions that Items 1345/1346 are rendered would not necessarily relate to orthomolecular medicine. However, the approximate full year incidence of services itemized under Items 1345/1346 has been estimated at 340,000. At current (1 November 1980) Schedule fees and benefits, the Schedule fee cost would approximate $7.5m and Commonwealth medical benefits would approximate $2.3m. Due to the differing levels of health insurance cover, I am not able to provide details of the level of funding by registered medical benefits organisations. If it is assumed that eligible persons are covered for the basic fund benefits, the fund benefit cost would approximate $3.4 million.
Medibank Private Offices
(Question No. 756)
Mr Hodges asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(l) What are the locations of offices, excluding agents, operated by the Health Insurance Commission for the purpose of providing services to Medibank Private contributors.
(2) Which of the Medibank Private offices are owned by the Commission and what is the estimated value of these properties.
(3) What are the estimated annual receipts to the Commission for rental of premises in excess of Medibank's requirements.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Village, 46-50 Yeo Street, Neutral Bay, 304-308 King Street, Lower Ground. Floor, Newtown, Macquarie Shopping Centre, North Ryde, 75 Miller Street, North Sydney, Westfield Shopping Centre, Parramatta, 446-448 High Street, Pemith, 27 King Street, Rockdale, 77 Queen Street, St. Marys, 285 George Street, Wynyard, 60-62 York Street, Sydney, Roselands Shopping Centre, Wiley Park, 480 Dean Street, Albury, Clyde Street, Batemans Bay, 63 William Street, Bathurst, Auckland Street, Bega, 8 High Street, Belmont, Bong Bong Street, Bowral, 261-263 Argent Street, Broken Hill, 24 Vincent Street, Cessnock, Pacific Highway, Charlestown, 24 Moonee Street, Coffs Harbour, Sharp Street, Cooma, Princes Highway, Corrimal, 157 Brisbane Street, Dubbo, Princes Highway, Figtree, 120-122 Erina Street, Gosford, Huntley Arcade, Goulburn, l'rinces Street, Grafton, 222 Banna Avenue, Griffith, Garden City, Kotara, 96 Pine Avenue, Leeton, 103-105 Molesworth Street, Lismore, 175 Main Street, Lithgow, 323-325 High Street, Maitland, 103 East Street, Narrandera, Cnr King and Brown Streets, Newcastle, 301 Hunter Street, Newcastle,J3 Berry Street, Nowra, Summer Street, Orange, Monaro Street, Queanbeyan, 220 John Street, Singleton, 2 Brisbane Street, Tamworth, Pulteney Arcade, Pulteney Street, Taree, Princes Highway, Ulladulla, Cm West and Oscar Streets, Umina, 27 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga, Warilla Grove Shopping Complex, Warilla, Warrawong, 128 Crown Street, Wollongong, 138 Comur Street, Yass.
Victoria-29 Ellingworth Parade, Box Hill, 16-18 Elliilgworth Parade, Box Hill, The'Hub, 24-26 McCrae Street, Dandellong, Whitehorse Plaza, Box Hill, 23 Koonang Road, Carnegie, 752 Burke Road, Cambcrwell, 42 Station Road, Cheltenham, Bacchus Marsh Road, Corio, 62-64 Main Street, Croydon, Shops 34 and 35, Dandenong Hub, Dandenong, 176' Barkly Street, Footscray, Beach Street, Frankston, 35-39 Main Street, Greensborough, 110 Burgundy Street, Heidelberg, Cheltenham Road, Keysborough, Centrepoint Mall, Melbourne, 94 Queen Street, Melbourne, 641-649 Mt Alexander Road, Moonee Ponds,Prahran Central'Commercial Road and Chapel Street, Prahran, 273 High Street, Preston, 277 Hampshire Road, Sunshine, Knox City Shopping Centre, Burwood Highway, Wantirna, 16 Armstrong Street, South Ballarat, Charing Cross, Bendigo, 196-200 Murray Street, Colac, Belcher Arcade, 171-181 Moorabool Street, Geclong, 119-123 Grey Street, Hamilton, Suite 3, O'Brien Chambers, Cnr Darlot and McLachlan Streets, Horsham, 43 Lime Avenue, Mildura, 20 Hazelwood Street, Morwell, 89 Fryers Street, Shepparton, 15 Murphy Street, Wangaratta, Hanover Arcade, Koroit Street, Warrnambool.

(1) Australian Capital Territory- -Medibank House, Bowes Place, Phillip, Belconnen Mall, Belconnen, Una Porter Centre, City Walk, Canberra City.
New South Wales-17 Castlereagh Street, Sydney, 2E Auburn Road, Auburn, Bankstown Square, Bankstown, Westpoint Shopping Centre,- Blacktown, 468/472 Oxford Street, Bondi Junction, 530/548 Oxford Street, Bondi Junction, Warringah Mall, Cnr Orchard and Pittwater Roads, Brookvale, C.S.R. House, 74-76 Burwood Road, Burwood, City Arcade, Queen Street, Campbelltown, Cnr Beamish and Campsie Streets, Campsie, Wallaceway Shopping Centre, Complex, Help Street, Chatswood, 445-449 Victoria Avenue, Chatswood, 136 Waldron Road, Chester Hill, 858 Pittwater Road, Dec Why, Westfield Shoppingtown, Progress Avenue, Eastwood, 51 Smart Street, Fairfield, Northgate Shopping Centre, Florence and Hunter Streets, Hornsby, Super Centre, Forest Road, Hurstville, Leichhardt Market Town, Cnr Flood & Marion Streets, Leichhardt, Commercial Union Building, 157-161 George Street, Liverpool, 767 ANZAC Parade, Maroubra Junction, 326 Marrickville Road, Marrickville, Merrylands Mall, Pitt Street, Merrylands, Miranda Mall, Miranda, Mt Druitt Square, Mt. Druitt, Neutral Bay

Quecnsland-82 Ann Street, Brisbane, 97 Creek Street, Brisbane, David Jones, Queen Street, Brisbane, Gympie Road, Chermside, 108 Bloomfield Street, Cleveland, Old Cleveland Road, Coorparoo, Cm Wickham and Brunswick Streets, Fortitude Valley, Indooroopilly Shoppingtown, Indooroopilly, ANZAC Avenue, Kallangur, 1 ANZAC Avenue, Kippa-Ring, Osborne Road, Mitchelton, Garden City, Mt Gravatt, Toombul Shoppingtown, Sandgate Road, Toombul, Woodridge Plaza, Wembley Road, Woodridge, 143 Tingal Road, Wynnum, 1 Pacific Fair, Broadbeach, SGIO Arcade, Bournong Street, Bundaberg, 42 King Street, Caboolture, Cnr Abbott and Shield Streets, Cairns, Caloundra Shopping Centre, Bowen Road, Caloundra, Rainbow Arcade, Coolangatta, 70 Goondoon Street, Gladstone, 11 Nannercost Street, Ingham, 93 Edith Street, Innisfail, Ipswich Centre, Bells Street, Ipswich, Big W Shopping Centre, Kawana Waters, Hopkins Arcade, 28 West Street, Mt Isa, Lowan House, Lowe Street, Namhour, 6 Denham Street,-Rockhampton, Cnr Scarborough and Nerang Streets, Southp0rl, 357 Strathpine Road, Strathpine, 24 Duggan Street, Toowoomba, Hollimans Arcade, 385 Flinders Street, Townsville, Mart Plaza, Ross River Road, Aitkenvale, Townsville West.

Answers to Questions

6 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2089

South Australia-26 Currie Street, Adelaide, 209 Greenhill Road, Eastwood; John Mattin's Store, Elizabeth, 113 Jetty
Road, Glenelg, Clovercrest Shopping Cente, Modbury, Shop
17, Big 'Y' Shopping Centre, Main South Road, Morphett
Vale, 54 Grey Street, Mt Gambier, Beach Road, Noarlunga, John Street, Salisbury, Westlakes Shopping Mall, West Lakes, Westlands Shopping Centre, Nicholson Street, Whyalla.

Western Australia-City Mutual Place, 5 Mill Street, Perth, 185 York Street, Albany, Cm Victoria and Wellington Streets, Bunbury, Boans Store, Cannington, Newman Street, Fremantle, Town Towers, Cathedral Avenue, Geraldton,
Maritana Street, Kalgoorlie, Mezzanine Floor, Boans Store, Morely, Ground Floor, PBS Building, 25 Barrack Street, Perth, Aherns Store, Rockingham Park Centre, Rockingham,
Aherns Store, Whitfords City, Hillarys.

Tasmania-77 Collins Street, Hobart, Cm York and Charles Streets, Launceston.

(2) Medibank Private Offices owned by the Commission, and their estimated values are:

I Bowes Place, Phillip, ACT (Central Office)
SO William Street, Perth, WA 17 Castlereagh Street, Sydney, NSW 94 Queen Street, Melbourne, Vic. (negotiat-
ing purchase) 77 Collins Street, Hobart; Tas. . 209 Greenhill Road, Adelaide, SA 82 Ann Street, Brisbane, Qld 301 Hunter Street, Newcastle, NSW
445/449 Victoria Avenue, Chatswood, NSW 468/472 Oxford Street, Bondi Junction,
NSW . . . . . . . . . . ..

$m 4.500 1.500 4.S00
3.400 0.800 1.800 1.500 0.2S0 3.500
1.500

23.2S0

(3) Estimated gross receipts ofrentals for the financial year 1981-82 are $953,163.
Institute of Marine Pharmacology at Dee Why, New South Wales
(Question No. 757)
Mr Hodges asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(l) Has his attention been drawn to the announced closure of the Roche Pharmaceutical Company's unique Institute of Marine Pharmacology at Dee Why, NSW.
(2) If so, have reasons for the Institute's closure been advanced to the Government or has the Government had talks with, or sought information from, the company regardIng the decision.
(3) Have approaches been made to the Government by. the company for financial support to subsidise the research centre; if not, will he investigate the matter with a view to providing financial assistance to the venture.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The Director of the Institute wrote to the Department of Science and Technology on 14 January 1981 advising that the Swiss parent company had decided to close the Institute by 30 June 1981. Officers of that Department have suhsequently had preliminary discussions with the Director of the Institute. I also understand that discussions have been held with members of the Australian Science and Technology Council.

(3) Consideration is being given to the question of what action, if any, the Government should take on this matter.
Cocos Island Quarantine Station
(Question No. 991)
Mr Lloyd asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
(1) When will the Cocos Island quarantine station commence operation, and how many of each type of animal will be accommodated at it.
(2) When will the first dairy and beef cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, and any other animals arrive at the station, and from which countries will they come.
(3) From which countries will animals be allowed before the Geelong laboratory, Vic., is operational, and when will that occur.
(4) What will be the quarantine period for these preGeelong animals.
(S) How many of each type and breed of animal have been booked into Cocos Island quarantine station prior to the opening of Geelong and, of these, what percentage is for private stud breeders, and what percentage is for Government Departments, universities, etc.
Mr MacKellar--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Cocos Island quarantine station will commence operation in late November 1981, when the first shipment of cattle from the USA and Canada will arrive. The station has been designed with capacity to accept 120 adult female cattle or comparable numbers of other sexes and species. It is estimated that up to SOO sheep or goats could be accommodated or a similar number of pigs.
(2) Dairy and beef callie will enter the station late this year in the initial shipment from the USA and Canada. Conditions have also been prepared to enable the importation of cattle from western Europe. Conditions to allow importation of pigs from the USA, UK and parts of western Europe in mid-1982 following the initial cattle importations are being developed. The importation of shecp and goats is still under preliminary consideration. Sheep and goats present specific problems in relation to 'slow virus diseases' which make the preparation of conditions under which importations may proceed a lengthy and complex operation.
(3) Prior to the opening of the Australian National Animal Health Laboratory (ANAHL) in Geelong, animals will only be accepted from countries with a known disease status. These countries include the USA and Canada, western Europe, the UK and Japan. Animals from certain other regions such as South America, South Africa and Asia will not be considered until after ANAHL becomes operational.
(4) Quarantine periods for imported animals will vary depending on species and country of origin. The quarantine periods on Cocos Island will vary between 3 and S months for cattle and pigs. Sheep and goats will require lengthier periods but it is not possible at this time to be specific due to the problems associated with detection of slow virus diseases. The quarantine periods on Cocos Island will follow quarantine periods in the country of origin.
(5) To date, applications from potential importers have only been sought for cattle from western Europe, Canada and the USA. Initial planning was for a shipment of cattle from western Europe to precede the cattle from the USA and Canada. However, construction delays and lack of firm demand have meant that cattle from the USA and Canada will be first. Applications for approximately 90 cattle from the

2090 REPRESENTATIVES 6 May 1981

Answers to Questions

USA and Canada have been received by my Department, all being from private breeders.
Council of Egg Marketing Authorities of Australia
(Question No. 998)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
(1) Does the level of the Council of Egg Marketing Authorities of Australia levy vary from State to State; if so, by how much and what has been the amount for each State during the last 3 years.
(2) If the levy has varied, how can this be reconciled with the provisions of the Constitution.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The rate of levy imposed under the Poultry Industry Levy Act does not vary between the States, but is uniform as

required under the Constitution. The total of amounts collected from each State over the last 3 years are as follows:

1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania

$
4,483,891 2,621,568 1,668,596
943,023 803,862 174,263

$
4,336,763 2,572,858 1,670,416
916,532 841,790 175,332

$
7,249,621 4,456,593 2,714,934 1,357,527 1,428,337
261,875

Note: (a) Australian Capital Territory is treated separately from New South Wales.
(b) Hens kept for commercial purposes in the Northern Territory of Australia have been prescribed as a class of hens which are exempt from the levy imposed under the Act.
(2) Not applicable.


