House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 122, 1981 Thursday, 30 April 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1799

Thursday, 30 Apri/1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10.30 a.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Acting Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Proposed Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in: (i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline
services in Australia; (ii) higher domestic air fares. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys, Mr Jacobi, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Morris and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
A substantial contribution to Australia's economy by the payment of taxation and to the quality of life of fellow Australians, is made by parents in the work-force who have preschool children
Taxation relief for adequate child-care is necessary to enable these parents to avail themselves of child-care facilities in order to take paid employment
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that tax-payers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other tax-payers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley and Mr Porter. Petitions received.

Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other taxpayers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon.
Petition received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully calls for:
The immediate and unconditional withdrawal of any proposals to deny Unemployment Benefits to unemployed people under 18 years old.
That the level of Benefits for all unemployed people, and including people receiving sickness benefits and pensions, be raised to at least 120 per cent of the poverty line.
That future employment policies be devoted to job creation and the restoration of full employment rather than the evasion of this responsibility by hiding the unemployed in short term training and education schemes.
Public acknowledgement of the fact that unemployment is the result of insufficient jobs and not the fault of any minority group, the education system or the unemployed themselves.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howe, Mr Kent and Mr Milton.
Petitions received.
Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were subjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(I) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:

Use of Live Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

1800 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Petitions

1. That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.

2. That no central records exist on such inhumane use of live animals for experimentation purposes, yet research institutions in several Australian States engage in such a practice.

3. That there exists no uniform legislation between the

States concerning responsible standards of indeed. in some States there is a complete

lraecskeaorcf hlecgoisnldatuicot~

altogether.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will enact legislation to require:

(a) the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics on the numbers of live animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purpose; and
(b) the National Health and Medical Research Council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all Government Industry and Educational Research Laboratories. '

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Humphreys.

Petition received.

Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission. and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must. under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed mining leases against the advice of conservationists and a State Government sponsored Public Enquiry.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That there is an urgent need to ensure that the living standards of pensioners and benefit recipients will not decline further.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that action be taken to:
(1) increase the amount of extra income which pensioners and benefit recipients can earn in order that they are not penalised by small fluctuations in earnings.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

National Women's Advisory Council
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the National Women's Advisory Council has not been democratically elected by the women of Australia;
That the National Women's Advisory Council is not representative of the women of Australia;
That the National Women's Advisory Council is a discriminatory' and sexist imposition on Australian women as Australian men do not have National Men's Advisory Council imposed on t'hem.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the National Women's Advisory Council be abolished to ensure that Australian women have equal opportunity with Australian men of having issues of concern to them considered, debated and voted on by their Parliamentary representatives without intervention and interference by an unrepresentative 'Advisory Council'.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrJull.
Petition received.
EISalvador
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of'Australia respectfully sheweth:
That the present government of EI Salvador has been responsible for the deaths of at least 10,000 people in 1980 alone; and that it has been condemned as one of the worst human rights violators in the world by such organisations as Amnesty International and the US Conference of Catholic Bishops.
Therefore we humbly request that the government of the Commonwealth of Australia:
(i) urge the government of the United States of America to immediately cease all military aid to the government of EI Salvador;
(ii) support the freedom of the Salvadoran people against the governing military dictatorship.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrKent.
Petition received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
1. Note that legislation establishing plant variety rights in other countries has had adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties.of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilizers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.

Petitions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1801

(c) iTnhgethgeenmetviucldnievrearbslietytoofdctrsoepassehaans dbeoetnheerroednevu, orennmdeenr
tal threats.
pApverluaon2snmt.tterRoaxvtelceaiclarusoniuegsntcinvihaeiestsgeicoeiotnsnnhe,ctatarritnoucmdlcdoitiaavvaileeknrrtteosepiantlltyaalhnnanetcseeccgaoeeposnnsufteam.bttrih:cuI,;eCmsetrdgeeaepstwnoeseenttlorailcc-lpbefrderaemonvsmeedgrrtvfsooaieftlPyaht.rnnhoedgef
into private hands.
epddseluton3caye.eberDhesss,ehb,ifnmeyadnneeddrnpettecjhonoeefcdnpvtesiuilnntamtagnAlteiruvnasastnetroyrrifeaetlsApyitasrurnoiosgtpsfhreoaAtessliuaianlscntoArtmfaoaulprisamtalnremagaleati!asslrdl.maangteedarsrtdahfeonenrtrpgetramhore
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrKerin.
Petition received.
Discriminatory Legislation To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament in Canberra assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That the right to work without discrimination on any ground including, inter alia, dis:rimination on grounds of race, ethnic origin, pregnancy, manta! sttus, sex andfor sexual preference, is a fundamental human nght; and
That it is both the duty and the responsibility of society to fully support those denied work and therefore those who are
pwuanitiehdmoepumltopdylieosdcynames ?matarstetosounulotldnobfaensyogcugiareortauyn'nstdei,enmabcailnluitdymdtegoqmupatretoervaiidhecaodfiu?islel
crimination on grounds of race, ethnic origin, marital status, sex andfor sexual preference, or pregnancy.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray: That appropriate and adequate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in Commonwealth employ ment, in employment of persons by statutory bodies and quasi-governmental organisations, in employment of individ uals under federal awards, and in employment of all persons in areas over which Commonwealth and Australian Capital Territory equal opportunity legislation should have jurisdic tion; and That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits to all persons without regard to race, ethnic origin, marital status andforsex. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon.
Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of childrens services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 budged, and further, that annual budget allocations in the area of childrens services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.

Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned Citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulin dependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the NHS and that insulin prescriptions re vert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Shipton.
Petition received.
Pharmaceutical Benefits
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respect fully showeth-
Restricting the 'Free List' for the supply of drugs under the Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme.
Your petitioners humbly pray that:
(a) It be raised in the House at the earliest possible opportunity that deletions from the 'Pharmaceutical Free List' have resulted in many cases where pensioners are being forced to pay several dollars weekly from their already meagre pensions to obtain relief, thus requiring deletion of other essential items from their weekly budgets.
(b) This matter be rectified at the earliest possible opportunity.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrViner.
Petition received.
Airline Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the citizens of Western Australia showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the present two airline domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.
That this policy has resulted in expensive airfares and poor service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visiting WA and vice versa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourable on our petition and formulate an Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens of New South Wales respectfully showeth that the Federal Government did not make increased funding available for government school programs such as:
I. General recurrent 2. Migrant education

1802 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

3. Disadvantaged schools 4. Special education 5. Capital grants 6. Multicultural education 7. Disadvantaged country areas 8. Children in institutions . 9. Services and development 10. Education centres 11. Special projects but increased the money available to the non-government school sector by 5.9 per cent. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will restore and increase substantially, in real terms, the allocation of funds for government school programs.
by Mr Robert Brown. P~tition received.
DISALLOWED NOTICE OF MOTION Mr Fisher proceeding to give a notice of motionMr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is arguing his motion. I suggest that he put it in proposition form and provide it at another time.
QUEENSLAND HOSPITALS Notice of Motion
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move: .
That this House condemns any attempt by the Federal Government to hold a gun at the head of the Queensland Government by compelling it to abandon Queensland's long standing, efficient, free hospital system.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
HEALTH INSURANCE TAXATION REBATE
Dr KLUGMAN-Will the Treasurer confirm that the tax rebate of 32c in the dollar for health insurance contributions will apply only for basic medical and hospital insurance cover? In other words, will family contributors paying up to $850 a year in contributions receive a rebate on only about $430 of this, resulting in a refund of about $120 at the end of 1982? Will the same taxpayers lose about $300 in the same year by the abolition of even half tax indexation? Is this part of the Government's plan to allow individuals to decide what to do with their own money, so vehemently restated by the Prime Minister on Tuesday afternoon?
Mr HOWARD-I confirm that the rebate will be available only in respect of basic medical and hospital cover as described in the statement made by my colleague the Minister for Health yesterday. I take the opportunity to repeat that the benefits of half tax indexation, which will be

worth about $500m by way of tax remissions, will be available from 1 July as promised in the Prime Minister's p()licy speech. The question of what other tax arrangements will prevail in 1981-82 and subsequent financial years will, of course, be determined on a discretionary basis, normally in the context of the preparation of future budgets. It ought not to be assumed that the decision made by the Government not to continue half tax indexation after the coming financial year necessarily implies a less beneficial taxation treatment of Australian families in future years.
INDUSTRY UNIONS
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Has the Minister for Industrial Relations noticed the predictability of at least one air industry union resorting to industrial anarchy each and every time there are school and public holidays? Does the Minister agree that the strike disease amongst our industry workers has reached such epidemic proportions that the Australian public has every right to demand--
Mr SPEAKER Order! The honourable gentleman will ask his question.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Does the Minister think the public is demanding that he do something positive? Finally, considering that the policies of the Government and the Australian Council of Trade Unions on the amalgamation of industry unions are generally in accord, will the Minister examine and determine the necessary procedures to bring about the amalgamation of our air industry unions forthwith?
Mr VINER-The honourable member has touched on a matter of some importance, that is, the establishment in Australia of industry unions. He quite rightly points out that it is a policy of this Government and the ACTU. I understand that the policy in favour of industry unions was established during the regime of the honourable member for Wills.
Mr Hawke-Why don't you try the truth for a change?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Wills will withdraw.
Mr Hawke-I withdraw.
Mr VINER-If the honourable member was not the author of the ACTU policy he undoubtedly embraced it during the time that he was President of the ACTU, Having regard to that, I would expect him to support in this House any efforts that this Government might make to increase the opportunities for the establishment of industry unions. As the honourable member said, it is also right that the splintering of a number of

Questions Without Notice

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1803

different union groups within the one industry allows one group-a minority group at that-to hold the rest of the employees within that industry, as well as the public as a whole, to ransom. It might well be said that in the recent airline dispute one small group of employees did precisely that. The House will recall that both Ansett Airlines of Australia and Trans-Australia Airlines were obliged to stand down other employees for whom they had no work because of the action of the hostesses. I can assure the House that I have a lively interest in the policy of the establishment of industry unions and I will be actively pursuing it during my ministry.
DISABLED PERSONS Mr MOUNTFORD-I refer the Minister for Health to that part of the Budget Speech of 19 August 1980 relating to the allocation of $700,000 in 1980-81 for the provision of aids and appliances for the disabled. Included among the aids were the widening of doorways, the provision of access ramps for wheel chairs, grip rails and home aids. In a news release on the same day, the Minister for Health stated that work would begin immediately on procedures to establish the program with the aim of introducing it in April 1981. I ask the Minister whether he has established such a program? If so, will he advise the House of the details of it? If he has not established such a program, when does he intend to do so, bearing in mind that the International Year of Disabled Persons is now one third completed?
Mr MacKELLAR-! thank the honourable member for his question. I do recall very clearly that statement made at the time of the Budget. The Government is committed to the introduction of this scheme to provide aids for the disabled. There have been active consultations with State governments and with voluntary agencies as to the proper administration for the effective implementation of the scheme. Those discussions are continuing; they have been taking place on a continuing basis. I hope-I cannot be precise about this-that I will be in a position to make a definitive statement about effective administrative arrangements in the near future. The Government remains committed to the program, which is of great significance to a great number of disabled people.

whether a decision has been made for the protection and preservation of this present Parliament House because of its undoubted historic value?
Mr SPEAKER-I am not aware of any decision taken in relation to this building. It is not the function of the joint committee of this Parliament which has been concerned with the design and building instructions, and which is the client for the new building, or any part of its authority given by this House or the other chamber, to decide on the future of this building. The honourable gentleman asked whether a decision has been taken. No, no decision has been taken. As to whether members of the public will be interested in it, I can assure him that they will be. As to what a future government will decide, it is beyond my capacity to foretell.
35-HOUR WORKING WEEK
Mr SCOTI-I direct a question to the Minister for Industrial Relations. Unions involved in the 35-hour week campaign claim that negotiated agreements with employers for the phasing in of the 35-hour week are being finalised at the rate of three a day and that this rate is rapidly increasing. In view of the fact that the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission is not involved in any of these settlements and agreements, does this mean that the roles of the Arbitration Commission and Government industrial relations policy are becoming increasingly irrelevant in the real world of union-employer bargaining? Is this a consequence of the Government's erratic, confrontationist and dictatorial approaches to employers, unions and the Arbitration Commission?
Mr VINER-I am very interested, if not intrigued, by the question of the honourable member. If he is suggesting that the bargaining between unions and employers outside the arbitration system should be accelerated, I wonder whether he would consider that such bargains should be binding in a contractual sense and carry the remedies available to either side for the breach of those bargains. I would be very interested to know whether he would face up to that proposition. Many people in the community feel that the unions should be bound by the bargains they make and, if they break them, they should be liable to damages, or the like, in the same way as any other person in the community who breaks a contract which he has entered into.

PARLIAMENT HOUSE Mr BRAITHWAITE-Mr Speaker, my question is directed to you. With the progress now evident on the site preparation for the new and permanent Parliament House, can you advise

BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT
Mr STEELE HALL-In view of the recent statement to this House by the Minister for Communications concerning the Broadcasting and Television Act having been incorporated into the

1804 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

evidence before the Administrative Appeals Trinot aware of any firm guarantees having been

bunal, will the Minister ensure that further evimade. If the honourable member has any case in

dence is given indicating that those changes in his mind where such an impression was created, if he

statement requiring parliamentary approval would provide me with the details I would be only

should be disregarded at this time so they do not too willing to seek information from the Chair-

pre-empt decisions yet to be made by Parliament? man and the Executive Director of the Australian

Mr SINCLAIR-As the honourable gentleman would know, any court can interpret only the law that is. Accordingly, the question he proposes does not arise. It is appropriate to respond to any requests, however, from the AAT or any other court for any explanation of statements that might be made in this House about intended Government policy. Such an intention has been made to the Tribunal. As the honourable gentleman will recall, within that statement there were a number of phrases relating to transitional provisions. I have no doubt that the AAT, as indeed any court considering such a matter, would take note of the intent of those transitional provisions. However, no ch~nge in the law will apply or can

Institute of Sport. This year, as I mentioned, is the first year of operation of the Institute. It has involved the development of relationships between the Institute and the various educational bodies in Canberra. If there has been any difficulty in respect of trainingtimes and course lecture programs, again I would be appreciative if the honourable member could supply me with the details. Through the board and through the liaison committee that has now been established it is hoped to smooth out some of these early difficulties to ensure that those who have scholarships are able to carry out their training programs in their chosen sport and also complete the educational program they have undertaken.

affect any decision taken by either a tribunal or a court until it has been passed by the Parliament. That certainly would not be so in the instance of the broadcasting and television legislation.

VITAMIN AND MINERAL SUPPLEMENTS
Mr SHACK-Is the Minister for Health aware of considerable and continuing community con-

AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF SPORT cern about the future availability of vitamins and

Mr JOHN BROWN-I direct a question to the Minister for Home Affairs. Is it a fact that certain young Australian sportsmen and sportswomen, including a number living overseas at the time, were offered guarantees of full time employ-

mineral supplements? Is it a fact that there is an intention to limit the access of the public to vitamins and mineral supplements and further to restrict the dosage levels of those items? If not, what is the correct position with respect to this matter?

ment if they would accept places at the Australian Mr MacKELLAR-I am aware that there has

Institute of Sport? Is it a fact that jobs have not been considerable public controversy about this

yet been found for all those to whom they were matter which is entirely unnecessary. If I may just

promised? Further, is it not also a fact that some set the scene, it is my intention to provide oppor-

students at the Institute were subsequently told tunities for industries and individuals who may be

that they may not seek full time employment and affected by changes in government regulations to

may only chase after non-existent permanent part comment on such proposed changes before there

time jobs? Is it true that members of the Institute is any move to implement them. This is a draft

who took up their scholarships on the understandstandard which has been circulated by a sub-

ing that they would undertake studies at either the committee of the National Health and Medical

Australian National University or the Canberra Research Council. It is merely for discussion. Un-

College of Advanced Education have been told in fortunately some people have taken it as being far

mid-semester to drop out of units which clash further down the line towards implementation

with newly promulgated training schedules? than is in fact the case.

Finally, can the Minister assure the House and all students at the CCAE and the ANU that pressure is not being applied to those two institutions to alter their lecture timetables to conform with the demands of the AIS administrators?

There is no intention on the part of the Government to reduce the availability of vitamin and mineral supplements; I wish to make that absolutely clear. However, we are concerned to ensure that consumers of products, including products

Mr WILSON-This is the first year of the covered by the vitamins and mineral supplements

Australian Institute of Sport. As applicants were area, are in a sound position to be aware of the

interviewed and granted scholarships, indications contents of the products that they are consuming.

were given, as I understand it, that efforts would Therefore we are making sure, to the best of our

be made to provide those who wished to seek emability, that the information supplied on the labels

ployment with employment opportunities. I am of a product is such that it will make it easily

Questions Without Notice

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATTVES 1805

understood by those people who wish to avail
 themselves of the product. I think it is most
important that there be contining onu tation between industry representatives, mdividuals, individual firms and the Government. I will continue to implement a policy which allows that consultation to take place. I repeat that there is no intention on the part of the Government further to restrict the availability of vitamins and mineral supplements.
SENIOR ADVISER TO THE TREASURER
Mr ROBERT BROWN-My question, which is addressed to the Treasurer, refers to an adver tisement in yesterday's Australian Financial Review calling for applications for a senior adviser to the Treasurer. The advertisement reads in part:
The position will embrace a variety of responsibilities including speech drafting, press liaison, research and a general advisory role, particularly of a political nature.
A formal economic training is desirable but not absolutely essential. A capacity for clear written expression is essential.
I ask the Treasurer: For how long has a formal training in economics not been an essential requirement for his senior adviser? Does the lack of economic understanding of his advisers account for the disastrous approach of this Government to economic management? Does his emphasis on the political nature of the general advisory role he re quires indicate that he has abandoned economic judgment in favour of political salesmanship?
Mr HOWARD-The advertisement is not for the senior position on my staff. To provide the honourable gentleman with a little bit of solace, the senior person on my staff happens to have had both a formal economic training and very exten sive private enterprise business experience. I can not think of a better combination for the senior person on the staff of a Treasurer in a free enterprise government. 1 belong to that school of thought which does not necessarily believe that economic expertise is coincidental with formal economic training.
FINANCE
Mr BAUME-l ask the Treasurer: When can the House expect to have the opportunity to deal with the proposed new section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act and the report of the Camp bell Commission of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System?
Mr HOWARD-I hope that I will be in a position within the next two or three weeks to intro duce into this House for consideration and for public scrutiny the proposed new section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act which is designed

to write into the income tax legislation an effec tive omnibus anti-avoidance provision. So far as the Campbell committee report is concerned, the latest information I have is that the committee expects to be in a position to provide the Government with its report so that it can be tabled in this Parliament at about the beginning of September. That is a little later than was originally thought but, as honourable members will understand, the scope of this inquiry is quite without precedent so far as our financial and economic system is concerned. The quality of the people who have con tributed to the inquiry is recognised, I think, on both sides of politics in Australia. I know that we on this side of the House and, I believe, all honourable members will look forward with very great interest to the report. l regard this report and the Committee's work as being landmarks in the development of the Australian financial system.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA: SALE
OF ARMS
Mr HAYDEN--1 ask a question of the Prime Minister. I refer to the fact that in the course of the recent United States of America presidential election, President Reagan advocated supplying arms to the forces of Mr Jonas Savimbi who is seeking, with South African support, to over throw the Angolan Government. Has the Prime Minister noted recent reports that this option is now being seriously considered by the United States Administration? Is he aware that most recently Prime Minister Mugabe of Zimbabwe has declared that such a sale of arms would be 'extremely repugnant'? Does he share that view? If so, will he express it to the United States Administration? If he does not share that view, or if he is not prepared to express his view to the United States Administration, will he state why?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I am not aware of the information contained in the honourable gentleman's question. I will make some inquiries and see whether there is any advice in relation to it. This Government would certainly oppose South African forces operating anywhere outside South Africa.
Mr Hayden-What about United States arms to Angola, to a rebel group?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I hope that I can be allowed to answer the question in my own way. This country would oppose South African forces operating in other areas of the Southern African continent. I hope that nobody would undertake policies that would encourage them to do so.

1806 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT fact that the last session of the Law of the Sea

Mr MacKENZIE-I address my question to the Minister for Communications. Was a briefing paper on the proposed changes to the Broadcasting and Television Act circulated to sectors of the industry just before Easter with a request for them to respond by the following Wednesday? Does the Minister know that this paper caused C?nsiderable concern, particularly amongregIOnal broadcasters? Can the Minister assure the members of the regional broadcasting industry that the proposed changes to the Act will not jeopardise their role as local and regional broad-' casting se~vic~ and that they will be encouraged to put their Views on these matters prior to draft legislation being introduced into this House?
Mr SINCLAIR-I understand that a circular

Conference was unable to reach finality on terms and conditions which would have been satisfactory to Australia because the new United States Administration sacked the United States delegation and replaced it with one which included representatives of corporations engaged in deep seabed mining. In view of the recent reports that Washington will not complete its review of the law of the sea policy before the next session, which is scheduled for later this year, and given the vital interest Australia has in the completion of these negotiations and the securing of a 200-mile economic zone and a 12-mile territorial sea, will the Minister advise the House what response he received from General Haig as a result of his representations on this question?

was sent by my Department to regional broad-

casters-indeed, it was sent t<;> all the members of

the broadcasting and television industry-to try

t? ensure that they had some opportunity to con-

SIder the.-contents of a statement that was laid

down in this House about intended changes to the

B~oadcasting and Television Act. If any sch~ule

l~ld down b~ the Department al1o~ed inadequate

bme to consider those the legislation has not

bcheeannginestr,oqdUuItceeodb, vthioousesl~yhaos

have views that they wish to express can still

make them known either to members of this

place, to the Government or to the Department

until such stage as the legislation is available and

ready for parliamentary discussion. It would be of

great concern to the Government if any sections

of the industry felt that the changes to be

introduced would prejudice those traditional

areas of concern reflected in existing legislation.

Mr STREET-The Australian Government understands the view of the new United States of America Administration that it would want to review the attitude taken by the previous Administration to the law of the sea draft convention. We made it clear that we understood it would want to do that. At the same time, I made known to the Secretary of State, during my visit to America, Australia's concern that if the delay caused by that was such that the draft convention as a whole was at some risk both Australia's vital interests and the stragetic interests of the United States could be at risk. I was given to understand that in its initial review the United States regarded a lot of the draft convention as acceptable but there were elements which it wanted to look at again. Since then the Australian and the United States delegations have been in close contact and we are hopeful that in due course, when the new

Lo.c~lism i~ particular, as far. as the regional Administration has completed its review, the

teleVISIOn. stat1o~s are concerned, IS a very importgreat progress that has been made over recent

ant doctrIne which we regard as being as importyears in drawing up a draft convention of the law

ant today as it has ever been. The purpose of the of the sea, will be translated into a document

changes that I intimated to the House would be which governments can ratify. I understand that

introduced is to try to ensure that the marketthe United States is not likely to be in a position to

place, which has certainly changed over recent give its final position by the next meeting, which I

years, can operate in a way that permits either inbelieve is set down for early August. In the mean-

stitutional investors or others who have an time, we are consulting the United States

interest in the market legitimately to pursue those Administration to ensure that the progress that

inyestments tha~ the ~ark~t permits. The changes has been made can be built on in the final

will be debated In full In this House in due course. convention. I hope that if any regional television station or

broadcaster, or indeed anybody else, has a view he will let it be known to individual members or to

AIR HOSTESSES STRIKE

me so that it can be taken account of in terms of Mr JULL-I ask the Minister for Transport:

the legislation.

Are air hostesses a necessary commodity to dom-

LAW OF THE SEA CONFERENCE

estic airline services? In case of any future air hostess strikes would the Minister be prepared to

Mr LI~~EL BOWE~--'-I direct my question change the-Air Navigation Regulations, allowing

to the MInister for ForeIgn Affairs. I refer to the the airlines to train flight safety officers and use

Questions Without Notice

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1807

them in emergencies or, indeed, on a full time basis?

Mr HUNT-Firstly, I think that we need to

understand why ciple that there

Ashuosturladliabedoceasbsiunppatotretntdhaenpsrinin

domestic aircraft. Annex 6 to the International

Civil Aviation Organisation Convention, under

the heading 'Operation of Aircraft', lays down the

standards for cabin attendants. It requires the op

?  erator to establish, to the satisfaction of the state
of registry, a minimum number sed on seat ng

capacity to effect safe and exped1t1ous evacuatiOn

in an emergency. It also requires seating for and

protection of cabin attendants and training in

emergency functions. Section 20.16.3 of the Air

Navigation Orders requires cabin attendants to be

carried on passenger aircraft carrying more than

15 passengers-that is, on a scale of one cabin at

tendant to 36 passengers or part thereof up to 216

passengers. Our requirements are slightly more

stringent than the requirements in the United

States and the United Kingdom where the scale is

basically one cabin attendant to 50 persons.

DAIRY AID SCHEME
Mr LLOYD-I draw the attention of the Min ister for Primary Industry to an article in the Melbourne Age on Saturday 25 April 1981, entitled 'Canberra to Quit Dairy Aid Scheme'. I ask the Minister: Is it the Government's intention, as al leged in that report, to end its involvement in the dairy industry stabilisation and price support scheme? What can he tell Parliament about the progress of the new scheme?
Mr NIXON-I did read with some amazement an article in the Melbourne Age on Saturday. Ap parently the author of the article was present at a factory which I opened last week in Shepparton when I made a speech from which he drew the conclusion that the Government was about to withdraw support from the Australian dairy industry. I think he was present at a different meet ing because nothing I said at that opening could lead him to those conclusions that led to his writing the article. There was a fair bit of imagin ation, to say the least, used in the article. The fel low ought to go back to school and learn a few facts.

Ansett Airlines of Australia and Trans Australia Airlines actually employ one more cabin attendant than they are required to employ under the Air Navigation Orders applying in Australia. I have asked my Department to review the requirements to see whether any relaxation is justified. Of course, an option is to use security at tendants on aircraft. I have an open mind on the
matter, but one thing I will not have an open mind
on is to take any decision whatsoever or give any
instruction whatsoever that in any way compro
mises safety in aircraft.

In respect of the future of the dairy stabilisation plan there have been continued negotiations with the Australian Dairy Farmers Federation. On Monday of this week the Federation considered a paper to put to me. I will be considering this paper in the next week or two. I am hopeful that negotiations can be concluded in time to set the objective, which I have stated earlier in the House, of a three-year program of underwriting instead of ad hoc arrangements that have applied in previous years. Only time will tell whether that will be achieved in time to set the program before 30 June this year.

HEALTH CARE SERVICES
Mr CUNNINGHAM-The Minister for Health is no doubt aware that many people in re gional areas with public hospitals do not carry any hospital insurance. What is the situation regarding a family which takes out hospital insurance in the next month if the woman is, at present, pregnant? Will the family be able to receive full insurance cover on or after 2 September for all confinement costs in hospital?
Mr MacKELLAR-Health insurance funds have requirements in relation to pre-existing con ditions in terms of the benefits that they do make available. Without looking at the individual cir cumstances I cannot give a precise answer to the honourable gentleman. I will investigate the matter and give him an answer later today.

DEFOLIANTS AND PESTICIDES:
EFFECT ON VIETNAM VETERANS
Mr BARRY JONES-I direct my question to the Prime Minister. What discussions and exchanges of information have taken place between the Australian Government and the United States Administration on the question of the im pact of agent orange and other defoliants and pes ticides on servicemen serving in Vietnam? Has the United States Veterans Administration expressed concern at the possibility of the Australian Government's inquiry establishing a causal link between the use of chemicals and subsequent breakdown in health because of the precedent it would set in establishing liability of the United States Administration for United States veterans similarly affected? Has the United States Administration urged the Australian Government

1808 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

to 'cool it' and to try every means to avoid There is no reason why the Commonwealth

liability?

Government's commitment should be altered in

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I will get more any way whatsoever.

detailed information for the honourable gentkman later today because this is a matter of very great importance and of very great concern to the individuals involved. The Department of Veterans' Affairs and the Minister for Veterans' Affairs have been doing everything they can to help resolve this issue. I am not aware of any expression of concern by the United States Government in relation to establishing a causal link in relation to problems or difficulties that any individual might have. But Jet me only say that if any such expression of concern did come to this Government from any other government, including the United States Government, we would not 'cool it', as the honourable gentleman suggests. We would press on with what we believed to be right and do everything we possibly could to assist the veterans concerned. I would believe, subject to advice which I will seek immediately after Question Time, that the United States Govern-

FOREIGN INVESTMENT Mr HAYDEN-I refer the Treasurer to the December half of the 1980 figures for foreign investment approvals given by the Foreign Investment Review Board. Is the Treasurer aware that 99 per cent of the foreign investment approvals were for the takeovers of existing businesses rather than for investment in new enterprises? Is the Treasurer also aware that there has been an alarming increase in the proportion of foreign investment which is pouring in merely to buy up shares in Australian companies? In this respect, is it a fact that foreign investment in corporate equities has increased from 10 per cent of the total in 1978-79 to 40 per cent in the first half of 1980-81 ? How much longer does the Government intend to preside supinely over the plunder of Australian business and industry by corporate adventurers from foreign countries?

ment would be just as interested in getting to a proper resolution of this important human problem as we are.

Mr HOWARD-It is a fact that there has been a very significant increase in foreign investment in Australia since 1978. That is true of portfolio in-

BURDEKIN DAM Mr DEAN-My question is to the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy. It refers to the Burdekin Dam project in north Queensland. Is the Minister aware of concern being expressed in north Queensland that the preliminary works for which the State Government is responsible are not proceeding as well as planned? Can the Minister say whether or not the preparatory work is proceeding as planned by the Water Resources Commission in Queensland? Can the Minister affirm that when it comes to building the darn wall itself the Commonwealth funding which was previously committed,will be forthcoming?

vestment particularly. We on this side of the House make no apology for the fact that we have a foreign investment policy which offers intelligent attractions for foreigners to invest in this country. At the same time our foreign investment policy has sought to achieve a balance between the need for a capital-scarce country such as Australia to attract large amounts of capital and also to ensure that Australians get a fair share of participation, particularly in new resource projects. The administration and implementation of foreign investment policy over the past 12 months has been characterised by a determination of this Government to ensure that the 50 per cent Australian equity guideline is fully observed.

Mr ANTHONY-As the honourable member mentioned, the preliminary work on the dam site is the responsibility of the Queensland State Government and the actual cost of the structure of the dam will be taken up by the Commonwealth Government. From what I know, very good progress is being made with the design of the structure of the dam and also the geological investigation and survey work. Up to the end of this year it is expected that the Queensland Govern-

Mr Keating-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. The Standing Orders provide that an answer shall be relevant to the question. The question asked related to portfolio investment in established industries and business in Australia, not new industries. It had nothing to do with the 50 per cent equity policy in prospective industries. It had to do with portfolio investment in existing industries. That is what the question was about. That is what we want an answer to.

ment will have spent a little over $4m in doing this Mr HOWARD-It would be a very strange

work. There has, however, been some temporary perversion of the understanding of our policy and

delay in the construction of one of the access of the English language to imagine that the sort of

roads, but I am told that this is only temporary stand the Government has taken on projects such

and everything is proceeding according to plan. as those at Blair Athol and Oaky Creek, two of

Questions Without Notice

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1809

the largest coal projects in Australia's develop ment history, represents a supine attitude on the part of this Government. In fact, the criticism that has been heaped upon this Government in respect of those projects has come more from those who believe that we have taken too doctrinaire an attitude in relation to Australian equity and Australian participation. They are splendid examples of the determination of this Government to see that Australians get a fair share of participation in the development of this country's resources.
The truth about foreign investment in this country over the past three years is that we have successfully achieved a balance between the need to attract foreign investment and the need to see that Australians get a fair share of participation. Of course, there has been an enormous upsurge in foreign investor interest in this country, and that derives from two factors. Firstly, people now re alise that we have totally reversed the anti investment policies adopted in the years 1972-75. Secondly, people overseas recognise that this is one of the most stable, predictable and best economic climates in which to invest.
Mr Hayden-! raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. Question Time and much of the parliamentary procedure becomes low farce if questions are not answered by Ministers. The fact is that the Minister is highly humiliated by the sellout of Australian industry, commerce and financial corporations that is taking place in the hands of this Government--

buying out of Australia's existing businesses with portfolio investment.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Blaxland will resume his seat.
Mr Keating-The Treasurer obviously cannot answer the question without embarrassment.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Blaxland will resume his seat. There is no point of order. The Treasurer is making a statement in answer to the question, which answer is quite relevant to the question asked.
Mr HOWARD-As 1 was saying, the enormous upsurge in foreign investor interest in Australia derives not only from the reversal of the anti-investment policies of earlier years but also from the fact that the economic policies of this Government have made Ausiralia an attractive and stable environment in which to invest. I believe our foreign investment policies have worked. We have stuck to the policy that was enunciated in 1976-a policy which, in other circumstances, the Leader of the Opposition has been pleased to describe as almost bipartisan. Yet he comes into the House today for his own particular internal political reasons--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Treasurer will draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr HOWARD-This policy has not only been described by the Leader of the Opposition as being bipartisan but also has worked demon strably to the benefit of Australia.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. That is not a point of order.
Mr Hayden-Which action it undertook des perately to prop up its balance of payments.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is not making a point of order; he is debating the issue.
Mr Hayden-Control of Australian industry now rests in the hands of overseas board rooms.
Mr SPEAKER-I draw to the attention of the Leader of the Opposition that he is not entitled to dbate the matter under the pretence of taking a point of order. When I ask him to resume his seat I expect his co-operation in doing so.
Mr Keating-Mr Speaker, I raise a further point of order. There is a Standing Order which says that an answer will be relevant to the question. The point of the question asked by the Leader of the Opposition was to direct a question to the Government on the basis of what the Government intends to do about the wholesale

NATIONAL FARMERS FEDERATION
Mr FISHER-I direct a question to the Minister for Primary Industry, who will be aware that earlier this year the National Farmers Federation issued a document entitled 'Farm Focus: The 80s', in which the Federation called for a White Paper on agricultural policy. Can the Minister say what is the latest Government position on the matter?
Mr NIXON-It is correct that at a conference early this year the National Farmers Federation presented a document entitled 'Farm Focus: The 80s', the central issue in which was a call for a White Paper on agriculture. I have had discussions with the leaders of the National Farmers Federation since that time. The Federation now accepts that there is a difference and understands the difference between a White Paper and a Green Paper. As a result of those discussions, yesterday we announced to the Federation that, with the co-operation of the farmer organisations and some Government leaders, a Green Paper, or Pol icy Discussion Paper as it is now called, will be prepared. The terms of reference to be used in the preparation of that Green Paper have yet to be

1810 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

decided, as has the membership of the team that will prepare it. I might say that the National Farmers Federation does believe that the agreement to prepare a Green Paper, the policy discussion paper, represents one of the most important successes it has had since its formation.

SPECIAL ADJOURNMENT Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House, at its rising, adjourn until Tuesday, 5 May 1981, at 2.45 p.m., or such time thereafter as Mr Speaker may take the chair.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (11.22)-The Opposition has no objection to that course being followed. We appreciate the situation.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

PROPOSED SELECT COMMITTEE ON TAXATION

Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (11.23)-1 move:

That this House, being greatly concerned at the apparent

continuing erosion of the equity of the tax system, calls on the

Government to establish a select committee on taxation to in-

vestigate and report on-

.

(1) the extent to which the income tax schedules established by the Parliament are related to the capacity of taxpayers to pay;
(2) the degree to which the nominal incidence of taxation under these schedules is distorted by the impact of tax avoidance and tax evasion;
(3) the impact on the equity of the tax system of the increased incidence of indirect taxation;
(4) the impact on the equity of the tax system of a greater proportion of tax revenue being collected from indirect taxation in the future, and
(5) the need for changes to the present system, the introduction of new taxes or other measures which can be used to restore equity to the tax system.

The motion calls for the establishment by this House of a select committee on taxation. In moving the motion for the establishment of such a committee the Opposition is expressing its very real concern at the deterioration of Australia's system of taxation over recent years. Since the advent of the Fraser Government 5+ years ago Australia's tax system has been used in a totally unprincipled way to achieve short term political . gains, to reward coalition supporters and to achieve a general redistribution of income away from the great bulk of the population in favour of a small, wealthy elite. The result of that process is a tax system which falls a long way short of achieving the desirable characteristics of a tax system and which commands less and less support from within the Australian community.

The Australian Labor Party feels that immediate action must be taken to reverse those trends. To that end, a select committee capable of taking

a more independent, long term view of the tax system would perform an invaluable role. Such a committee would be able to investigate the effects and shortcomings of the current tax structure, could formulate a stable framework for longer term reform, could examine and advise the Government on the impact of profound changes to the system and would provide valuable public information for a wide-ranging taxation debate. In short, such a committee would playa similar role on the revenue side of the Budget to that which the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure plays on the expenditure side. Surely if it is reasonable to have an expenditure committee, the establishment of which the Opposition strongly supported, it makes just as much sense, if not more sense, given the controversy surrounding taxation within the community, to establish a committee to examine the revenue side of Government policy.
There are a number of objectives to which any tax system should attempt to conform as closely as possible and which would be the reference points of such a committee. These objectives are well-known and, indeed, the present Treasurer (Mr Howard) has made a point of referring to them on many occasions. First, and the Opposition regards this as of prime importance, a tax system should be fair or equitable. This requires that persons in the same situation, with similar income, should be equally treated. Parliament often provides specific concessions to persons in certain circumstances to enhance the equity of the tax system-for example, the spouse rebate, zone allowances and limited rebates for health and education expenses. Further, it seems to be generally accepted that taxation should be levied according to a person's ability to pay; that is, people with higher incomes who are in a better position to pay tax should do so. In other words, our tax system should be progressive.
Secondly, the tax system should be simple to understand. It should not impose undue compliance costs on taxpayers nor should taxes be overly expensive for the authorities to administer and collect. Also, the tax system should be efficient, enabling the government to achieve its revenue objectives and collect taxes from designated persons and activities with a minimum degree of fuss. Finally, the tax system should, as far as possible, be neutral in its impact and should not influence people to choose one course of action rather than an alternative solely because of tax benefits. Naturally, any government will want to encourage desired activity, resource allocation

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1811

and so on but, in our view, such intentional departures f;om neutrality should be kept to a minimum and used only where a similar result could not be better achieved in some other way. Otherwise, all other objectives may be undermined as the tax system becomes more complex and cumbersome, and open to abuse.
As I have already mentioned, the Treasurer has been at pains in the past to remind us constantly of these desirable objectives for the tax system. Yet, despite the rhetoric, there has developed a clear contradiction between what the Treasurer has identified as a good tax system and what he has actually produced since he has occupied the Treasurer's office. His policies and those of his predecessor have dangerously emasculated Australia's income tax system during their terms of office. Any thought of well-considered, balanced reform has been thrown out the window by successive coalition Treasurers who have been more intent on manipulating the system to serve the economic interests and ideologies of the Government and its supporters. Short term political self-interest has taken precedent over rational taxation decision-making.
Let us look briefly at the Government's record on taxation. The most striking aspect of this record is undoubedly the Government's blatant dishonesty with regard to taxation. First there were the tax cuts before the 1977 election-surely everyone remembers the fist full of dollars advertising and the 'Dial-a-Tax-Cut' campaign-which were to apply from 1 February 1978. It is now history that these tax cuts lasted only until the 1978 Budget when the so-called 'temporary' 1.5c tax surcharge was introduced. This surcharge had a highly inequitable impact despite repeated assurances from the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). The Treasurer and the then Minister for Finance that the surcharge would last only for eight months, these promises were quickly forgotten and the surcharge continued until November 1979 and was in fact reflected in yeady tax rates right up to June last year.
The second gross deception of Australian taxpayers related to tax indexation. In 1975 the Prime Minister promised to index taxes fully for inflation so as to 'make government more honest with your money'. These were fine sentiments which again did not stand the test of the Government's expediency. In no year since that promise was made have we had full tax indexation. Indeed, tax indexation was suspended during 1979-80, there was less than half indexation this year and it will be abandoned completely from after next year. The Government has been roundly condemned for these broken promises

and its credibility on taxation is in tatters. Yet the Prime Minister and the Treasurer seem to be unable to learn from their mistakes. During the last days of the recent election campaign, when the Government was searching desperately for a favourable issue, both the Prime Minister and the Treasurer promised that any further increases in oil levy revenue would be handed back as income tax cuts. Again this promise has been forgotten and the entire $400m collected in a full year from the January oil price increase has flowed straight into Government coffers. Such blatant manipulation of the tax system for short term political gain, as these actions indicate, can lead only to a distinct move away from the aims of equity, simplicity and efficiency and a marked deterioration in public support for our system.
Another disturbing trend has been the increasing use of the tax system by this Government to provide concessions to various supporting interest groups. By using the tax system rather than making direct grants through the expenditure side of the Budget, the Government is able to hide from public scrutiny the extent of its subsidies to privileged groups in the community. On our estimates, since coming to power the Government has legislated for some 44 tax concessions-12 to farmers, 13 to companies and 19 others, mainly related to gifts and the film industry. The costs of these concessions are unknown and once introduced they tend to become part of the status quo and continue unquestioned. Often they are not directed to persons most in need of assistance and are difficult to control to prevent abuse. Honourable members have only to look at the fiasco of the concessions to the film industry to realise the scope for exploitation of such measures.
Only two of this long list of concessionsadjustments to dependants' rebates-have related to the great bulk of pay-as-you-earn taxpayers, who are the taxpayers most in need of assistance. The other concessions have all gone to various lobbies and high income taxpayers, thus increasing the proportion of the tax burden borne by ordinary taxpayers and, in our view, greatly reducing the equity of the system. This would be a major area for inquiry by the select committee. Apart from those T have mentioned there are a vast number of tax concessions, awarded for a great variety of purposes, which have accumulated in the Income Tax Act over a long period and a number of governments. Most, have become well entrenched and are looked on as the norm, rather than as special concessions designed to achieve specific tasks, which is how they should

1812 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

be regarded. The continuing cost of them is unA fundamental task of the committee would be

known, except possibly to people within the Taxto develop such policies and to look at a means of

ation Office. Worst of all, such concessions proovercoming schemes such as those I have men-

vide the breeding ground for tax avoidance-for tioned. In addition, the committee would playa

smart operators to design highly artificial schemes central role in investigating and advising the

in order to gain various tax benefits to which they government on the methods and extent of tax

would not otherwise be entitled.

avoidance within the community. By publicising

the proliferation of certain schemes and ensuring

To my knowledge very little recent work has that they were brought to the Government's

been done in this area. The select committee attention the committee would provide a power-

would perform a valuable task in making the tax ful deterrent to continued tax avoidance. One

system more equitable, simple and efficient if it scheme which could initially occupy the com-

were to examine, among other things, the whole mittee's attention would be the assignment of

gamut of tax concessions to determine their real book debts by certain professional groups. This

relevancy and if it were to vet closely any new scheme has been used widely since the middle of

proposed concessions, to determine their cost, 1979. As figures in my possession show, it involves

necessity and effectiveness.

the avoidance of considerable amounts of tax by

privileged high income earners. It is this sort of

Another area of prime relevance to the comscheme which the parliamentary committee

mittee's activities would be the area of tax avoidshould seek out and identify in order to stop it as

ance. Tax avoidance has mushroomed over the quickly as possible.

last few years. As the last annual report of the

Commissioner of Taxation shows the number of It is clear that certain professionals, such as

identified participants in tax avoidance schemes doctors, barristers and dentists, are taxed on the

last year was 20 times higher than in 1975-76. The basis of actual cash receipts compared with most

estimates of the annual loss to revenue are of the businesses and other self-employed taxpayers who

order of $1,OOOm, or perhaps much higher. These are taxed on the basis of what they earn, including

successful tax avoidance activities by high income money owed to them, but not actually received.

earners are further destroying tax equity and Taking advantage of this fact, doctors and other

placing a much heavier burden on the great magroups involved take action to divert the money

jority of low and middle income earners, so much owed to them before it is received and tax be-

so that PAYE taxpayers are paying an extra $4 to comes due. They do this by assigning such book

$5 a week to make up the lost revenue.

debts, by way of gift, to their spouse, children or

family trust. It is then argued that these debts are

The Government has tried to stem this flood Qf not income in the hands of the recipient but are

lost revenue, but without success. The case-bycapital and thus non-taxable; nor does the income

case approach adopted by the Treasurer leaves have to be declared to the Taxation Com-

the Taxation Office too far behind the tax missioner. The doctors, dentists, or whoever uses

avoiders and unduly complicates the tax Act, this scheme, may register the assignment of book

opening up further scope for tax avoidance. In addebts, at least under State law in Victoria, with

dition, the Government is clearly unwilling to act the Registrar-General, and may have to pay

against several blatantly used schemes which have stamp duty and possibly gift duty although this

caused huge revenue losses for a number of years. can be avoided if the gift is for the maintenance

These include: Contrived internal superannuation and education of children, but they are still able to

schemes, trusts, which are still a lucrative form of avoid paying large amounts of income tax.

tax avoidance for very high income earners;

foreign tax havens which involve the laundering I have in my possession three legal opinions by

of profits through low tax countries; and transfer top tax lawyers which have been provided to sup-

pricing by multinational corporations. These last port the scheme's legality. They have been pre-

two are said by the Secretary of the Australia taxpared by Mr Clifford Pannam, QC., Mr I. C. F.

payers Association to involve revenue losses in Spry, QC. and Mr A. J. Myers. All support the

excess of $2,000m. Clearly a new approach to tax view that once bills owed by the clients and

avoidance is necessary. Given the substantial patients are given away they become non-taxable

problems which the Government is likely to in the hands of the professional's wife, trust, chil-

encounter with the attitude of the High Court of dren or close friend. The proliferation of this

Australia to the enforcement of a new general scheme is most disturbing. According to my infor-

anti-avoidance section, alternative policies against mation it is being used in most States. However, it

the tax avoidance parasites are urgently needed. seems to be most prevalent in Victoria. Certainly

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1813

it is easier to trace in Victoria because of the requirements of State laws that any such assignments be registered. It is, therefore, possible by examining the relevant public register to determine just who has been ripping ofr the tax system
in this way.
We have carried out a search of the register in Melbourne, at the Registrar-General's office, and found, much to our consternation, that in the last two years at least 150 doctors, dentists, solicitors, barristers and others have registered such assignments or notified their intention to do so. Among

this list are five respected Queen's Counsel-Mr J. L. Sher, Mr A. J. Chernov, Mr E. W. Gillard, Mr D. G. Williamson and Dr Pannam, whose opinion 1 have already referred to. I seek leave to incorporate in Handsard a list of persons who have registered or notified an intention to register the assignment of book debts with the RegistrarGeneral's office in Melbourne.
Leave granted.
The list read as follows-

REGISTERED ASSIGNMENTS OF BOOK DEBTS Registrar-General's Office, Melbourne

Person making assignment

Transferred to:

Registration Execution Name

Residence

Occupalion

Name

Residence

Occupation

Amount

10.10.80
10. \0,80
21.1 1.79 18.3.81 18.3.81 9.10,80 9.10.80 28,8.80
8,8.80 27.3.80 6.5,80
IS.lSI
11.3.81
6.8.80 5.8.S0
26.5.S0 6.6.S0 6.6.80 27.5,80 23.4.S0
23.4.80 23.4.S0 23.4.80 21.3.80
16.4.80 10.4.80
10.4.80
10.4.80
1004.80
2.4.80
17.3.80 11.1.80
25.3.81 18.3.81 23.9.80

1.8.80 Arber\ Samuel

Brighton

Med.prac.

1.8.80

Applebee, Frederick Sandringham Med. prae.

19.10.80 9.6.80 23.6.80 23.7.80 5.12.79 3,7.80

Ashton, Peter Bailey, Christopher Baxter, RoyceG. Blatt, Paul David Blatt, Paul David Balabin, Igor

Eo Hawthorn Hastings Delacombe Ripponle. Ripponlca W. Essendon

Med.prac. Med.prac. Med. prac,
Gen. prae. Gen. prae. Med. prae.

12.5.80 20.2.80 15.2.80

Balfe, Joseph R.
Balfe, Joseph R. Brew, George P.

Melbourne Melbourne Malvern

Barrister Barrister Med. prae.

23.6.80 Griffiths, John G.

Sebast.pol

Med. prae,

14.2.81 Gilchrist, Gary J.

Beaumari~

Dentist

16.7.80 16.7.80
30.5.80 6.5.80 6.5.80 15.4.80 31.1.80

Grace, Carl E. Galbraith, Stuart R.
Gillard, Eugene W. Gray! Peter A. Gray, Peter A. Green, Kevin J. Galbraith, James E.

Highton Freshwater
Creek Brighton Beach Brighton Brighton E. Bentleigh Camberwell

Barri_~tcr
Surgeon Surgeon !VIed. prac. Opthamologist

27.2.S0 27.2.80 27.2.80 24.1.80

Gracel David Grace, David Grace, David Grame John A.

Richmond Richmond Richmond Toorak

Med.prac.

18.2.80 11.3.80

Bhaskar, Rakesh Bond, Allan J.

Werribee Toorak

Med.prac. Mcd.prac.

11.3.80 Bond, Jennifer

Toorak

Married woman

11.3,80 Bond, Allan John

Toorak

Med.prac.

11.3.80 Bond, Jennifer

Toorak

Married woman

15.2.80 Barclay, David Reid Guys Hill

26.2.80 Beetham, William R. Miners Rest

31.10.80 Bicknell, JohnP.

Malvern

Med.prac. Barrister

3.5.81 6.6.80 8.8.80

Chazan, Samuel
Collie, Donald L. Cox,ColinJ.

Kew Sandringham Malvern

Med.prac. Med.prac. Med.prac.

Elizabeth Simth

Hampton

Renee Pianka

Mid. Brighton

Richclle Arher

Brighton

Barbara Applebee Sandringham

E.Smith

R. Pianka) R.Arber;

Above

B. Applebee)

Leslie Jane Ashton E. Hawthorn

Clair Edith Bailey

Jennifer Leah Baxter Delacombe

Peggy Blatt

Ripponlea

Peggy Blatt

Ripponlea

Nina Balabin and

Anor

Diane Coleman Balfe Mont Albert

Diane Coleman Balfe

Monica Patricia

Brew

Mary Elizabeth

Sebastapol

Griffiths

Lisabeth Margaret Baumari.'i

Gilchrist

Susan Frances Grace Highton

Freshwater

Sally Jane Galbraith Creek

Judith Ann Gillard

Kay Lillian Grey

Kay Lillian Grey

Rosemary Green

E. Benlcigh

Patricia Elizabeth

Galbraith

Debra Jane Grace

Debra Jane Grace

Debra Jane Grace

Barbara Lancaster

Game

Pushka Bhaskar

Tricontincntal

Corporation f.td

Tricontinental

Corporation Ltd

Tricontinental Corp,

Ltd

Tricontinental Corp.

Ltd

Pauline Frances

Barclay

Violet Mary Beetham

Belinda Robyn

Bicknell

Martha Cha7..an

Kew

Judith StanleyCollic SanJringham

Beverley Pearl Cox Malvern

27,155.90

Married woman
Barrister Barrister

39,900.00 6,530.66 8,297 .. 87 1,391.19
731.20 24,133.52

Married woman

51280.00 11,564.00 7,142.99

Married wom.n 13,222.69

Home duties

9,172.25

9,000.00

Married woman

6,000.00 22,500.00 10,243.23 14,995.32 18,000.00 22,554.70

450.00 2,500.00 6,824.00

3,199

10,472.25 32,347.45

Married woman Married woman

8,515.66 4,128.30 18,833,88

1814 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

Person making assignment

Registration Execution Name

Residence

Occupation

Transferred to: Name

Residence

15.7.80
18.6.80
5.6.80 8.2.80 12.11.79
22.8.80
4.9.80 16.4.80
14.11.79 30.3.81 25.3.81 3.3.80 3.3.80 3.3.80 16.4.80
12.12.79 18.3.81
18.3.81 10.10.80
10.10.80
14.3.80 28.2.80
28.2.80 21.11.79 14.11.79
25.3.81
6.8.80
2.7.80 2.7.80
2.7.80
2.7.80
12.6.80
12.6.80
12.6.80
27.5.80
27.5.80
6.5.80
12.3.80 11.3.80 5.12.79
9.11.79
18.3.81

1.7.80

Cowie, Robert W.

6.5.80

Cone, Charles P.

10.5.80 21.1.80

Cernavin. Igor ChernovI Alex

12.10.79 Chow, Chi-Ta

22.5.80 Croyle, Michael

Hawthorn Ringwood N.Fitzroy Canterbury Mooroolbark Kew

Med.prac. Med.prac. D.surgeon Barrister Dentist Barrister

10.7.80 18.2.80

Davie,Brian P. Douglas, John C.

Richmond Hawthorn

Surgeon

30.10.79
1.6.80 13.12.80 14.2.80 14.2.80 14.2.80 27.2.80

Devlin, Christopher
Ellett, David F. Ellett, David F. Ellett, David F. Ellett, David F. Ellett, David F. Evans, Malcolm

Hantilton
Balwyn Balwyn Balwyn Balwyn Balwyn Eaglemont

Dentist
Orthodontist Orthodontist Orthodontist Orthodontist Orthodontist Med.prac.

26.11.79 Evans, Richard

9.6.80

Fleming, John D.

Sandringham Hastings

Barrister Med.prac.

23.4.80 9.5.80

Faull, Peter A.

Ballarat

Ferguson, Russell N. Malvern

Med.prac. Med.prac.

9.5.80

Ferguson, Russell N. Malvern

Med.prac.

4.2.80 13.2.80

Freeman, Richard P. Malvern

Fryd.y, Alan K.

Essendon

13.2.80 31.10.79 31.10.79

Fryday, Alan K. Pary, William Fernon, Michael

Essendon Frankston Warrandyte

Dentist Solicitor

5.3.81 16.7.80

Harewood, Laurence E. Melbourne M.
Harrison, Geoffrey M. Ceres

Urologist

31.5.80 27.5.80

Haines,lan C.

Mildur.

Herszlikowicz, Morris E.Kew

Med.prac. Med.prac.

12.5.80 Herszlikowicz, Morris E.Kew

Med.prac.

20.5.80 Herszlikowicz, Morris E.Kew

Med. prac.

22.5.80 Hjorth,RobertJ.

Richmond

Med.prac.

22.5.80 Hjorth, Robert J.

Richmond

Med.prac.

22.5.80 Hjorth, RobertJ.

Richmond

Med.prac.

9.5.80

Henderson, Peter N. Hawthorn

Opthamo1ogist

9.5.80 Henderson, Peter N. Hawthorn

Opthamologist

\5.2.80
8.2.80 1.2.80 25.10.79
18.10.79

Higgins, Christopher D.
Hase, MichaelP. Ham, FrankJ. Harding, David L.
Horne, Henry

Armadale
N.Balwyn Kew Kangaroo
Ground Benalla

Med.prae.
Dentist Surgeon Med.prac.
Med.prac.

20.6.80 Irani, Boman N.

Kew

Med.prac.

Marilyn Judith Cowie
Margaret Eileen Cone
Zoya Cemavin Elizabeth Mary
Chernov Frances Wing Fun
Chow M.J.C. Nontinees
P/L
Valerie Anne Davie Lynette Mary
Douglas Rosalin Faye Devlin

Richmond

Barbara Denise Ellett Balwyn

Cartenna P jL

Balwyn

Barbara Denise Ellett Balwyn

Barbara Denise Ellett Balwyn

Barbara Denise Ellett Balwyn

Georgina Margaretta

Evans

Deidre Evans

Anne Elizabeth

Flenting

Eleanor M. Faull Ballarat

Jennifer Meg

Malvern

Ferguson

Anne Hamilton

Malvern

Roberts

Rita Lesley Freeman

Lorrainclanice

Johnston

Helen Kay Fryday

Pamela Joy Fary

Pamela Joy Fernon

and Elizabeth Ann

Lidesden

Denise Harewood Kew

Jennifer Anne Hamson
Helen Lucy Haines
Kry8tyna Herszlikowicz
Krystyna Hcrszlikowicz
Krystyna Herszlikowicz
Ada Margareth Hjorth
Ada Margareth Hjorth
Ada Margareth Hjorth
Helen Patricia Henderson
Katharyn, Anna and John Henderson
Margaret Hilary Higgins
Beverley Ann Hase
Elizabeth Rose Ham
Andrea Gladys Harding
NolaL.Horne, PamelaM. Patience, Ruth M. King, Robyn Kelly

Ceres

Farokh Bowman Irani

Kew

Occupation

Amount $
15,099.60
7,883.57
3,900.82 23,101.60
13,685.70

Married woman 10,867.30 14,704.00
20.686.00 33,597.00 20,967.00 9,592.00 5,380.00 5,323.00 5,647.00
28,604.00 Married woman 6,530.66
Married woman 12,008.52 2,996.45
2,996.45
24,016.55 3,213.28
9,683.93 12,675.00 23,085.00

Home duties

20,790.80 9,000.00 12,984.65 1,745.38 9,659.35 3,201.97 2,996.70 4,998.10 10,008.10 14,000.00 7,000.00 7,142.99 14,692.08 12,783.00

37,754.44

Student

7,606.25

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1815

Person making ass-,ig:..n_m_e_n_t_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _T_ra_n_sf_e_rr_ed_to_:_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

Registration Execution Name

Residence

Occupation

Name

Residence

Occupation

Amount

IS.3.80
IS.3.80 23.9.80
24.1.79 24.1.79
24.1.79
IS.3.81 18.3.81 7.10.80 30.6.80
12.3.80
12.3.80
12.3.80
12.3.80
17.3.80 17.3.80 17.3.80 9.11.79

20.6.80 Irani, Homai

Kew

Med. prac.

1.8.80 1.7.80

Irani, Homai Jackson, Robert P.

Kew Nunawading

Med. prac. Chiropodist

25.12.79 Joseph, Andrew H. 27.12.79 Joseph, Andrew H.

Melbourne Melbourne

Solicitor Solicitor

27.12.79 Joseph,AndrewH. Melbourne

Solicitor

18.3.81 18.3.81 13.3.80 13.6.80

Kaminski, Zygrunt Kaminski, Zygrunt Kelly, William Keast, Peter J.

to Templestowe Med. prac.

L, Templeslowe Med. prac.

N. Ba lwyn

Barrister

Campherwcll Med. prac.

21.2.80 Kelso, Alexander

Newtown

Med.prac.

21.2.80 Kelso, Alexander

Newtown

Med. prac.

21.2.80 Kelso, Alexander

Newtown

Mcd.prac.

21.2.80 Kelso, Alexander

Newtown

Med. prac.

26.2.80 26.2.80 26.2.80 8.10.79

Knight, Geoffrey, M. Knight, Geoffrey, M. Knight, Geoffrey, M. King, Michael R.

Brighton Brighton Brighton Benalla

Dentist Dentist Dentist Med. prac,

9.11.79

8.10.79 Kelly, Paul A.

Benalla

Med. prac.

11.11.80 lU1.80 20.8.80
15.7.80 3.4.80 5.12.79 14.11.79

30.4.80 30.4.80 3.7.80

Lardy, Peter Lardy, Peter Liszukiewicz, Henry

N. Balwyn N. Balwyn St Albans

Med. prac. Med. prac. Med.prac.

1.7.80 4.2.80 31.l0.70 30.12.79

Leonard, Ian Larkins, John F. Larking, John Ludescher, Christian

Templestowe Mcd,prac.

Essendon

Barri!>ter

Mordialloc

W. Wheelan Hill Solicitor

12.11.79 18.3.81
18.3.81
20.6.80
22.5.80
2112.80 10.10.80
10.10.80 6.5.80 6.5.80
9.4.80 6.3.80 14.11.79
2.4.80

24.10.79 Lindsey, Maxwell 17.7.80 Marich, Joseph A.

E. Malvern N. Balwyn

18.181 Marich, JosephA.

N. Balwyn

2.5.80

Marich, Joseph A.

N. Balwyn

30.4.80 Marich, Joseph A.

N. Balwyn

17.11.80 Morrison, Wayne A. Hawthorn 16.7.80 Morgan, FrancesJ. Ballarat

16.7.80 15.2.80 15.7.80

Morgan,Frances r.
Melville, Hugh J.
Morrison, George

Ballarat Glen Iris Malvern

18.2.80 18.2.80 25.10.79

Merkel, Ronald Merkel, Ronald Meikle, Ronald G.

Melh. Melh. N.Balwyn

18.7.80 Martin, Ian H.

Toorak

Med.prac. Anaesthetist
Anaesthetist
Anaesthetist
Anaesthetist
P. surgeon Dentist
Dentist Med. prac. Med.prac.
Barrister Barrister Radiologist
Psychoanalyst

Farokh Bowman Irani
Danesh Irani

Kew Kew

Student Student

7,606.25 7,208.05

Margene Mary Jackson
Michael Eric Salter
Louise Frances Joseph
Louise Frances Joseph
Elizabeth Kaminski
Elizabeth Kaminski
Michelle Kelly
Rosemary Louise Keast
Richard Malcolm Kelso
Hugh Alexander Kelso
Hugh Alexander Kelso
Richard MalC-Dlm Kelso
Sinikka Riita Knight
Sinikka Riita Knight
Sinikka Riita Knight
Nola L. Hornet Pamela Patience, Ruth King, Robyn Kelly
Nola L. Horne, Pamela Patience, Ruth King, Robyn Kelly

Nunawading Married woman
L. Templestowe Married woman L. Templestowe Married woman

6,800.00
6,342.23 9,622.91
2,359.23
2,857.00 3,398.00 22,568.00 13,517.00
2,841.00
4,171.00
2,735.00
4,009.00
2,070.00 5,930.00 9,747.00 37,754.00
37,754.00

Valerie Joy tardy N.Balwyn

Lesley Lardy

N. Balwyn

Nina Balabin and Tanor

Margaret A. Leonard

Gail Patricia Larkins

Robyn Leslie Larking ..

Pamela Joy Fernon & Elizabeth Anne Ludcscher

Jean Lindsey

Pamela Norman Marich

Pamela Norman Marich

Pamela Norman Marich

Pamela Norman Marich

Serena Morrison

Violette May Williams

BaHarat

Lome Jean Morgan

Judith Mclvi1!e

Judith Monica Morrison

Beth Zeally Merkel

Beth Zeally Merkel

K.M.P. Holding.', P/L

Pamela Margaret Martin

Married woman

15,492.60 15,492.60 24,133.52

14,667.60 11,000.00

23,085.00

14,958.71
Married woman 12,7in.12
Married woman 10,637.72
Married woman 4,990.40
Married woman 9,589.40
37,851.00
37,851.00 7,142.99 7,142.99
8,100.00 8,100.00
60,000.00 12,275.00

1816 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

Person making assignment

Registration Execution Name

Residence

Occupation

Transferred to: Name

Residence

Occupation

Amount

20.12.79
30.3.81
25.3.81 17.12.80
17.12.80 6.3.80 9.11.79 3.3.80
3.3.80
3.3.80
20.12.79 14.11.79 20.4.79
18.3.81
18.3.81 10.10.80 10.10.80 10.10.80 10.10.80 4.7.80 30.5.80
14.11.79 14.11.79 12.11.79
9.11.79
10.1.80
18.3.81
30.6.80
18.3.81 18.3.81 18.3.81 18.3.81 18.3.81 18.3.81 20.2.81
13.1.81 3.10.80
5.6.80
29.5.80
. 23.4.80 18.3.81 20.2.81 10.10.80 10.10.80 10.10.80 10.10.80 11.6.80 27.5.80 23.5.80
16.4.80 7.12.79

27.11.79 Mangan, George

Alfredton

1.6.80 McDonaId,JohnD. N.Balwyn

13.12.80 McDonald, John D. N.BaIwyn 30.11.80 MacLeod, Alan M. Kew

28.11.80 7.2.80 17.10.79 14.2.80

MacLeod, Colin E. McCallum, Peter McCallum, Peter
McDonald, John D.

Albert Park Eltham Ivanhoe N.Balwyn

14.2.80 McDonald, John D. N.Balwyn

14.2.80 McDonald, John D. N.Balwyn

23.11.79 23.10.79
18.3.79

McCallum! Peter

Eltham

McKenna, John M. Beaumaris

Q'Hanlon, Richard M. Lilyda1e

Med.prac.
Orthodontist
Orthodontist SUTgeon
Barrister Med.prac. Med.prac. Orthodontist
Orthodontist
Orthodontist
Med.prac. Radiologist Med.prac.

12.6.80 Plunkett,JohnH.

18.3.81
1.8.80 1.8.80 1.8.80 1.8.80
4.6.80 2.4.80

Pick, Edward W. Pianko, Isaac
Pianko, Isaac Pianko, Is.aac Pianko, Isaac
Prouse, Julian C. Pittard, Darren

25.10.79 25.10.79
24.10.79

Poynter, John Pearce, David C. Pearson, John R.

18.10.79 Patiencej Geoffrey

BaHarat

Dental surgeon

N.BaIwyn

Med.prac.

Middle Brighton Med.prac.

Middle Brighton Med.prac.

Middle Brighton Med.prac.

Middle Brighton Med.prac.

G1enroy

Dentist

Lower

Dentist

Templestowe

Toorak

Radiologist

Brighton

Radiologist

Kew

Med.prac.

Benalla

Med.prac.

21.12.79 Pannam, Clifford L. Melbourne

Barrister

13.8.80
30.5.80
9.6.80 6.6.80 10.6.80 10.6.80 14.5.80 14.5.80 20.6.80

Roberts, Andrew K. Lower

Surgeon

Templcstowe

Roberts, Andrew K. Lower

Surgeon

Templcstowe

Rush, Peter H.

Hasting.'>

Med.prac.

Rossiter, Alexander B. Middle Park Med.prac.

Rastogi, Dileep S.

DoncasterEast Psychiatrist

Rastogi, Dileep S.

Doncaster East Psychiatrist

Robson, James S.

Hawthorn

Dentist

Robson, Annita G. Hawthorn

Dentist

Richardson, John B. Brighton

Med.prac.

23.1.81 7.8.80

Ross, Leslie C.

Albert Park

Richardson, Barry J. Hawthorn

Barrister Physiotherapist

10.5.80 Rogozinski, Jack

StKiida

Dentist

31.3.80 Robertson, Ian F.

Toorak

Med.prac.-

21.1.80
6.6.80 11.6.80 1.8.80 1.8.80 \.8.80 \.8.80 18.2.80 15.4.80 23.4.80

Ryan, Edward D.
Slonim, Maurice Shub. Samuel Smith, John W. Smith, John W. Smith, John W. Smith, John W. Salinger, Jeffrey P. Smith, Redford J. Silverston, Michael

East Melbourne Opthamologist

Brighton Hawthorn Hampton Hampton Hampton Hampton Toorak
East Bentleigh
Toorak

Med.prac. Med.prac.
Solicitor Med.prac.

18.7.80 8.11.79

Soppitt, Phillip R. Stanley, Richard J.

Williamstown Med.prac.

Hawthorn

Barrister

Julia Gertrude Mangan
Ann Margaret McDonald
KojannaP/L Shirley Elizabeth
MacLeod Caroline MacLeod Christina McCallum Christina McCallum Ann Margaret
McDonald Ann Margaret
McDonald Ann Margaret
McDonald Christina McCallum
KMP Holding.'>, P/L

Kew Albert Park

Simon Michael and
Paul William O'Hanlon

Dorothy Lois Plunkett
Pauline J. Pick
Elizabeth Smith Renee Pianko Michelle Arber Barbara Applebee Joy Collette Prouse
Gillian Pittard

Ballarat N.BaIwyn Hampton M.Brighton Brighton Sandringham

21,554.00 16,524.00 15,000.00
7,735.35 10,309.31 4,688.25 4,994.75 9,552.25
60,000.00 7,000.00
Married women 5,429.00 Married woman 3,302.00
5,553.00 9,334.13

KMP Holdings P/L

KMP Holding.'> P /L

Carolyn Rose

Pearson

Nola L. Horne,

Pamela Patience,

Ruth King, Robyn

Kelly

Penelope Franklin

Tate

Janet Elaine Roberts Lower

Tcmple....towe

Janet Elaine Robertt\ Lower

Tcmplestowe

IudithRush

Crib Point

Married woman

Elvie Mary Rossiter Albert Park

Usha Rastogi

DoncasterEast Secretary

Usha Rastogi

Doncaster East Secretary

Santhor P/L

Hawthorn

SanthorP/L

Hawthorn

Sally Anne

Brighton

Richardson

Alison Whitney Ross Albert Park

Judith Anne

Hawthorn

Richardson

Julia Rachel

Rogoinski

Valda Joan

Robertson

Margaret Doig Ryan

Slonim,Isobell

Brighton

Married woman

Martin David Shub Armadale

Student

Elizabeth Smith

Hampton

Renee Pianka

Middle Brighton

Richelle Arber

Brighton

Barbara Applebee Sandringham

Susan Jane Salinger

Naomi Wright-Smith East Bentleigh Married woman

Rosalie Anne

Silverston

Mary E. Soppitt Susan Felicity
Stanley

60,000.00 60,000.00 9,637.40
37,754.44
20.460.00
10,136.88
6,656.55
6,530.66 4,128.30 14,331.13 5,972.79 14,781.62 14,762.00 9,994.00
14,130.30 14,989.40
3,900.80
13,604.60 17,822.10 4,128.30 10,217.85
12,222.55 18,000.00 14.999.63
14,962.00
52,250.00

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1817

Person making assignment

Registration Execution Name

Residence

Occupation

Transferred to: Name

Residence

Occupation

Amount

6.12.79 28.8.79 5.12.79 18.3.81 18.3.81
18.6.80 5.12.79 9.11.79 10.10.80
10.10.80
24.3.81
18.3.81 13.11.80
10.10.80
10.10.80 8.10.80
11.7.80 30.6.80
18.6.80 18.6.80 2.4.80 14.3.80
12.3.80
27.2.80
4.2.80 24.7.80 12.4.79

12.11.79 12.6.79 6.11.79 23.6.80 31.5.80

Sher, Jeffrey Leslie Brighton

Stewart, Ronald J. Ferntree Gully

Storz, Hanz P.

Carnegie

Thalore, Vinod R. Ballarat

Turnbull, Peter Bruce RingwoodE.

Barrister Solicitor
Psychiatrist Accountant

9.5.80 3.11.79 23.10.79 9.5.80

Troy, Michael J. Toller, Gerald J. Tiong, Hung Sing Talbot, James M.

LiIydale Doncaster
Kew Malvern

Med.prac.
Med.prac. Med.prac.

9.5.80 Talbot, James M.

Malvern

Med.prac.

11.6.80 Wainer, Bertram B. Research

1.3.80 Wong, Clement

Rosanna

20.10.80 Woodruff, Roger K. Kew

16.7.80 Williams, John F. Ballarat

16.7.80 Williams, John F. Ballarat 26.8.80 Wilkinson, Brendan J. Essendon

29.5.80 Webb,NoelJ.

Camberwell

15.4.80 Whitehead, David F. Doncaster

27.5.80 27.5.80 15.2.80 8.2.80

Wahr, Elizabeth Anne Jolimont

Wahr, George Peter Jolimont

Widdop, Frederick J. Beaumaris

Whiteside, Maxwell

G.

Malvern

8.2.80

Woodward, Anthony

N.

Yinnar South

6.2.80

Williamson, Douglas

G.

Hawthorn

21.12.79 15.4.80 5.3.79

Webb, NoelJ. Young, Peter C. Zydower, Franklin S.

Camberwell Melbourne Kew

Med.prac.
Med.prac. Med.prac.
Dentist
Dentist Barrister
Barrister D.surgeon
Med.prac. Med.prac. Dentist
Med.prac.
Med.prac.
Barrister
Barrister Barrister Barrister

Diane Vicki Sher
Plaid Nominees P/1.

Mona Storz

Carnegie

Abida Thalore

Ballarat

Leonie Joanne

Turnbull

S.Croydon

Susan Troy

Carmel Toller

Doncaster

StellariaP/L

Jennifer Mary

Malvern

Ferguson

Anne Hamilton

Roberts

Malvern

Jan Richardson

Elizabeth Bay,

NSW

Marie Ah-So Wong Rosanna

Prudence Mary

Woodruff

Kew

Violette May

Williams

Ballarat

Lorne Jean Morgan Ballarat

Patricia Mary

Wilkinson

Suzanne Webb

Audrey Ruth

Whitehead

Fiona Jane Wahr

Fiona Jane Wahr

Alice Wilma Widdop

30,950.00 7,000.00

Secretary

14,261.00

Married woman 9,435.00 8,809.00

19,000.00 29,996.00

29,996.00 213,663.00 Married woman 5,122.07 13,739.65

7,849.00
11,670.00
9,701.45 9,701.45 10,472.00

Ursula Mary Whiteside

10,139.60

Rosemary Woodward

11,216.16

Wendy Anne Williamson
Suzanne Webb
Kay Lynette Young
Partisan Nominees P/L

S. Yarra

Home duties

28,386.00 3,940.00
$73,930.00

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO REGISTER AN ASSIGNMENT OF BOOK DEBTS

Person making assignment

Transferred to:

Registration Execution Name

Residence

Occupation

Name

Residence

Occupation

Amount

30.3.81 26.3.81 24.3.81 25.3.81 24.3.81
11.11.80 26.281 26.2.81
28.2.81
7.2.81 7.2.81
5.1.81 26.2.81
17.2.81
10.12.80

l.l2.80 17.3.80 24.3.81 16.3.81 20.3.81
1l.ll.80 25.2.81 18.2.81
21.2.81
7.2.81 7.2.81
5.l.81 30.9.80
17.2.81
10.12.80

White, William R. Henderson, Roger K. Aitken, Ian J. Lobb, Colin B. Gibbons, Nicholas
Keith Salinger, Jeffrey P. Brewer, Richard G. Vickers-Willis,
MichaelC. Kruger, Brendan F.
Ellison, David J. Harrison, Neil J.
Shavinj David Shavin, David
Moffatt, Anthony R.
Whitehead, David F.

Brighton

Barrister

Pamela Marie White Brighton

Melbourne

Becit Henderson MtEliza

Canterbury Med.prac.

Catherine J. Aitken

MtWaverley Solicitor

Janne Barbara Lobb

Montrose

Nicholas Keith

Bayswater

Investments P/1.

Toorak

Solicitor

Jodi Salinger

Toorak

Heidelberg

Dentist

Helen Melva Brewer Lower Plenty

Geelong

Solicitor

Louise Yeats

Geelong

Vickers-Willis

Lower Plenty Dentist

Lorraine Bridget Yarrambat

Kruger

Melbourne

Dentist

NormaJ. Ellison

Melbourne

Dentist

Beverley Ripple Harrison

Ashburton

Glen Waverley Barrister

Anne Marie Shavin

Glen Waverley Barrister

Anne Marie Shavin

(in consideration of $25.00)

Caulfield

Med.prac.

Carolyn Margaret Caulfield

Moffatt

(in consideration of$25)

E. Doncaster D.surgeon

Audrey Ruth

Whitehead

D.nurse

11,100.00 5,020.00 13,000.00 20,520.00 15,000.00
17,000.00 5,906.00 19,797.00
17,163.00
21,015.00 16,625.00 5,000.00
8,220.00
9,769.00

1818 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

Person making assignment

Registration Execution Name

Residence

Occupation

Transrerred to: Name

Residence

Occupation

Amount

16.2.80 23.6.80
9.9.80 12.8.80 24.6.80 24.7.80

16.7.80 23.6.80

Chazan, Samuel Cromie, George P.

9.9.80 12.12.80 24.6.80 24.6.80

Blatt, Paul David Blatt, Paul David Blatt, Peggy Goldberg, Peggy

Kew Ballarat
Rippon-Lea Rippon'Lea Rippon-Lea Rippon-Lea

Med.prac.

Lynette Chazan

Med.prac.

Janet Henrietta

Cromie

Gen. prac.

Peggy Blatt

Gen. prac.

Peggy Blatt

Barrister

Paul David Blatt

Barrister

Paul David Blatt

(supersedes first notice)

Kcw Ballarat
Rippon-Lea Rippon-Lea Rippon-Lea Rippon-Lea

Student nurse Married woman
Barrister Barrister Gen. prac. Gen. prac.

6,098.00 8,809.00
2,878.00 1,576.00 3,499.00 3,174.00

Mr WILLlS---I thank the House, The total
amount of book debts shown in this list-not all the assignments registered show an actual amount; indeed quite a few do not-is $2,800,000. This means that at 60c in the dollar $1,680,000 is lost in tax. The list makes interesting reading. I will cite some examples. On 6 December 1979 Mr J. L. Sher, a barrister of Brighton, assigned a portion of the book debts, being approximately 60 per cent of aJl debts up to and including 9 November, amounting to $30,950, to Diana Vicki Sher of Brighton by way of gift. On 15 April 1980 Mr Peter Charles Young, a barrister of Melbourne, assigned the whole of the book debts amounting to $73,930 due to him, in consideration of the natural love and affection, for the sum of $25 to Kay Lynette Young of South Yarra. On 6 June 1980 Dr Peter A. Gray, a surgeon of Brighton, made two assignments by way of gift amounting to $25,238.55 to Kay Lillian Gray of Brighton. The assignment consisted of almost 400 individual debts due to Dr Gray from private patients and hospitals ranging from a miserly $2.45 to almost $550.

These are just a few examples of the way in which the great bulk of taxpayers are being ripped off by the selfish actions of very high income earners exploiting this book debts scheme. My colleague, the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy), who will second the motion, will expand on the details of this scheme, how it can be easily stopped and why we think the Treasurer's response to it is totally inadequate. The proposed House of Representatives taxation committee could do the country a great service if it helped to put an end to abuses such as these. The committee would also be able to examine the very difficult issue of tax evasion about which we know very little at present. This is the area of black economy, cash payments and undeclared income. Little or no work is being done on ways to overcome this extremely difficult problem which is causing revenue losses of the same, if not greater, magnitude as the so-called legal tax avoidance. The Government announced in 1978 that it would take some steps towards restricting tax evasion in the building industry but it then backed off from that
measure.

On 14 May 1980 Mr James Robson, a dental surgeon of Hawthorn made an assignment or transfer by way of gift to Santhor Pty Ltd of the same address-presumably a family companyof debts amounting to $14,781.62. On the same day, Annita Gibbon Robson, also a dental surgeon of the same address, made an assignment of $14,762.05 to the same company, Santhor Pty Ltd. On 12 August and 9 September 1980 Mr Paul David Blatt, a general practitioner of RipponLea, made two assignments amounting to $4,454.l0 to Peggy Blatt of Rippon-Lea. On 24 June 1980 Peggy Blatt, a barrister of Rippon-Lea, assigned debts of $3,499 to Paul David Blatt. However, this notice was subsequently changed so that debts of $3,174 were assigned to Peggy Goldberg, a barrister of Rippon-Lea, to Paul David Blatt. Obviously it seemed too blatant for husband and wife to be seen to be assigning debts to each other so Mrs Blatt decided to use her maiden name.

I have detailed a number of major influences on the income tax system over recent years-the broken Fraser promises, the increased use of tax concessions, an explosion in tax avoidance and tax evasion. The net effect of all these measures has been a drastic increase in the tax burden on lower and middle income earners, so much so that 80 per cent of them are now paying a greater proportion of their weekly incomes in tax than they did in 1975. The only people who have benefited from the tax policies pursued over the last five and a half years have been the higher income earners who are now paying lower taxes than they did in 1975. In other words, because of the deliberate actions of this Government the income tax system has become regressive and much less equitable. These developments, along with those mentioned earlier, have meant that as a whole our tax system is no longer adequate to achieve its desired objectives. Indeed the equity of the tax system has been eroded to such a degree that according to a study published by the Melbourne Institute of

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1819

Applied Economic and Social Research in 1979 High Court. I hope he does not believe that press-

the tax system now is distinctly regressive. As inure should be brought to bear on the judicial sys-

comes go up the proportion of income paid in all tem. If the burden of his objection is that we

taxes goes down. This is so over the great range of should have been able to find legislation accept-

incomes except for the very highest incomes. This able to the High Court then the Government

we find highly disturbing indeed. Certainly it is an which he supported should have managed also to

aspect of a tax system which could be looked at by find appropriate legislation during its three years

the taxation committee.

in office. It failed to do so. As the Treasurer (Mr

The.re are many other aspects of taxation which we would see such a committee as being able to investigate. This committee could take substantial note of the efficiency of the tax system to which I referred earlier and recommend measures to the Government to improve it.

Howard) announced during Question Time today, we will be presenting very shortly a proposed new section 260-the section to which [ referred-- -which seeks to overcome the difficulties that have been established in our relations with the High Court. It will be a compendium piece of legislation coping with the general question of tax

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- evasion of this nature. [t is tax avoidance of a style Order! The honourable member's time has that really becomes tax evasion.

expired. Is there a seconder of the motion?

Difficulties have been experienced by legal de-

Mr Duffy-Mr Deputy Speaker, I second the motion and reserve my right to speak.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (1l.42)-It comes as no surprise to the House that the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) once again proposes a motion criticising the Government's handling of the tax situation. There is no doubt that there is scope for some degree of criticism of the volume of tax avoidance-of such a nature that it really becomes tax evasion-that has gone on in Australia. But for the honourable member for Gellibrand to say, as he has in effect, that this has occurred because this Government has failed in its proper duties in this area seems to me to be particularly curious. He is aware of the way in

cisions around the world. The honourable member for Gellibrand is well aware of the fact that the Privy Council-the law lords in Britainrecently came down with a revolutionary judgment changing the whole basis of its formerly legalistic approach to the question of tax law. This is a vital change which I hope will be reflected in Australia. In fact the law lords in the House of Lords took the view that they should see through the legalistic nature of the law and ascertain what the devices really sought to do. If only we had that kind of application of the law in Australia we would not have the sort of problems that the honourable member for Gellibrand has raised here today.

which the courts of this country, particularly the This Government has sought determinedly to

High Court of Australia, have approached pass laws to prevent the rape of the revenue

artificial devices used by people in the evasion of which has been going on despite a mountain of

their proper tax bills.

laws which has made the taxation Act almost

It is all very well passing laws to prevent people from evading tax. It is another thing to have a judicial system which supports those laws. The honourable member knows perfectly well that the High Court was very difficult in the matter of tax legislation when his party was in government. He knows perfectly well that the High Court has been particularly difficult in relation to legislation that this Government has endeavoured to sustain.

unmanageable. It is physically difficult to lift that Act. It is impossible to find one's way through it unless one happens to be an expert. Because of court interpretations, many legislative changes have been required to deal with every specific avoidance technique that has been raised by the experts in this area. There is a large area of professional expertise, as the honourable member for Gellibrand pointed out.

He knows perfectly well that there is a section of We have been obliged to deal with each individ-

the Income Tax Assessment Act totally outlawing ual style of avoidance, but specifically as a result

artificial devices used by people in order to evade of the High Court's decisions we cannot deal with

tax. He knows all that perfectly well. He recogeach avoidance measure until we find out what it

nises that the High Court has rendered that secis, or until it has been tried. The Australian Labor

tion of the Act inoperative. Yet he comes into this Party's solution to that problem is simply to make

House pretending that this dreadful failing is the law retrospective. That is a principle which

entirely attributable to the Federal Government. the Labor Party embraces. It involves making

I presume the honourable member for Gellibrand something an offence which at the time it was

does not believe that we should stand over the committed was not an offence. It means that one

1820 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

ends up as a retrospective criminal. This is something which is absolutely intolerable and is not sustainable in our form of government and in our form of democracy. This matter received a great deal of attention in a study conducted by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development into the problems of tax avoidance of a nature that really becomes evasion. The concept of making a retrospective offence something which was not an offence when it was committed is something which I believe flies in the face of our general proposition of the way in which we should be running our country.
I hope that this very unfortunate situationwhich the honourable member for Gellibrand quite rightly has pointed to~in which many people are avoiding their responsibilities to their colleagues, will be overcome by a combination of our proposed new section 260, which has taken many years of hard work to develop, and a change in the approach of the High Court. I am not assuming that the High Court necessarily will follow the Privy Council but I hope it does. I believe these two things could well bring about a dramatic change in the situation rightly pointed to by the honourable member for Gellibrand. My objection to the speech of the honourable member relates to the way in which he endeavoured to apply the blame. The honourable member should face up to the fact that under the Government he supported the same sort of problem existed and the same sort of blame could have been applied to that Government. Of course, the only difference is that this Government has introduced a mountain of legislation banning individual and specific devices which were ripping off the revenue. The major attempt by the Labor Government to deal with this matter was to wave Frank Crean's finger at one significant form of avoidance and do nothing else. Nothing was done about the Curran scheme, the major rip-off at that time. All that happened was that Frank Crean's finger was waved and there was a threat that legislation would be introduced. But introducing it was too difficult and too much of a problem for that government. Certainly, it took us a while to work out that sort of legislation necessary too. I concede that. All I am pointing out is that We did more than wave a finger; we introduced the legislation.
The honourable member for Gellibrand knows perfectly well that the difficulties in this legislation are monumental. It is cynical of the honourable member to come into this House beating his breast in the way that he has, knowing the problems, recognising that his own government faced exactly the same problems and coped with them pretty badly. Some sections of this motion,

of course, are of pretty poor quality. I am concerned that the honourable member has come into this House expressing his concern about the increased incidence of indirect taxation. His motion calls for the committee that he wants to appoint to enquire into:
the impact on the equity of the tax system of the increased incidence of indirect taxation;
Let me point out to the honourable member for Gellibrand that under the Hayden Budget of 1975 the volume of indirect taxation represented 28 per cent of total tax revenues. In the latest Budget, despite all the hoo-ha about the enormous oil revenues, that percentage has risen by a tiny amount. It has gone up from 28 per cent to 30 per cent. The honourable member talked about enormous distortion! What rubbish! The fact is that under the Government of which he was a member it was the lower income consumer in particular who carried the burden of indirect taxation. I dramatise this fact by pointing out that in the three years of the Labor Government sales tax, for example, which applies across a great range of commodities, went up by 14.4 per cent. Under the present Government sales tax in real terms-I am expressing the figures in real terms in both instances-has, in fact, declined by 6.1 per cent. We do not hear that sort of thing from the Opposition. It does not want to know aboilt it. In fact, sales tax collections-something that could be described as attacking consumption-have, in fact, fallen by 6.1 per cent.
There is no doubt that we have had an increase in indirect tax under the present Government, basically as a result of the oil revenues. As a result, total taxation revenue under the present government has increased in real terms by 21 per cent over its five Budgets. People might say: 'Isn't it disgraceful that tax collections should go up by such an amount?' I point out to the House that in the three years of the Labor Government total tax collections rose by 24 per cent. In three years it managed to increase taxation revenue by 3 per cent more than we have in five years.
Dr Klugman-Yours has increased by 64 per cent.
Mr BAUME-This is a 21 per cent increase in real terms. If the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) can understand the economic phrase 'real terms' he will know that that means that the figure is arrived at after accounting for inflation. If the honourable member for Prospect had looked at the statistics prepared by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Library Statistical Service he would not have made suchan asinine interjection. The reality is that there has

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1821

been a 21 per cent increase in real terms in total tax revenue by the present Federal Government over five Budgets compared with an increase of 24 ,per cent by the Labor Government in only three years.
If the honourable member for Prospect wants to know why we increased tax collections, we had to do so in order to catch up on the massive gap that developed under the Labor Government between revenue and expenditure. Under the previous government there was an enormous increase of 33 per cent in government spending which at that time was not matched by anything more than a 24 per cent increase in taxation revenue. We had to catch that up. We had to pay not only our own bills but also those of the Labor Government. That is what has happened. That is what these figures dramatically show. On the question of indirect taxation, I was intrigued, by the way, to hear the honourable member for Gellibrand misleadingly indicate to this House that we had an extra $400m 'in the kick' as a result of oil price rises. I am surprised that the honourable member for Gellibrand would use this device. He referred to a full year knowing full well that at the moment-he was trying to give an inference, of course, that we have a lot more lolly in the bank--
Mr Barry Jones-An implication; you draw the inference.
Mr BAUME-An implication. I bow to the honourable member for Lalor. The implication is that we somehow have ripped off more than we are pretending we have. There is a suggestion that something is naughty. The reality is that the net gain over the Budget Estimates-this is after taking this oil price rise into account and deducting, by the way, the cost of the industrial disruption that took place on the oil platforms; the Bass Strait strike-so far this financial year is something like $40m to $50m. At this stage this figure represents roughly one-tenth of the figure that the honourable member for Gellibrand was trying to indicate to the House. It seems to me that the honourable member for Gellibrand has failed to establish the basic grounds on which he has presented this motion. In the first place this Government has introduced masses of legislation seeking to remove the unfair nature of tax collections in respect of people being able to evade their proper responsibilities. This Government clearly faces the same problem in the High Court of Australia that the honourable member's government faced.
Let me dramatise the extent to which there is a problem in this area of tax collections. On the one hand, there is no doubt that the pay-as-you-earn

taxpayer, for example, is carrying a larger burden than the non-PAYE taxpayer. A proportion of that burden can clearly be evidenced as coming from tax avoiders. On the other hand, the large proportion of that burden is a result of deliberate tax incentives which have brought about a degree of growth in some industries resulting in higher employment. Whilst there is no doubt that PAYE tax collections under this Government have gone up by something like 26.3 per cent and then tax collections-that is, non-PAYE tax collectionshave fallen by 5.2 per cent, under Labor there was a 38.2 per cent increase in PAYE tax collections in real terms. We have dramatically cut that sort of rise. We have moved from a 38.2 per cent rise in only three years down to only a 26.3 per cent rise over five years. If the honourable member for Prospect wants to dispute those figures I remind him that they were prepared by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Library. It seems to me that there is no doubt that the burden of taxation is being shifted as a result of avoidance schemes. There is also no doubt in my mind that the combination of this Govermment's effective measures and a change in the law will improve things.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

(Quorum formed).

Mr DUFFY (Holt) (12.0)-The honourable

member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) clearly

spelled out the need for the establishment of a sel-

ect committee on taxation. I propose to deal with

that part of the motion relating to tax avoidance,

and in particular the tax avoidance scheme

already outlined by the honourable member. This

scheme involves the blatant use, mainly by medi-

cal practitioners, barristers, dentists and other

professional persons, of a tax avoidance scheme

based on the assignment of book debts. Taxation

for these people is on a cash receipts basis. They

are not taxed on accrued debts which are assigned

to a spouse or in some cases a family trust or a

company. In the hands of the assignee the accrued

debts become no tax is paid

capital on such

which is assigned

dneobttst.axTehd~'

sthchaet mis~

was the subject of two opinions, which I have

read, by leading Melbourne Queen's Counsel. The

first opinion was that of Dr l. F. C. Spry, Q.c.,

dated 11 June 1979. The second was that of Dr

Clifford Pannam, QC., dated January 1980.

I point out to the House that there is some disagreement among tax lawyers in Victoria as to whether the assignments of debt referred to require registration. However, on the basis of the

1822 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

provisions of the Property Law Act and the Instruments Act in Victoria, the view seems to be that prima facie registration is necessary and is certainly preferable. As a result of the registration, persons using this scheme are to some extent able to be identified, at least in Victoria. Searches conducted at the Office of the RegistrarGeneral and referred to by the honourable member for Gellibrand, indicate to s9me degree the people using this scheme. It is also on public record, because of the publication of the assignments, in the Dun and Bradstreet Gazette. However, because of the disagreement amongst the tax lawyers involved in this matter, many people would be using the scheme without registering the assignments. Research has shown that registration of assignments of debts to use this scheme took place as early as April 1979. By November 1979 the scheme had become a very popular method of avoiding tax. Yet an article on this matter, appearingin the Age of 21 January 1981, stated:
A spokesman for the Treasurer said that Mr Howard was not aware of the book debt scheme.
It is really pathetic that the scheme had been a matter of public record in Victoria since, at the latest, April 1979 yet almost two years later the Treasurer in this Government was not aware of its existence. Unfortunately one has to accept that the Treasurer was not aware of it, but it is almost unbelievable that he was not. On 2 April 1981 I directed a question to the Treasurer on this matter. The Treasurer indicated at that stage that the Commissioner of Taxation 'will be contesting very vigorously what is being done'. That is a most commendable attitude but, to say the least, somewhat belated. It is now April 1981 and this scheme has been running untouched by this Government since about April 1979. The contest referred to by the Treasurer would almost certainly involve a High Court of Australia case, which on any analysis of past performances the Commissioner of Taxation could not enter into with any confidence. This matter was referred to by the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) when he said that the difficulties that this Government had in this area were related to the interpretation by the High Court. We do not dispute that and we realise that there is a difficulty there but it is not a difficulty in relation to this tax avoidance scheme.
Mr Jacobi-It might change with Barwick gone.
Mr DUFFY-Well, let us hope so. This case indicates clearly the need for a select committee, which is the subject of this motion. It is not a

scheme which necessarily involves an interpretation by the High Court. In answer to that question the Treasurer further indicated that if the efforts of the Commission were not successful, further action, including the consideration of requiring that an accruals form of taxation returning be adopted by people who presently enjoy the privilege of returning their incomes on a cash receipts basis, should be taken. If this Government has any credibility on the issue of tax avoidancethat is extremely doubtful, but in order to salvage some-it should give the Commissioner of Taxation legislative authority to act now in relation to this scheme. Why should the matter be considered further, as indicated by the Treasurer in his answer to the question? Already the people involved in this scheme have abused the privilege referred to by the Treasurer. What of the tax years 1979 and 1980? Does this Government propose that for those years the tax not paid will be written off? Surely a government utterly hung up on cutting expenditure in some areas for people in desperate need will not allow those earning huge incomes to continue their bludge on other taxpayers, which is what thosc involved in this scheme are doing. We are talking about massive tax avoidance achieved by a deliberate and highly artificial scheme.
The honourable member [or Gellibrand has dealt with some specific examples but in order to indicate the magnitude of this outrageous taxation fiddle I would like to give one example; that is, the partnership of six radiologists who assigned $60,000 of book debts to a company by way of gift. This assignment involved book debts for a period of two weeks, from 10 October 1979 to 24 October 1979. The amount of $60,000 was assigned thereby avoiding paying tax on that amount. But the Government is so inept that it has failed to take any action to stop such tax avoidance.
Many of the people involved, as indicated earlier, are clearly identified by public records in Victoria. This position may not apply in other States as the same statutory provisions may not operate. However, if this is the case, assignments in equity can still be traced. It is not an excuse for this Government to say that if in other States there is no registration requirement it is then unable to trace the assignments of debts. This type of assignment in equity could be used in States other than Victoria and also by those tax avoiders in Victoria who do not register assignments. The tracing could be done in the following ways: Firstly, by checking falls in income levels of those taxed on a cash basis-that ought to be a reasonably simple procedure-secondly, by checking the

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1823

incomes of those taxed on a cash basis which end of this disease, which has developed in the

should have increased but, on the basis of returns community under this Government. Further, if

submitted, do not show an increase; thirdly, by the Government is serious about abuses of our

checking the returns for gift duty, as, in some taxation system it should support the motion. The

cases, these tax avoiders are prepared to make a Parliament would then be in a position to take

great sacrifice by paying gift duty! It is worth some positive action for the benefit of all Aus-

noting that in Victoria the current rates of gift tralians. If the proposed select committee had

duty are: Between $20,000 and $25,000, 1.5 per been in existence it would certainly have traced

cent; $25,000 to $74,000, 5.6 per cent; and the scheme which I have outlined, which was on

$74,000 to $201,000,10.5 per cent. If someone on public record as early as April 1979 and which

an income of $200,000 a year, assigning that was still unknown to the Treasurer of this

amount under this scheme, paid any gift dutyGoverIiment in January 1981.

which is unlikely-if he did make that great sacrifice, the rate he would pay would be 10.5 per cent.

In closing I will deal with one matter raised by the honourable member for Macarthur. He attacked the Labour Government for its lack of

Fourthly, and most significantly, those people action in this area. We hear this sort of continued

taxed on a cash basis should be required to advise argument from the other side of the House. It may

the Commissioner of Taxation in their income tax well be rumoured in tax circles that Julius Ceasar

returns of the details of any assignment of debts. was not effective in handling tax avoidance but

Clearly, this would stop the scheme. The opinions the relevance of that to the debate today totally

to which I have referred indicated that at this escapes me. Even if the Whitlam Labor Govern-

stage a taxpayer need not advise the Comment had not handled this matter in a correct

missioner of Taxation of assignment of debts.

fashion it would not be an excuse for this Govern-

On the issue of tax avoidance, it is time this Government put up or shut up. We await with bated breath the redraft of section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act. It is pathetic that it has taken five years for this Government to introduce such legislation. The burden of taxation on

ment. But it should be recorded today that such a claim is totally untrue. The previous Labor Government took wide ranging action against tax avoidance. I have a list of such action taken by the Labor Government between 1972 and 1975. 1 seek leave to incorporate that list in Hansard.

pay-as-you-earn taxpayers cannot be allowed to Leave granted.

continue. This injustice was conceded by the honourable member for Macarthur but his figures

The document read as follows-

were incorrect. It is time the correct figures were put on record in relation to the burden which has been placed on pay-as-you-earn income earners. Between 1975-76 and 1979-80 pay-as-you-earn incomes increased by 49 per cent while tax on those incomes increased by 73 per cent. In the same period, non-pay-as-you-earn incomes increased by

THE LABOR GOVERNMENT (1972-75) AND TAX AVOIDANCE
The previous Labor Government took wide ranging action against tax avoidance, including:
elimination of Norfolk Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands and Christmas Islands as tax havens for the avoidance of personal and company tax. 1973-S.7A
dividends and interest paid to Papua New Guinea were

80 per cent while tax on those incomes increased by only 31 per cent. These figures highlight the dismal failure of this Government on taxation. They are tragic but not suprising as this Govern-

made subject to withholding tax to prevent use of PNG to avoid withholding taxes. Payments of dividends to artificial companies in PNG and other tax havens was ended. 1973-74 S.7, S.128, S.160.
introduction of the system of tax clearance certificates

ment has presided over tax avoidance becoming the major growth industry during its period in office. It has taken off. It is now a multi-billion dollar industry in this country.

and the use of exchange control by the Reserve Bank to limit the use of tax havens for tax avoidance. 1973Taxation Administration Act S.14, Banking Act S.398
restrictions on the purchase and use of companies with accumulated lead debts 1973-S.63.

The Treasurer should remember the words of Henry Ford who said: 'You can't build a repu-

restrictions on the purchase and use of companies with accumulated losses 1973-S.80.
restrictions on the carry forward of excess distributions

tation on what you are going to do'. The Treasurer must act now to legislate on the scheme to which I have referred. Because of the nature of the scheme such legislation should be retrospective. The core of this problem is the failure of this

by private companies to avoid undistributed profits tax 1973-S.105.
subscriptions to psuedo-exploration companies ended as a form of tax avoidance. 1973-S.77.
avoidance of withholding tax on interest payable to overseas residents through an overseas branch of an Australian

Government to accept that position. Only when company was stopped 1973-74-S.128

the intention of retrospectivity is clearly spelled Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson) (12.15)-1

out to the tax avoidance industry will we see the enter this argument on behalf of the Government.

1824 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

Before I get down to basics I will comment on the speech made by the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy). Whilst he complained about the lack of action by the present Government, his speech was very long on rhetoric but very short on facts. I support the record that this Government has in relation to the record of the Australian Labor Party in this area. During its three years in office, the Labor Government had before it notice of certain tax abuse schemes. It threatened to implement action against them but it did not do so at any stage. Those three years were vital. What is now described as the disease of tax avoidance and abuse was created, I believe, in those years when no action was taken.
Mr Duffy-Why do you say that? Mr BRAITHWAITE-It is easy to demonstrate that tax avoidance schemes take at least two to three years to show their heads. The fact that a scheme was discovered in 1975-76 indicates to me that its birth took place in Labor's period in office arid not in the period of the present Government. Tax avoidance schemes were in evidence in Labor's years but the Labor Government and its Treasurer, Mr Crean, took no action. In fact, Mr Crean did not go ahead with certain actions he outlined, I think in the 1973 Budget. Mr Hawke--It is now 1981. Mr BRAITHWAITE-It is 1981 but the same Labor team is now in opposition. Its members are as long on rhetoric now as they were then. Perhaps in 1981 they can come up with the answers that they could not find in 1972 to 1975. Let me set the record straight. The Labor Party has claimed that it did a lot in relation to tax avoidance in 1972 to 1975. It did absolutely nothing. A comparison of the records 'of the Labor Government 'between 1972 and 1975 and the Fraser Government from 1975 to the present does not do the Labor Party much credit. A number of things have been done. Nobody has said that what has been done is sufficient. A review by a select committee would not be sufficient. I point out to the Opposition that over many years the Labor Government as well as this Government could have taken action on many reviews and reports indicating where the problem lies. Courts in Australia have interpreted taxation statutes in a very literal manner. Thus, although there is a general anti-avoidance provision in the Income Tax Assessment Act, section 260, it has not generally been applied to schemes which have the intent of avoidance but also other demonstrable purposes. The tendency to exclude from consideration factors which are not strictly relevant to the letter of the law simplifies matters for

those seeking to devise legal means of avoiding their taxation liabilities. It has in the past forced legislators to adopt a case by case and legalistic approach to countering tax avoidance. Governments have been forced into reacting to the initiatives of tax avoiders and the revenue and responsible taxpayers have certain ly been disadvantaged. This Government has a firm commitment to remove the advantages tax avoiders have had in the past. Again I refer to the fact that the Labor Government had a similar commitment but it did not implement it. The Government will not countenance the actions of those with sufficient wealth and lack of responsibility in forcing a greater taxation burden on those in the payas-you-earn system, those with low incomes and those who accept their taxation responsibilities.
The burden of tax that is shifted by avoidance schemes is no small matter. It has been estimated by the Commissioner of Taxation that in 1978-79 $230m was lost to revenue. In 1979-80 the figure was $280m. At the end of 1980 an amount of $700m was in dispute. In the current year the estimated loss to revenue is $300m. These sums would have been significantly larger were it not for the Government's very active campaign against tax avoidance. There is justified resentment by the majority of income earners in having to pay a larger tax bill because of the minority who seek to avoid their share of support of community services. It is basic to the equity of the tax system that the burden oftaxation be distributed fairly. I do not think anybody disagrees with that. This Government has attacked avoidance by adopting many approaches. It has developed a system of identifying and reacting promptly to particular avoidance schemes. It does not accept, as the Labor Party accepts, retrospectivity. However, it has reduced the former time advantage of tax avoiders by mta.king schemes invalid from the date of announcement of intended legislation and by eliminating the possibility of carrying forward losses. It has undertaken drafting of new general anti-avoidance legislation to overcome deficiencies in section 260.
I think when the legislation comes before Parliament we should ensure that it is certain in its application and that it does everything that it is intended to do. If it does not there will be a loss of two to three years before the legislation can be tested before the courts. If the legislation is deficient those two or three years will be lost. I would advise that caution and certainty be applied in this area so that when we get the legislation it does everything we want it to do.

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1825

This Government is also revising provisions which apply to transfer pricing and other avoidance arrangements conducted through international transactions. The Government has acted in other ways to counter tax evasion. It is now a criminal offence to act, or to aid and abet someone else to act, to prevent th~ actual colle~tion of income and sales tax by pnvate compames and certain trusts., Reflecting on that, I would say that if such a measure were subject to the retrospectivity provision that the Labor Party espouses, one would be doing what the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) said-making something illegal today that was legal yesterday. Although it was a difficult problem to overcome, the Government did act to correct the anomoly but did not make the legislation retrospective.
The Government has appointed and regularly consults with a taxation advisory committee of private sector practitioners of noted ability and experience in the taxation field. I have always felt that if we are to effect proper legislation and attack schemes properly then we should consult the people in the taxation field who have the necessary experience. I do not think we should take the advice of public servants only in this matter. Their advice should be blended with the expert advice of people who practise in the taxation field and who have experience in private enterprise. In a case-by-case approach to tax avoidance-the Treasurer is notified by the Commissioner of Taxation of evidence of new avoidance schemes-he has announced his intention to legislate specifically against these schemes, with legislation to date from the time of announcement. By this means, the Government has, since 1977, introduced nine Bills incorporating 24 legislative measures against avoidance arrangements. What was the Labor Party's record in this regard when in office? I do not think it introduced any Bills. Other amendments have been enacted to deal with sales tax avoidance arrangements. Further legislation will be introduced in the current sittings.
The arrangements against which the Government has acted have fallen into two general categories: Firstly, schemes which seek to obtain artificial deductions; and, secondly, schemes which attempt to shield income from taxation. An illustration of the first is expenditure recoupment schemes. In September 1978 it was announced that amendments to the income tax Act would be introduced to counter certain identified recoupment schemes. These amendments related to prepaid interest, pre-paid rent and similar schemes. Those schemes, and future ones of a like nature, were to be dealt with effective from that date.

In early 1979 legislation was foreshadowed to deal with new schemes relating to variations of these, abuses of stock provisions, abuses of mortgage interest deductions and a variation of the Curran scheme. In June of that year, schemes involving deductions for bad debts were included in legislation effective from September 1978. In August of last year, legislation on further schemes involving so-called expenditure on films, in operating on exempt gold mining businesses, on consumable supplies and on market research were similarly back-dated. An illustration of the second category of action against which the Government has legislated is the exploitation of the privileged tax status of certain charitable institutions and other bodies that are exempt from tax.
I now wish to deal with the revision of section 260. Section 260 had originally been conceived as a general anti-avoidance section. However, as the Asprey committee noted, the courts have held that for section 260 to apply, it must be shown that a scheme was implemented in a particular way to avoid tax; it would not be applied, for example, if the use of arrangements were capable of other explanations than tax avoidance. This contrasts with a recent case in Britain in which the House of Lords departed from such a legalistic approach to see through a series of deals to judge the motive behind them. I think this is a major breakthrough in relation to precedents. I wonder how long it will take for Australian courts to adopt a similar procedure.
The Asprey committee noted in its report that transactions which are a genuine ordering of affairs and those which are of an artifical nature often follow much the same path. It highlighted the difficulty of enacting legislation to cope with the separation of such transactions in a language that fulfils the ideas of simplicity and precision. For example, the committee pointed out, firstly, that such a statute needs to apply to such a variety of circumstances that obtaining adequate coverage requires extensive wording; but, secondly, if it is to be sufficiently all-embracing there is a real danger of penalising those with a genuine reason for entering into a transaction which, in other circumstances, should be prevented. The Government's revision of section 260 attempts to make it applicable generally to schemes which are undertaken for the purpose of reducing liability to income tax. As is evident from what has been said, this is a difficult and complex task. It has thus not been possible to complete this task quickly, although the revision is now close to final drafting. The Government has, of course, sought appropriate consultations, including consultations with the

1826 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

Taxation Advisory Committee. The new legislation has already undergone considerable redrafting. It is intended that there be ample opportunity for those interested to make comments on the proposed changes. The Government is anxious that a reasonable time be allowed for examination of the legislation by those affected by it and by those who will be called upon to interpret it and advise on it.
The Government is committed to removing inequity to the community because oftax avoidance through every means available to it. As I said, we have demonstrated this. The tax avoidance industry has grown to considerable proportions. I thit:).k approaches should be made, both by the Government and the Opposition, to ensure that we do clamp down on tax avoidance and ensure that the taxation system is equitable to all who pay into it. We have demonstrated a determination to crack down on tax avoidance by active legislative programs and the use of several directions of approach. The Government recognises that it can never completely eliminate tax avoidance or tax evasion. There will always be clever and unscrupulous people who will take the opportunity to manipulate the scheme. This Government is determined to work against those schemes whenever they are brought to its notice.
There is a recognition within the community that the Government cannot solve the problems of tax avoidance in isolation. That is why it is looking to redraft section 260. Certainly, a constructive contribution has to be made by the business and the professional sectors if we are to implement legislation that will be effective. That is why I have such great hopes for the redrafted section 260. The Government has shown its willingness to hear the views of all interested parties. I hope that when the redrafted section 260 becomes available for comment, the private sector will make a constructive contribution to its success.
The motion lists five areas which the proposed select committee should investigate. Some of those relate to the capability of taxpayers to pay their tax. While there is a tax avoidance and tax evasion industry billions of dollars of revenue is being denied. We should be concerned that that amount has to be spread over many areas. The pay-as-you-earn taxpayers are the people predominantly affected. We should also consider how far this distorts the proper tax impartiality as far as taxpayers--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! As it is now two hours after the time fixed for the meeting of the House, the debate on the motion is interrupted.

Motion (by Mr Wilson) agreed to:
That the time for the discussion of notices, General Business, be extended unti112.45 p.m.
Mr BRAITHWAITE-I was in the process of winding up my argument. In summary 1 should say the motion that has been moved on behalf of the Opposition is one that I think concerns the minds of Australians, particularly those who pay tax. No Government member would believe that the Treasurer through his advisers has not moved as rapidly as possible in the area of tax avoidance and certainly tax evasion. Therefore I have put the Government's case on the record. I would ask those who are interested in this subject to compare the Government's record with the record of the three years Labor was in office. As I said at the commencement of my speech, I think that that comparison will show that the Labor Opposition is very long on rhetoric but very short on action.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr ARMITAGE (Chifley) (12.31)-1 support the motion moved by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) to establish a select committee on taxation. In this Parliament this morning the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy) gave an extraordinary expose on a tax avoidance scheme which has been going on since April 1979 and which the Treasurer (Mr Howard) as late as January of this year said he did not know anything about. The Treasurer has now decided to bring in legislation to close up that loophole. But, of course, the legislation will not be retrospective. I think that this is a very good reason to establish a select committee of this Parliament continually to vet all issues of taxation and in particular tax avoidance schemes. Perhaps the Treasurer, who seems to want to know about a scheme sometimes when he thinks he will get some cheap publicity out of it, will find that if such a committee is set up he will get information much more rapidly than he is getting it now. Some time ago I tried to expose the tax avoidance schemes being conducted by prominent members of this Parliament.
Mr Leo McLeay-Who are they? Name them.
Mr ARMITAGE-The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony), just to nametwo of them. In endeavouring to do that I tried to table the relevant documents time and again in this Parliament. But every time. I tried to table those documents the Treasurer refused to co-operate. In other words, he did not want to know about these tax avoidance schemes. Of course, those loopholes have not been closed up to this day.

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1827

Mr Humphreys-I wonder why they have not What is the situation in Australia? An English

been closed up.

company which no longer finds it profitable to op-

Mr ARMITAGE-Of course, there is a law for the wealthy and a law for the poor. It is as simple as that. Another good example is the attempt by Holmes a'Court to take over the Elder Smith organisation. I asked in this Parliament whether the Treasurer wasaware that Holmes a'Court had made a profit of $16.5m by the simple artifice of buying shares in the name of what was in effect a $2 company-a subsidiary company. By selling

erate in the tax avoidance industry in the United Kingdom has now established itself in Parramatta to engage in the tax avoidance industry in Australia. Until this Government wakes up to what is happening and adopts the Australian Labor Party policy of legislating retrospectively to the date of commencement once a tax avoidance scheme is discovered the tax avoidance industry will continue to flourish.

the company and not the shares he was able to I have quoted some very good examples of tax

claim that this was a capital gain and not a profit avoidance. According to the estimate that one

even though he had bought most of the shares gets from the Australian Taxation Office, in

only a few days earlier. He contended that he was excess of $1,OOOm per annum is being lost in rev-

not bound by section 26AAA of the Income Tax enue as a result of the tax avoidance industry.

Assessment Act. In other words, he contended Who is paying for that?

that it was not a profit but a capital gain. Section 26AAA provides that a profit made from the purchase and sale of assets within a period of 12 months shall be treated as profit and not as capital gain.
Mr Leo McLeay-Who were the losers?

Mr Leo McLeay-The working people.
Mr ARMITAGE-That is quite right. As the honourable member for Grayndler says, it is the working people-those who cannot avoid tax, those who have to pay their tax under the pay-asyou-earn system. I should mention that from

Mr ARMITAGE-The losers, of course, were 1975-76 to 1979-80 collections of PAYE taxation

the members of the public. By this simple artifice increased by 80 per cent whereas collections of

Holmes a'Court avoided tax to the extent of non-PAYE taxation increased by only 31 per

$7.5m out of a net profit of $16.5m.

cent. This is indicative of the fact that those on

Mr Willis-He bought a good race horse. Mr ARMITAGE-Yes, he got a good race horse out of it. I brought this matter before the

wages and salaries whose taxation is collected weekly, fortnightly or monthly when they are paid--

Parliament by way of a question the day after this Mr Barry Jones-Like us.

transaction took place. The Treasurer should have had details of this matter on his desk at that time but he did not know anything about it. He said in the last week of the previous sitting that he now knew about it and that he would introduce legislation to amend the Act to close off this loop-

Mr ARMITAGE-That is right. Even members of parliament have to do that. But more importantly than that, the great mass of the wage and salary earners in this country who--
Mr Leo McLeay-Even the pensioners.

hole. But once again when I interjected to ask Mr ARMITAGE-We do not have PAYE

whether he would make it retrospective I received pensioners. The facts are that those people who

no answer.

have to pay taxation when they receive their

The tax avoidance industry has been the greatest growth industry under the Fraser Government. There was very little tax avoidance until this Government came to power. Honourable members opposite ask what the Labor Government did about tax avoidance. The fact is that tax avoidance was not a major growth industry at that time. Since that time it has become a major

wages or salaries paid 80 per cent more tax in 1979-80 than they paid in 1975-76. Those who pay their tax by the non-PAYE system-those who are self employed and so on--are the people whose tax collections have increased by only 31 per cent. In other words, year by year, an increasing taxation burden is being placed on average wage and salary earners.

growth industry and this Government refuses to That is one of the reasons we submit very

tackle it. A system was introduced in the United clearly that this committee should be established.

Kingdom under which any tax avoidance scheme, Its establishment is essential if we are to close

when discovered, would be legislated against and these loopholes. It is essential if the Government

the legislation would be made retrospective to the is to be kept honest on this issue because at the

day the tax avoidance scheme was used. As a represent time it is not being kept honest. At the

sult the tax avoidance industry in that country present time the Government is recognising tax

was destroyed overnight.

avoidance schemes far too late-deliberately, in

1828 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Proposed Select Committee on Taxation

my submission-and is refusing to legislate against them restospectively to make sure that its friends are able to avail themselves of these schemes. For that reason I think it is absolutely essential that we establish this committee. It could be a watchdog in all areas of taxation and, in particular, in the area of tax avoidance. It would be a watchdog which would make sure that prominent members of this G()vermnent would no longer be able to indulge in tax avoidance schemes as they have done in the past, as exampled by the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister of this country. For that reason I strongly support the establishment of this select committee.

Question put.

That the motion (Mr Willis's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

45

Noes

63

Majority

18

AYES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Bowen, Lionel BrowD,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G.
Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Coben,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke,R.J.L. Holding, A. C. Ho,e,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C.I. Jacobi,R.

Jenkins, H. A. Iohnson, Los (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Kelly,R.I. Kent,L.
Kerin,I.C.
Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo
McMabon, Les Mildren, 1. B. Milton,P.
Morrison, W. L. Mountford, 1. G.
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, 1. L. Theophanous, A. C.
UreD, T.
Wallis, L. G. West, S. J. Wi!1is,R. Young, M. I.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. (Teller) Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A.
BrowD,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M. A. Cadman,A.G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H: G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G.

Hyde, 1. M.
Jarman,A. W. Jull,R.C.
Katter,R.C.
Killen,D.J. Lloyd,B.
Lusber, S. A.
MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M.
McMabon, Sir William Macphee,I.M.
Moore,I.C. Newman, K. E. NixoD,P.I.
O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, 1. R. Robinson, Ian Rocber, A. C.
Ruddock, P. M.

NOES
Drummond, P. H. Falconer, P. D. Fif.,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles,G.O'H. Good1uck, B. J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.I. Hodgman, W. M. Howard, 1. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender,I. M. Street, A.A. Tambling, G. E. J. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Question so resolved in the negative.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The time allotted for precedence of General Business has expired.

PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr LEO McLEAY-Yes, Mr Deputy Speaker.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-He may proceed.
Mr LEO McLEAY-Last evening in the debate on the motion to take note of the paper delivered by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) on health care services, the honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) made a statement after I had concluded my speech which seemed to indicate that I had made an attack on large private hospitals, generally seen as those which are run by charitable and religious organisations. I make it quite clear that at no time in my speech was I referring to private hospitals run by religious and charitable organisations. Indeed, I have a great sympathy for the plight in which they have been placed by the present Government's health arrangements. The private hospitals and nursing homes to which I was referring-I made it quite clear in my speech-were those conducted by private entrepreneurs, usually doctors, with profit as the motive for the conduct of them. They usually achieve this profit by referring their own patients to these hospitals. I take great exception to the inference by the honourable member for Murray that I was making an attack in particular on Catholic private hospitals in New South Wales because I believe hospitals such as Lewisham and St Margaret's have been those which have been most harmed by the present Government's health proposals. I think every assistance should be given to them.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented and seek to make a personal explanation.

Joint Committee on the ACT

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1829

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-The honourable member may proceed.
Mr BARRY JONES-I have been misrepresented by Hansard's report of yesterday's cognate debate on the Designs Amendment Bill, the Patents Amendment Bill and the Trade Marks Amendment Bill. I drew attention to inaccuracies in the second reading speech of the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson). I said:
The main argument that is put in the speech-it is put twice-concerns the common law remedy known as 'passing off'.
I pointed out to the House that this was not a remedy but an offence. Unfortunately, Hansard quotes me on page 1713 as saying:
I point out to the House that there is no such thing in common law remedy called 'pissing off'.
The two offences are entirely different and not to be confused. The correct reading should be 'passing off'.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair is persuaded to the honourable member's view.
JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY Mr FRY (Fraser)-On behalf of the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory I present the following report, together with extracts of minutes and proceedings:
71st-72nd series of proposed variations of the plan of layout of the City of Canberra and its environs-Final Report.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr FRY (Fraser)-by leave-This report covers two variations to the city plan. The first deals with a car park in Deakin while the other concerns the extension of William Hovell Drive from Coulter Drive to Kingsford-Smith Drive. The Committee has approved the Deakin variation which is for the gazettal of a car park to enable the construction ofmedical offices on the site. The Committee has, however, expressed concern about car parking in the area and asked for a report on the question of car parking to be submitted to the Committee in a year's time.
The proposed extension of William Hovell Drive has been given detailed consideration by the Committee. The Committee held a public hearing on the proposal on 13 March 1981 and a subcommittee of members inspected the proposed extension later that day. The Committee considered the evidence given at the public hearing at a later meeting and then decided to hold a further public hearing on the proposal. This hearing was held on Tuesday, 28 April. Prior to this hearing the Committee conducted a further inspection.

Alternative alignments for the proposed road were considered by the Committee but the Committee was not convinced that any of them justified a departure from the preferred alignment proposed by the National Capital Development Commission. According to the National Capital Development Commission the road will cost $2.9m at 1980 prices. The first alternative proposal would involve moving the road 9 metres to the west of that preferred alignment. It would involve reconstruction of part of the intersection and would cost in the vicinity of $30,000. One member of the Committee, the honourable member for Cook (Mr Dobie) has submitted a dissenting report and has indicated his support for this proposal. The second proposal would increase the length of the road by 270 metres and would cost an estimated $120,000. The third alternative is to increase the length of the road by 600 metres. This would cost an estimated $350,000.
The Committee acknowledges that the road may reduce the amenity of some residents near the road but also acknowledges the need for the construction of the road as an integral part of the road network for Belconnen and the additional cost to the community if alternative proposals were accepted.
Accordingly, the Committee has approved the variation with the recommendation that the acoustic earth mound be raised by approximately half a metre. In conclusion, I compliment all those involved in the inquiry. The Committee cannot satisfy all those involved but it has made a decision in the general interest of the residents of Canberra.
Mr DEAN (Herbert)-by leave-As one of the members of the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory, I express our congratulations to the Hawker Residents Action Committee which participated in our hearings. Its members were most articulate and their evidence was very helpful to the Committee when making its decision. However, I make the point-this will be seen on a reading of the evidence and a reading of the report in full-that the estimates of costs of the possible alternative routes, as referred to by the honourable member for Fraser (Mr Fry), are bare estimates only. They do not necessarily take into account any additional earthworks that may be required. In one case, they do not take into account the cost of lowering a water pipe and they do not take into account the costs of reconstructing the intersection into which this extension flows.

1830 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

When all these factors, plus the possibility of and determination, their belief that they can suc-

compensation to the landowner, are taken into ceed, who have built Australia.

account the figures of $120,000 for one route, or

$350,000 for another are seen to be very bare Fortunately, Australia's experience of big

figures indeed. The costs in fact would be somegovernment has been comparatively slight. We

what higher than those figures. Taking that into had a taste of it between 1972 and 1975. In those

account, the Committee could not justify recomyears the Commonwealth Government's claims

mending some more westerly alignment against on the nation's earnings rose from 23.8 per cent of

the reasonable efforts proposed by the National gross domestic product in 1972-73 to 30.1 per cent

Capital Development Commission to ensure that in 1975-76. Between June 1972 and June 1975 the

the proposed alignment is laid down with as little number of Commonwealth Government em-

impact as possible on the environment of the ployees rose by 52,000 and the number of State

neighbours.

employees rose by 114,000. It is not surprising

Sitting suspended from 1 to 2.15 p.m. REVIEW OF COMMONWEALTH
FUNCTIONS

that towards the end of this period, private sector employment fell. It fell because the growth of government produced a massive loss of confidence and private enterprise was crowded out.

Ministerial Statement

Government was taking up too much room. Since

Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-by leave-The Review of Common-

the 1975 election, the Government has been making an historic turnaround.

wealth Functions, chaired by the Minister for Industry and Commerce, Sir Phillip Lynch, has been the most significant and far-reaching ministerial undertaking of its kind ever undertaken by a Federal government. Its immediate aims are to streamline and fine down Commonwealth operations, partly by withdrawing from functions more appropriately handled by the States or private enterprise, and partly by rationalising the

a The Government has taken the view that we
would all be better off in a material as well as in social and political sense by establishing a more limited, and more realistic, role for government. Smaller government means eliminating waste, duplication and unnecessary costs of government. It does not mean austerity. The benefits of our program are now visible for everyone to see.

functions which properly belong to the Commonwealth. In the wider perspective, the aim of the Review is to establish the conditions under which there can be increased opportunities for all and better care for those in need.
The Review's starting point is that Australia's greatest resource is the Australian people and that the role of government is to enable people to exercise their abilities, their skills, their imaginations and their enterprise. When this happens the result is economic growth, more jobs, higher incomes and a better life for all. If we ask why it is that the free and democratic nations of the West provide the best way of life for ordinary people, the unmistakable answer is that it is because people who live in these societies are free to build for them-

More limited government is now encouraging massive job creation. In the last two years 300,000 new jobs have been added to the Australian economy-far more than government itself could have provided. But we must continue to make sure that there is sufficient room for the kind of individual initiatives which have built Australia and which are vital for Australia's future. This is why the Government has emphasised and reemphasised the importance of the economy and the need for the most stringent controls on government expenditure. The Government has had to concentrate on economic management, not because it alone matters, but because a sound economy is a precondition of other objectives.

selves the kind oflife that suits them best.

A sound and growing economy is important to

Only individuals have full knowledge of their Australians and their families. It is important in

own needs, wants and priorities; politicians, promoting the arts, in improving social security,

officials and bureaucrats neither have this knowlhealth services, education and in protecting the

edge nor can ever have it. This is why government environment. The growth of govermrient and

must not be intrusive and why strong and efficient increasing centralisation in Canberra had been

government must not grow into big and bureaugoing on for a long time. The temptation for

cratic government. Big government concentrates governments to increase their own power and

power, loses a perspective on its own limitations, expenditure is great and Labor gave a momentum

and leaves less room for people to make their own to the growth of government which has beef

choices. And we must not forget that it is people, reined in substantially over the last five years. The

their knowledge and their talents, their enterprise figures make the position plain.

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1831

In the three years before 1972-75 there was a by government but which would be more effec-

real growth of 4.5 per cent in Commonwealth outtively provided by the private sector itself.

lays. In the next three years there was an enorDepending upon the result of other reviews

mous 10 per cent real growth per annum. In the affecting air traffic we will be prepared to consider

five years since then, this Government has offering the domestic airline terminals throughout

brought the growth down to only about 1 per cent Australia for sale. The Government has decided

per annum. We have worked for a turnaround. to proceed with the sale of the Housing Loans In-

And I believe that the Review of Commonwealth surance Corporation.

Functions will contribute to a momentum that is building up in support of that turnaround. Each. step towards reducing the cost of government to the community, slight though each may appear in isolation, contributes to this end. And alongside expenditure restraint, we have worked to reduce the burdens of bureaucracy on people, and we have returned a considerable degree of independent responsibility to the States. It is in the context of these concerns and aspirations that the particular actions of the Review of Commonwealth Functions should be viewed.

Shipbuilding assistance will be scaled down, the Shipbuilding Board abolished, and the ship design function will be transferred to the private sector. Surplus Commonwealth land and storeholdings are to be identified and sold. Again, the Government does not consider that traditional government monopolies should be able to use their privileged position to compete with private enterprise where no public benefit can be discerned. Accordingly, the Australia Post Courier Service will be abolished and increased use will be made of private contractors for mail cartage. The Australian

I turn now to the specific decisions arising from Postal Commission will, however, maintain a ser-

the Review of Commonwealth Functions.

vice to be known as Australia Post Express, for

Transfer ofFunctions to Private Sector

the carriage of postal items only, as part of the mail service. The Commission's statutory mon-

In detailing the decisions I will first of all deal opoly powers will be closely examined to see

with those which express the Government's whether they should be reduced or eliminated.

objectives of strengthening private economic ac-

tivity and the influence of individuals over the economy through their choices in the market place. In the view of the Government, activities of a commercial kind are generally best performed in the private sector, where they are open to greater influence from consumers and to the disciplines of competition.
The Government has therefore decided that a number of significant activities presently carried

In the area of telecommunications, a technological explosion is now occurring and exciting opportunities for private activity to introduce diversity and innovation are expanding rapidly. The area is a complex one, and the many significant issues arising here required detailed investigation beyond the resources of time available in the present review. The Government takes the view that the traditional monopoly in this area can no longer be considered sacrosanct. Accordingly, a

out by the Commonwealth Government can more efficiently be undertaken by private enterprise. We propose to offer for sale as a going concern the Ordnance Factory at Bendigo, the Australian

major review will be undertaken of the activities of Telecom Australia to determine the extent to which the services it offers might be more effectively provided by the private sector. Pending the

Wool Testing Laboratory and some Commonoutcome of this inquiry the determination of stan-

wealth equity in the Wool Stores.

dards for interconnection equipment will be

Opposition members interjecting-

transferred from Telecom to an independent body.

Mr SPEAKER-Continued interjection is

most unparliamentary. For the House to be able The Professional Employment Offices Of the

to assess the statement. I ask that all honourable Commonwealth Employment Service will be

members remain silent.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-We will offer the Australian Government Clothing Factory for lease or sale as a going concern to the private sector. The Australian Government Publishing Ser-

integrated with normal CES operations. The Templine service will be abolished and the requirements of employers and job applicants for temporary vacancies will be reabsorbed within theCES.

vice bookshops will be offered for lease to the priA major portion of the National Acoustic

vate sector, as will the management of migrant Laboratories work will be carried out by the pri-

hostels. Similarly, there are a number of areas vate sector. However the NAL will continue to fit

where services are provided to the private sector hearing aids for eligible persons.

1832 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

In the Australian Capital Territory, the Belconnen Mall will be offered for sale to private enterprise as well as the Canberra retail markets, Havelock Guest House, the Mugga quarry and the hotmix plant.
We will complement the transfer of activities to private enterprise by contracting out to the private sector for the supply of certain goods and services to the Government. The in-house design of major works by the Department of Housing and Construction will be reduced from 60 per cent to 50 per cent of its activities and its in-house performance of minor works, repairs and maintenance activities will be reduced by around 50 per cent. The increased use of contracting out will also be reflected in the provision by the private sector of computer software services and technical advice. The Commonwealth also proposes to make increasing use of private surveyors, lawyers and accountants to perform essential functions on a contract basis. The scope for subcontracting an increased proportion of the Royal Australian Mint's total requirements for coinage blanks to the private sector will be reviewed and private sector tenders will be invited for the sole rights to market and distribute all Australian numismatic coins.
Contracting out will also affect the Government Printing Office, whose activities will now be confined to essential parliamentary and government work, with the bulk of other work contracted to the private sector. Again, the work of cleaning and watching Commonwealth properties by the Department of Administrative Services and the provision of non-departmental food services will be contracted to the private sector.
There is also scope for further contributions from outside Government to the nation's defence effort. The Department of Defence will from now on be encouraging the private sector and universities to perform a wider range of activities in defence science, research and development and will extend the use of contractors' services, where cost effective, for the naval dockyards and the defence workshops, including quality control requirements.
A significant number of Government operated services in the Australian Capital Territory will be transferred to the private sector. I mention here particularly the provision of sporting and cultural facilities, motor vehicle testing, the marketing and sale of residential and commercial land and the landscaping activities of the city parks administration. There will be a significant reduction in the number of statutory bodies and

positions in the Australian Capital Territory, affecting some 30 separate bodies.
Government Regulation and Assistance Schemes One of the many virtues of the free enterprise
system based on the market is that it decentralises influence and control over what is produced to the greatest extent possible. It gives consumers a greater say through their spending decisions than any other system. Through their decisions they have a dominant influence over the allocation of resources. The more government intervenes to change the impact of consumers' decisions through regulation and subsidies, the more control over the economy passes from the many to thefew.
In the course of the review of Commonwealth functions we have given close attention to many of the Government's regulatory activities, and to programs of industry assistance. Some degree of regulation is necessary to ensure the proper functioning of our free enterprise system. Government has a role in setting basic ground rules to facilitate the smooth functioning of private business activities and to ensure that appropriate information is equally available to all participants.
Over the years there has evolved a great deal of legislation which involves regulation of industry. Although some of this legislation benefits. the community as a whole, and some of it has been put in place at the request of the private sector, it nonetheless imposes substantial costs on the taxpayer and the consumer and particularly on individual business enterprise. It is evident that much of government regulation of private sector activity is neither necessary nor effective and is certainly more costly than is self-regulation.
As a significant step in the necessary process of deregulation we will abolish the Prices Justification Tribunal. This body has outlived its usefulness as a regulatory mechanism and is placing an undue burden on industry; there is no evidence that it is having any significant impact on the restraint of inflation. An appropriate mechanism will be established for the maintenance of the Government's petroleum product pricing policy. There will be a rationalisation of the industry assistance advisory functions within and between departments, including a reduction in the level of activity of the Industries Assistance Commission following from the completion of current tariff review references.
The Government will continue its efforts to free the airlines from undue regulation and restriction. The ~lVersight of Qantas Airways Ltd operations by the Department of Transport is to

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1833

be reduced and a new financial directive issued to the airline which will free Qantas to conduct its operations in a more commercially competitive manner, including the ability to set its own minimum fares. In relation to the domestic airlines, Government policy has already recognised the advantages of greater competition. The Government has announced its in-principle decision to establish Trans-Australia Airlines as a public company. The Government has yet to make a decision concerning the ownership of that company. This action and the introduction of different and wide-bodied aircraft by each airline should result in a new era of competition between the two airlines. In addition the Government has decided to establish machinery independent of the regulatory authority, the Department of Transport, to hear and make decisions upon proposals for changes to air fares. We have also announced the establishment of an inquiry into whether further major deregulation of Australia's domestic airline industry is a desirable long term objective.
The activities of the Australian National Line and Australian National Railways are also to be significantly deregulated. The Industries Assistance Commission is to investigate modifications and improvements to the Customs by-law system. Rent control in the Australian Capital Territory will be abolished and shopping hours deregulated. There are cases where both the Commonwealth and the States seek to regulate the same activities. Duplicated regulation is inherently inefficient. Therefore there will be a reduction in the range of activities of the Trade Practices Commission and the associated Trade Practices Division of the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs which overlap with the States. The Commission will reduce its activities by more selective complaints investigation, reduce its level of adjudication work, reduce staff in education and safety and information standards monitoring and limit compliance work in relation to misleading and deceptive conduct and other unfair business practices to those matters that raise issues of importance at the national level. The Department of Business and Consumer Affairs will continue to maintain a national role in product and labelling standards.

with the States as to their usefulness. Charges will be introduced for industry-initiated statistical collections. We will make a concerted effort to scale down the paper burden on the private sector. All Ministers, and the departments and authorities responsible to them, are examining, with a view to reducing, the current level of data and information they collect.
These measures by no means represent the end of our commitment to examining the possibilities for deregulation. In particular we are looking forward to the forthcoming report of the Campbell Commission of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System. We expect that it will give guidance on the possibilities for achieving substantial deregulation of another major area of business activity which the Commonwealth directly influences. Finally in this connection, it should also be emphasised that it is not only necessary for the Commonwealth to review its regulatory activity. As has been pointed out by the Confederation of Australian Industry, the States have, if anything, even more considerable responsibilities in these areas. I hope that the measures I have announced will act as a stimulus to the States to review their own extensive regulatory provisions.
Industry Assistance
It is not only unnecessary regulation and information demand which imposes costs on the community. Assistance schemes for industry also impose costs on taxpayers, and it is necessary that these too be subject to review to determine the balance between costs and benefits. As private economic activity strengthens and becomes increasingly competitive, government assistance becomes less necessary and industry can be asked to pay more of the costs of the government services it requires. Taxpayers should only be asked to meet the costs of subsidies and other assistance where the benefits clearly warrant the expense. In the improved climate for business operations we believe there is less need for specific government initiatives to promote particular business activities which are essentially the responsibility of business itself and when profits should provide an adequate incentive.

Apart from the burden of regulation, the Government is also continually reminded by industry of the burden imposed by the paperwork requirements of government. The Australian Bureau of Statistics is to eliminate a number of low priority statistical collections and review the frequency of other collections. Some 27 collections will be scrapped forthwith and another 29 subjected to further investigation and consultation

Wherever possible we intend to apply the 'userpays' principle and introduce new or increased charges for Government services as the best possible determinant of the value of those services. Consistent with this we will be examining further the feasibility of requiring industry to meet the cost of membership of international commodity organisations. Charges will also be introduced for actuarial and valuation services, archives services,

1834 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

the services provided to industry by the Australian Atomic Energy Commission, and for translation services and the assessment of overseas qualifications. The program of export inspection charging, aimed at recovering approximately 50 per cent of total costs, is to be extended: In the case of fish and dried fruit from 1 July 1981; of livestock, dairy products, eggs and honey from 1 July 1982; and of fresh, canned and processed fruit and vegetables from 1 January 1983. A significant rationalisation of meat inspection services has already been commenced and will be finalised by the Australian Agricultural Council in August 1981.
The differential between the interest rate on commercial borrowings by the Australian Wheat Board for the Wheat Board interest subsidy scheme.and the cost of borrowing from the Rural Credits Department of the Reserve Bank is to be reduced by one percentage point. The Commonwealth's expenditure on wool promotion activities is to be set at $20m for the next three years.
Mr Kerin-Each year? Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Yes. Reflecting the success of Australia's exporters in recent years the cost of the Export Expansion Grants Scheme has been considerably more than the Government anticipated. On its introduction in 1978 the Scheme was estimated to cost $66m annually; in the 1980-81 Budget $200m was provided. The Government has now decided that on its expiry in .June 1982 the Export Expansion Grants Scheme will be extended by one year to June 1983 pending review by the Industries Assistance Commission; but that grant rates will be reduced by 50 per cent from 1 July 1982. The Export Now campaign is to be terminated. In the improved climate for business .operations we believe there is less need for specific government initiatives to promote particular business activities which are essentially the responsibility of business itself and when profits should provide an adequate incentive. Accordingly the productivity improvement and industrial working environment functions of the Department of Science and Technology are to be significantly scaled down. The business information centres, established on a trial basis, will be terminated.
Taxation Concessions Taxation concessions for industry, which are equivalent in all practical senses to direct expenditures from the Budget, have also been reviewed and we have decided to reduce a number of currently available concessions. Some of the reductions are of the order of 10 per cent; the details of how the reductions are to be effected in each

particular case are set out in an attachment to this statement. The reductions will affect the investment allowance, the 20 per cent loading on depreciation rates, the outright deductions for conversion of oil or liquefied petroleum gas fired plant, the accelerated write-off of general mining and petroleum mining development expenditure and the petroleum shareholder rebate. The Government acknowledges that there is inevitably an element of arbitrariness about these proposals but believes that some reductions in the level of taxation concessions available to industry are essential if the burden of containing the public sector is to be shared by all groups in the community.
Transfer ofFun~tions to the States I now turn. to deal with the functions and responsibilities which will be returned to the States. Australia has prospered as a federal system. The federal system has strengthened and unified the nation by giving the major regions embodied in the States sufficient autonomy to adjust the services provided by government to local needs and desires, while at the same time guaranteeing each of them a strong voice in national affairs. A nation Australia's size cannot be effectively governed from Canberra, and attempts to inflate Canberra's power have been rejected again and again by the Australian electorate. The State and local governments are closer to the recipients of many services and are better placed to administer those programs. Their structure and location permits maximum response and involvement by those most affected by the decisions of government; they provide an effective barrier against centralist control.
Mr Barry Jones-But they still lack the perspective.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-And the honourable gentleman has none. Since coming to office we have acted to strengthen the bond of federalism between the Commonwealth and State governments. This has been reflected particularly in the changing balance of responsibility for the administration of programs and a marked decline since 1975-76 in the proportion of Commonwealth assistance provided to the State-local government sector in the form of specific purpose grants. Over this period, the proportion of total Commonwealth assistance provided as untied general revenue payments has risen from less than 40 per cent to around 50 per cent. This has provided a considerable increase in the funds available to the States which they can spend at their own discretion and without interference. The decisions I will announce continue this trend to

Review o/Commonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1835

allow the States greater freedom in deciding how they will spend their available finances. Our aim will be to maintain and assert national concern and to stimulate appropriate initiatives, while eliminating unnecessary overlap, waste and interference in the delivery of services and programs.
Health
As the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) advised the House yesterday the Government has concluded an extensive review of the arrangements for medical and hospital care in Australia. The changes flowing from that review were based upon the following objectives: Ensuring that eligible pensioners and the disadvantaged members of our community have free access to high standard health care; encouraging the general community to accept greater personal responsibility for their health costs through the application of the 'user-pays' principle; and removing inefficiencies and waste within the public hospital system.
The measures announced yesterday by the Minister for Health meet these objectives and represent a comprehensive and responsible policy to maintain existing high health care standards while ensuring that providers and consumers of health services are made more conscious of the costs of those services. The changes restore to the States their traditional responsibility for managing public hospitals and encourage them to increase efficiency within these hospitals. They strengthen arrangements to protect eligible pensioners and disadvantaged persons against the cost of hospital and medical care; ensure that the general population becomes more aware of the costs of health services by increasing their responsibility for their health care costs while encouraging them to provide for these costs through health insurance based on community rating; and they enhance the invaluable role played by the private health delivery sector and especially that of private hospitals.
These changes represent the outcome of a most comprehensive review of the health care sector in Australia; a review that would not have been possible without the untiring work of the Minister for Health and I am especially appreciative of his efforts. Finally, the number of and expenditure on advisory committees within the Health portfolio are to be significantly reduced. We will negotiate with the States with a view to transferring the pathology laboratories to them.
Education
As with health, the Commonwealth believes that the States have a primary responsibility for the administration and delivery of educational

services. Accordingly, it proposes to reduce significantly its involvement in this area. There will be a reduction in the Schools Commission's direct involvement in program administration and information collection. Accordingly, the activities of the State offices of the Commission will be scaled down and the Building Unit in the central office disbanded. Consistent with a reduced role for the Commonwealth in activities which are the proper preserve of the States, the Curriculum Development Centre will be abolished unless the States are prepared to meet 50 per cent of its operating costs. Special support for educational research and the Education Research and Development Committee will be terminated. This will allow the States to determine their own priorities in these areas.
Tn the Australian Capital Territory the Commonwealth Teaching Service Commissioner's role will be terminated and the functions currently performed by the Commissioner taken over by the Public Service Board, the Department of Education and the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority. The Minister for Education will develop proposals for the re-structuring of the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority to improve its operating efficiency and management. The Government has before it the reports of the Schools Commission and the Tertiary Education Commission for the 1982-84 triennium and will shortly be issuing formal guidelines to the two Commissions. In determining these guidelines the Government will be applying maximum expenditure restraint to the programs in all sectors.
At the tertiary level the Government has been concerned at the proliferation of separate institutions and proposes immediate action to reverse this trend and to provide for more efficient use of resources. Arising from the recommendations of the Tertiary Education Commission, the Government will promote a major rationalisation and reallocation of resources in higher education. This will involve consolidation into larger units of 30 existing colleges of advanced education, for which teacher education is the main activity, by their incorporation into multi-purpose or multi-campus colleges with a single governing body or by integration with neighbouring universities. Additional resources will be provided for institutions which are able to expand their effort in the technology and business studies. An amount of $5m will be earmarked within the general recurrent grants for universities and colleges of advanced education in the years 1982 and 1983 to facilitate this process. Some action has already been taken in the States and it is the Commonwealth's intention to reach

1836 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

agreement with each State concerning the rationalisation measures by the end of 1981. If this cannot be done, the Commonwealth will not be prepared to continue recurrent funding for the colleges concerned after the end of 1981, and if the State governments wish these colleges to continue as separate entities they will have to make their own separate financial provision.
In noting the view expressed by the Tertiary Education Commission in its triennial report that engineering courses in Victoria should be rationalised, the Commonwealth has decided to accelerate this process and intends that the engineering schools at Bendigo and Preston colleges of advanced education and at Deakin University be phased out with no new students admitted after 1981. The assesment of grants for the University of Western Australia and Murdoch University is to be based on a greater sharing of resources and collaboration between these two institutions. The Government does not see a need to establish a university in the Northern Territory as proposed by the Northern Territory Government and will not be providing funds for this purpose in the forthcoming triennium.
For second and higher qualifications in universities and colleges of advanced education, fees will be introduced except for recognised double degree and diploma combinations. These fees will apply to new enrolments from 1982 but students who are in receipt of Commonwealth Government post-graduate awards will be exempt from these fees. The Government does not intend to introduce fees for tertiary students undertaking their first qualification. Eligibility for student assistance under the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme and the Adult Secondary Education Assistance Scheme is to be tightened. From the beginning of 1982, however, a loans scheme will be introduced for tertiary students. This will enable them to supplement their current income by amounts which will be repayable after graduation. This is a form of assistance which recognises the substantial benefits flowing to individuals from a higher education and thus expresses a sound balance of community and individuals interest. It reduces the burdens on taxpayers in an entirely appropriate way. The availability of this additional form of financial assistance will be taken into account in determining the level of benefits under the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme.
Other Transfers to the States Other major programs which have been identified for early transfer to the States include urban public transport and the soil conservation programs. These transfers will involve the States'

taking responsibility for full policy and administrative matters. We intend that field activity under the Adult Migrant Education Program will be undertaken wherever possible by the States and non-government bodies with the Commonwealth's role restricted to arranging and coordinating only. We will be proposing to the South Australian Government that the staff of the Australian National Railways working for the South Australian Transport Authority should be transferred to that Authority.
Mr Scott-Mr Speaker-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
Mr Scott-I can no longer sit here--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman--
Mr Scott-And listen--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I warn the honourable member for Hindmarsh to resume his seat.
Mr Scott-And listen to this Prime Minister, who has not got a mandate from the people.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I name the honourable member for Hindmarsh.
Mr Scott-He is repudiating--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
Mr Scott-The agreements that were made--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
Mr Scott-I have made more than a point. This Government--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. I name the honourable member for Hindmarsh.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House)-Mr Speaker, I move:
That the honourable member for Hindmarsh be suspended from the services of the House.
Mr SPEAKER-The question is that the motion be agreed to.
Mr Scott-Mr Speaker, I do not have to be suspended. You can direct that I leave this chamber.
Mr SPEAKER-The question is--
Mr Scott-But I leave it, saying that this
Government does not have the mandate to do these things. If you think it has the mandate then--
Question put:
That the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott) be suspended from the service of the House.

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1837

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

65

Noes

48

Majority

17

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Browo,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Coleman, W.P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher,P. S. (Teller) Fraser, Malcolm Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges,J.C. (Teller) Howard, J. W. Hunt,R.J.D. Hyde,J.M.

Jarman,A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Killen,D.J.
Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William
Millar,P.C. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack,P.D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, 1. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J.
Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey,C. W. Viner, R. I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES

Armitage, J. L.
Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Browo,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J.
Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V.
Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W.G. Holding, A. C.
Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry J ones, Charles Keating, P. J.
Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C.
Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P.
Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G.
Scholes, G. G. D.
Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C.
Wallis,L.G.
West,S.J.
Willis,R.
Young,M.J.

Questions so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hindmarsh is suspended from the service of the House.

Mr Scott-l repeat: This Government does not have a mandate, particularly on the matter of the

agreement on the railways in South Australia, which was negotiated by the workers. They will remember all members opposite.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hindmarsh will leave the chamber.
Mr Scott-Mr Speaker, I apologise to you. The honourable member for Hindmarsh thereupon withdrewfrom the chamber. Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The New South Wales Government will be given the option of taking over the Glebe Estate Project and all States will be asked to share the operating costs of the Australian Institute of Criminology, given that State law enforcement and related authorities benefit from the Institute's activities. A new building in Canberra for the Institute will not be proceeded with. Responsibilities for the regulation and control of nuclear activities are to be implemented as far as possible by the States and the Northern Territory, with the Commonwealth maintaining a co-ordinating role. The Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service is to maintain its present policy functions, and will maintain control of marine parks and the essential Commonwealth interests in the Kakadu National Park, but we propose to scale down its general activities and to delegate responsibility for the operation of non-marine parks to the Northern Territory and Territory administrations. Responsibility for the financing of environmental regulatory services in the Northern Territory will be transferred to the Northern Territory Government. The funding of the Aboriginal Sacred Sites Protection Authority will also be transferred to the Territory Government. Grants to the States for Aboriginal housing will be integrated into the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement. A number of other Commonwealth activities which impact on State functions are also to be terminated as we no longer consider that they fulfil a useful purpose commensurate with their costs and the States are fully capable of meeting any remaining responsibilities themselves. The Regional Development Program, the Decentralisation Advisory Board, the Commonwealth Council for Rural Research and Extension and Commonwealth involvement in rural extension services all duplicate areas of State activity and will be abolished. Expenditure under the Ord River Irrigation Act will be terminated after existing commitments have been met. We have carefully reviewed other joint Commonwealth-State programs and for the time being at least we consider that the Commonwealth should remain appropriately involved, but

1838 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

we are determined to simplify their administraon major reductions in this area. The Government

tion and to eliminate any overlap and intrusion on will withdraw its offer of asistance for the

what are properly the administrative concerns of proposed Sydney-Melbourne railway electrifica-

the States. To this end we have decided that the tion in view of the lack of priority accorded to this

following principles are to be employed in future project by the States: Capital works for the

by Commonwealth Ministers and departments in proposed Canberra convention centre and Mu-

the administration of joint Commonwealth-State seum of Australia will be deferred indefinitely and

programs:

the proposed Commonwealth Government

An incident having occurredMr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman will resume his seat. The honourable member for Werriwa will withdraw.

Offices in Adelaide will be postponed for several years. No funds will be made available in the coming financial year for a number of building projects including the Canberra Law Courts, the National Library extension, the Townsville Com-

Mr Kerin-I withdraw, Mr Speaker. Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Commonwealth involvement in the determination of guidelines for joint programs will embrace general objectives only and deal in broad terms with the manner in

monwealth Offices, the Australian Federal Police headquarters, the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation headquarters, the National Biological Standards Laboratory and the Australian Dental Standards Laboratory.

which these objectives should be sought; .adminisIn future all proposals for capital works will be

trative involvement of Commonwealth departexamined solely in the Budget context. This will

ments will be limited to that necessary to ensure enable the Government to estimate more accu-

that the project, program or service is being rately the impact of these proposals not only on

progressed satisfactorily towards the agreed broad Budget outlays but also on building and construc-

objectives; and accountability reports will be limtion resources within the economy. The future

ited to the minimum necessary to satisfy the Comcapital expenditure on airport works is being

monwealth Auditor-General and the Commonreviewed and a more co-ordinated approach to

wealth authorities concerned that Commonpriorities will be established. Particular attention

wealth funds have been expended properly.

is being given to the scope for private sector and

Rationalisation of Commonwealth Government Activity

airline involvement in the construction of facilities, including the scope for developing facilities of a more modest standard.

I turn now to the decisions relating to the Commonwealth Government's own internal

Other Commonwealth Activities

activities. In making these decisions we have had In addition to these decisions, the Government

several objectives in view. These were: Firstly, to believes that the most rigorous control must con-

make sure that Commonwealth Government actinue to be exercised over spending by depart-

tivity does not crowd out private enterprise, ments and authorities. For the coming financial

inhibiting the private sector expansion on which year the Government intends that then:: will be a 3

job.opportunities depend; secondly, to reduce unper cent reduction in real terms on the current

necessary demands on the taxpayer by cutting level of expenditure by departments and authori-

back on bureaucracy; thirdly, to make sure that ties on administrative and operational items, in-

Commonwealth Government activities are perduding property acquisition, repairs and mainten-

formed with the greatest efficiency and effecance and furniture and fittings.

tiveness possible. Tl;te Government's attitude to expenditure restraint will be firmly in evidence in its approach at the forthcomi~g Premiers Conference and Loan Council meeting. We will be able to demonstrate to the States that we have taken another major step towards putting our own house in order; we will be expecting them to follow our example.

There will be a further tightening of Budget review procedures with the onus of proof being on the proponent to justify any increase in expenditure over the same money provided in the previous year. Coupled with this we intend that there should be a further improvement in the efficient management of government departments. Every effort will be made to eliminate non-essential ser-

Expenditure on capital works is an important vices, to combine common service areas, to make

item in the Commonwealth Budget. With the more efficient use of automatic data processing

boom in private investment associated with reand to decentralise and delegate management de-

source development there is a need to avoid overcisions to individual departments. The Govern-

stretching the capacity of the building and conment has decided to terminate the computerised

struction industry,' We have accordingly decided staff management system, called Mandata. The

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1839

termination of the Mandata Program Office will be achieved without any increase in staff ceilings in departments and will result in a significant reduction of staff within the Public Service Board.
The 'level of research activity and expenditure undertaken within government departments and authorities will be curtailed. The number of advisory committees and councils will be significantly reduced by abolition or amalgamation-this will apply particularly to the Science and Technology, Health, Education, Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Capital Territory and Social Security portfolios. Altogether we will be winding up or amalgamating some 40 advisory committees. In future the Government will not as a general rule provide an annual payment or sitting fee to part time members of advisory bodies, although individual cases of hardship or real need will be considered on their merits. Appropriate guidelines will be determined.
The Government proposes to terminate the Assisted Passage Scheme forthwith. Negotiations will be necessary with some migration-agreement countries to phase out the scheme. Assisted passages will be available only to eligible refugees and to those formerly eligible whose applications have been lodged by today. We also intend to abolish the Legislative Drafting Institute and the Council for Aboriginal Development and not to proceed with the establishment of a Broadcasting Information Office. The Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission is to be replaced by an advisory body which, while retaining its independence, will be serviced by staff of the Attorney-General's Department rather than by a staff of its own.

The emphasis will therefore clearly be to help people: By placing them in employment; with our training programs; and by career counselling for those most severely affected by long term unemployment. The regular collection and publication of CES statistics of persons registered for unemployment and of unfilled vacancies will be terminated; more reliable information on unemployment levels will continue to be available through the Australian Bureau of Statistics.
Significant room for staffing reductions exists in our diplomatic missions overseas. The staffing of the London and Washington posts will be cut by 232 and by 75 staff respectively. New guidelines will be issued on overseas representation. The overseas representation of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs will also be reviewed in the light of revised and more efficient procedures for the recruitment and selection of persons for permanent settlement in Australia. There will be a streamlining of procedures for persons applying for temporary entry to Australia and for the granting of Australian citizenship.
The Australian Development Assistance Bureau will be retained as a separate entity but, to the maximum extent possible, its activities and personnel will be integrated with the Department of Foreign Affairs. The need to maintain separate State offices for ADAB will be reviewed, with the administration and supervision of overseas students becoming a responsibility of the Department of Education and individual tertiary institutions.

The Industrial Relations Bureau will be maintained. Following our review the Government believes that it is functioning with increasing effectiveness. In the interests of improved administation and better service for clients, we will examine the scope for greater co-location of the offices of the Departments of Social Security and the Commonwealth Employment Service. In future, claim forms for unemployment benefit and fortnightly income statements will be lodged directly with the Department of Social Security; the requirement that unemployment benefit claimants visit CES offices fortnightly is to be removed. Again, in future all registered unemployed persons will be interviewed by CES officers after four months and those under 25 years of age still unemployed after eight months will be reinterviewed. The reasons for selecting these periods are so they will coincide with the eligibility criteria for our manpower and training programs.

One of the major benefits flowing from this extensive review of Commonwealth activities is that resources are freed to activities which the Government believes should be significantly developed. A more efficient public sector will produce substantial benefits in enabling us to implement more fully currentpriorities. I make particular mention here of a case in point. A reallocation of existing resources in the Australian Atomic Energy Commission research establishment and in the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation will enable the Government to establish a new Institute of Energy and Earth Resources in the CSIRO. The establishment of this Institute is a recognition of the high priority the Government believes must be given to energy research. It will consolidate Australia's present nuclear research establishment into a first-class ilUclear science and technology research organisation and establish a first class non-nuclear research organisation.

1840 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 198 I

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

The Government has also decided that the Australian Marine Sciences and Technologies Advisory Committee-AMSTAC-should from now on report direct to the Minister for Science and Technology. Previously it was a Standing Committee of the Australian Science and Technology Council-ASTEC. It will now be separate from that body, although ASTEC will be represented on it with observer status. The Government will also explore with State governments the appropriateness and feasibility of transferring to the States the remaining Commonwealth operational elements of the administration of quarantine. That would leave policy matters in relation to quarantine with the Department of Health for people and the Department of Primary Industry for animals and plants.
Reviews
We intend to establish major reviews into a number of significant areas of Commonwealth activity in order to further tighten administration and achieve a more efficient and effective service. First of all, I wish to announce that there will be a major review of the organisation of the Department of Defence, in the light of the five years of experience since the defence reorganisation in 1976. Generally we believe the amalgamation of the individual Service departments into a unified Defence Department has served Australia well, but we think it is now opportune to stand back and consider what further improvements might be made. The review will assess the suitability of the defence organisation to propose and implement policy for the achievement of Government defence objectives.

Secondly, we propose to engage consultants of international standing to review and report on the appropriate responsibilities and scaling down of activity of the National Capital Development Commission, having regard to the allocation of planning functions between the NCDC and the Department of the Capital Territory, including consideration of the extent of regulation of land use, design and siting.
Thirdly, we also intend to establish a major external review of government laboratory facilities and services to ensure a rational and coordinated use of available services and facilities. As previously mentioned, a major review of Telecom Australia will be undertaken and reviewof the staffing levels of the Reserve Bank of Australia has been instituted by the Governor of the Bank. An independent review will be made of the Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies.
The Government is conscious of the need for a close watch to be kept on the activities of statutory and non-departmental bodies. Ministers will be examining critically the need for continued existence of all statutory bodies within their portfolios. In addition we will be proposing the establishment of a joint parliamentary standing committee to review the performance, role, functions and continued need for all statutory bodies; references to this committee will be initiated by aMinister or by either House of Parliament.
I table a schedule of the decisions arising from the review of Commonwealth functions and seek leave to incorporate it in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-

Function

Government decision

1. Aboriginal Housing 2. Applied Ecology Pty Ltd 3. Sacred Sites Protection Authority 4. Council for Aboriginal Development
(CAD) and National Conference (NAC) 5. Institute of Aboriginal Studies . . .
1. Property and Survey Activities
2. Disposal of Surplus Land

Aboriginal Affairs
States Grants for Aboriginal Housing to be incorporated in the CommonwealthStates Housing Agreement (and earmarked as an identifiable program component).
Commonwealth funding to be withdrawn. Funding be transferred to the Northern Territory Government. CAD to be abolished, with advisory functions and powers transferred to the
NAC.
An external review of the Institute to be conducted (including its interrelationship with the proposed Museum of Australia and the Heritage Commission).
Administrative Services
Increased use to be made of private surveyors so that the private sector obtains an agreed target proportion of Commonwealth survey work within 5 years.
Overseas property activities of statutory authorities to be transferred to the Overseas Operations Branch of the Department of Administrative Services.
Department of Administrative Services to assume policy control for all aspects of domestic property.
Surplus Commonwealth land to be sold or leased.

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1841

Function

Government decision

3. Government Printing and Publications
4. Storage of Goods
5. Purchasing Policy Development and Review
6. Purchasing Division, Technical Services Sections
7. Management Support Services within Portfolio
8. Ministerial Document Service 9. Cleaning and Watching of Common-
wealth Properties 10. Food Services
11. ACT Non-migrant Guest Houses 12. Use of Hire Cars 13. Management of Migrant Hostels

Capacity of Government Printer to be limited to that required for Parliament and the urgent and confidential needs of government.
Remaining work to be transferred to private sector. AGPS bookshops to be leased to private sector. Departments to identify and dispose of surplus goods. Establishment of Departmental bulk stores to be controlled. Storage costs to be recovered. Contracting out to private sector of routine disposal of goods to be increased. Role of Purchasing Division to be extended to purchases by statutory authorities
and departments over the Regulation 52 limit to achieve greater purchasing economies. Resources devoted to this function to be reduced.
Management support for AGPS, Transport and Storage Division and Australian Electoral Office to be centralised with Management Services Division of Department.
Circulation of daiiy compilation of Ministerial Statements to be limited to essential users.
Cleaning and watching of Commonwealth properties to be undertaken by private sector.
Non-departmental food and other services provided by CACS Ltd to be transferred to private sector.
Departmental services to be subject to further review. Havelock House to be placed on market. Future of remaining guest houses to be reviewed. Preference to be given to firms that use Australian made cars. Migrant hostel management to be transferred to the private sector on a manage-
ment fee arrangement.

1. Crown Solicitor's Division 2. Australian Legal Aid Office
3. Production of High Court Decisions 4. Legislative Drafting Institute 5. Private Publication of Commonwealth
Statutes 6. Institute of Criminology
7. Court Reporting Services

Attorney-General's
Suitable work to be let out to private sector. New South Wales, Tasmania and Northern Territory Governments to be invited
to take over Australian Legal Aid Office functions. Production and marketing of High Court decisions to remain with private sector. Institute to be abolished and replaced with on the job training. Restrictions on private publication in competition with government publication
to be eased. New building not to be proceeded with. States to be asked to contribute six-sevenths of all costs of the Institute. Efficiency of the Court Reporting Service and scope for limiting its services to
essential requirements to be examined.

1. Bankruptcy 2. Customs By-law System 3. Prices Justification Tribunal 4. Consumer Affairs Activities
5. Policy Advice on Industries Assistance

Business and Consumer Affairs
Bankruptcy work to be contracted to private sector.
Industries Assistance Commission to investigate improvements to by-law system. Tribunal to be abolished. An appropriate mechanism will be established for the maintenance of the
Government's petroleum product pricing policy.
Activities of Trade Practices Commission to be reduced by: More selective complaints investigation; Reduced adjudication work; Reduced education functions and safety and information standards monitoring.
National product/labelling standard setting role to be maintained. Staff in Trade Practices Division of BACA to be correspondingly reduced. Scope for rationalising assistance advisory function within and between Depart-
ments to be examined. lAC staffing to be reduced following completion of Tariff Review references. Staff in Industries Assistance Division of BACA to be correspondingly reduced.

1. Recreation and Cultural Facilities
2. Motor Vehicle Testing Centres 3. Lands

Capital Territory
Maximum future provision of recreation and cultural facilities to be by private sector.
Scope for existing facilities to be leased or sold to be examined. Motor dealers and garages to perform testing of cars for registration purposes. The private sector alone to market and sell residential and commercial land in-
cluding over the counter sales.

1842 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

Function

Government decision

4. Canberra Commercial Development Authority . . . . . .
5. Canberra Retail Markets Trust 6. National Capital Development Com-
mission
7. City Parks Administration
8. Statutory and Comparable Bodies and Positions

Authority to be abolished.
Belconnen Mall to be sold to the private sector.
Trust to be terminated and facilities sold to a trade co-operative. Consultants of international standing to be engaged to review and report on the
appropriate reduction in the responsibilities and scale of activity for NCDC (having regard to the allocation of planning functions between NCDC and the Department of the Capital Territory, including consideration of the extent of regulation of land use, design and siting.)
The issue of free plants to owners ofnew homes to be discontinued. Existing contract arrangements to be extended to cover all aspects of landscaping
activities.
Architects, surveyors, real estate, stock and station and business agents to regu-
late themselves. Charges for registering and (where appropriate) regulating professional groups
be reviewed to cover administrative costs. Various review bodies to be transferred to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal,
including the Land Commissioner and Valuation Review Board. Milk Authority and the Show Ground Trust to assume responsibility for their
staffing requirements. Extent of building industry regulation to be reduced subject to appropriate safety
requirements being preserved.
Rent control to be abolished.
Review of 3rd party insurance arrangements to be expedited. Controller of Prices to be abolished. Milk price control to be undertaken by the
Milk Authority. Co-operative trading societies to be deregulated.
Shopping hours to be deregulated. Minister for Health to examine scope for reducing Government involvement in
registration/regulation of health professionals.
Nature Conservation Advisory Committee to be abolished.
TAB, Liquor Licensing Board and Poker Machine Licensing Board to be amalgamated.
Scope for operating housing loans scheme through banks or building societies to be examined.

1. ABC-'Accommodation Arrangements 2. Broadcasting Information Office 3. Australia Post . . . . . . . .
4. Telecom
5. Post Offices as Agents for Government Activities

CommunicatioDs
Scope for rationalisation of existing ABC locations to be examined. Broadcasting Information Office not to be established. Australia ]>ost Courier Service to be abolished. Australia Post to maintain a postal express service for postal items only, as part of
the mail service. Private contractors to be used for mail cartage. Australian Postal Commission's statutory monopoly powers to be examined with
a view to reduction or elimination. An independent inquiry of Telecom to be established to examine the extent to
which there could be a wider private sector involvement in activities currently performed by Telecom. The determination of standards for equipment for the interconnect market be transferred from Telecom to an independent body. Post Offices to provide brochures and information for business and community on government programs. Post Office information agency activities not to compete with private enterprise.

1. Defence Science; Research and Development
2. Naval Dockyards 3. Defence Workshops 4. Quality Control/Assurance
5. Defence Warehousing
6. Defence Printing Establishment
7. Defence Review

DefeDce
Direct Commonwealth involvement to be reduced.
Private sector and universities to be encouraged to perform activities. Use of contractors' services to be extended. Contract arrangements for repairs and maintenance to be extended. Greater use to be made of private sector and Government factories to meet qual-
ity control requirements. A single Defence Quality Assurance Service to be established. Further rationalisation and centralisation of Defence warehousing to be under-
taken. Defence Printing Establishment, Brunswick, to be transferred to AGPS within
twelve months. A major review of Defence organization to be conducted, to report by mid-1982.

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1843

Function

Government decision

1. Adult Secondary Education Assistance Scheme
2. Schools Commission . . . . . . 3. School Building Costs 4. Curriculum Development Centre 5. Research Activities 6. International Education 7. Student Loans 8. Eligibility for TEAS
9. Tertiary Tuition Fees
10. Rationalisation of Colleges of Advanced Education
II. Proposed University in the Northern Territory'
12. ACT education . . . . . . . 13. Education Program for Unemployed
Youth

Education
Eligibility to be restricted to those needing qualifications for employment.
Direct involvement of Schools Commission in program administration in the States and information collection to be reduced.
State Offices to be scaled down accordingly. Buildings Unit in central office to be abolished. Subsidies for school buildings and other capital facilities to be based on an amount
equal to the mean of average costs for each sector (eg. government school and non-government, primary and secondary). Commonwealth funding will not be available for Government school buildings in States which exceed this average cost level in the building of new facilities. Centre to be abolished (unless the States agree to contribute 50 per cent of operating costs). In future, only curriculum projects requested by the Australian Education Council and cost shared 50:50 by the States to be undertaken. Special supportfor educational research to be terminated. Education Research and Development Committee to be abolished. In-house and contracted research activities of the Department of Education to be scaled down. Participation in international education activities, particularly UNESCO and OECD, to be scaled down. A loan scheme, administered by tertiary institutions, to be introduced from the beginning of 1982 as a supplement to TEAS. Changes to TEAS rates to be considered in the light of this additional form of assistance. Eligibility for living away from home allowance for those 21 to 25 to be restricted to those required to live away from home by reason of geography or home conditions. De facto relationships no longer to be an acceptable qualification for independent status. Periods of registration for employment, with or without receipt of Unemployment Benefits, to be taken into account in determining the 2 year qualifying period for independent status. Tuition fees to be introduced in universities and CAE's for students undertaking degrees and diplomas subsequent to an initial tertiary qualification, except for recognised double degree or diploma combinations. Fees to apply to new enrolments from 1982. The scale of fees to be announced in the Budget context. Postgraduate students receiving Commonwealth Government Postgraduate Awards to be exempted from fees. Grants to universities and colleges to be offset to take account of fee income. Consideration to be given to funding activities of single purpose CAE's where they have been amalgamated with or into larger institutions to the satisfaction of the Commonwealth Government by the end of 1981. Commonwealth funding for thirty single-purpose CAE's to cease as single purpose institutions from the end of 1981. The consolidation of institutions is to result in genuine amalgamations with one governing body and a real saving of resources. The States to be given the option oftakingover affected colleges after 1981 on the basis that they provide the full funding involved. An amount of $5m to be earmarked within total funds made available for universities and colleges in 1982 and 1983 to facilitate this rationalisation of activities through expansion of technological and business studies. The engineering schools at Preston and Bendigo CAE's and at Deakin University to be run down with no new students accepted after 1981. The future of the engineering school at Caulfield CAE to be examined. Funding for the University of Western Australia and Murdoch University to be based on a greater sharing of resources and collaboration. Commonwealth funding not to be provided for the establishment of a University in the Northern Territory in the 1982-84 Triennium. The Commonwealth Teaching Service Commissioner to be abolished and the functions to be absorbed by the Public Service Board, the ACT Schools Authority and the Department of Education. The ACT Schools Authority to be restructured. Use of ACT school buildings to be significantly rationalised. Administration of program to be transferred to the School to Work Transition Program.

1844 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

Function

Government decision

1. Professional Employment Offices (PEO)
2. Occupational Information 3. Vocational Psychology 4. CES Templine Service 5. Waterfront Employment Offices
6. Other Aspects of CES Operation
7. Former Regular Servicemen's Vocational Training Scheme
8. Labour Market Research
9. CES Statistics
10. CES Recall Interviews
11. Aspects of CES UB Administration

Employment and Yonth Affairs
PEO's to be discontinued as a separate network from the Commonwealth Employment Service.
Services to be rationalised having regard to level of State services. Services to be rationalised having regard to level of State services. Templine to be abolished. Operation to be discontinued. Functions to be performed by private employers. Typist/stenographer testing in Perth to be abolished. Employer paid advertisements to be discontinued in areas where CES has not
been the traditional source ofjob vacancies. Scheme to be terminated.
Further rationalisation between Bureau of Labour Market Research and research positions in Department to be undertaken.
Regular collection and publication of CES statistics of persons registered for unemployment and of unfilled vacancies to be discontinued.
All registered unemployed to be interviewed after 4 months and those under 25 re-interviewed after 8 months.
Initial UB claim forms and fortnightly income statements to be returned direct to the Department of Social Security.
The requirement that claimants visit CES offices fortnightly to be removed.

1. Cash Mode of Salary Payment . 2. Enemy Subjects Trnst Accounts 1. Public Affairs Branch 2. Australia-Japan Relations
3. Advisor on Science, Technology and the Environment
4. Overseas Aid
5. ADAB Regional Offices
6. Policy Towards International Organisations
7. Eastern Regional Organisation for Public Administration
8. Overseas Representation

Finance
Cash payments for staff employed by the Commonwealth to be eliminated (with the exception of certain industrial type payrolls).
Trust Account to be terminated.
Foreign Affairs
Departmental public relations operations to be scaled down. Australia-Japan Relations function to be rationalised by:
examining overlap between Standing Committee on Japan, Consultative Committee on Relations with Japan and Australia-Japan Foundation;
reviewing need for a separate Japan Secretariat; reducing Foundation staff and/or scaling down Information and Cultural
Relations Branch. Abolish position.
ADAB to be retained as an entity with its own director. Officers of ADAB to be integrated into Department to greatest extent possible to
allow for maximum: interchangeability ofpersonnel; and common support services.
State Offices of ADAB to be reviewed with a view to: supervision of sponsored overseas students becoming the responsibility of tertiary institutions; administration of the overseas student training program being transferred to the State offices of Department of Education; greater use to be made of private sector travel firms to arrange travel;
Future location of International Training Institute to be considered. Australia's membership of, and level of contribution to, international organisa-
tions to be reviewed. Australian membership to be terminated.
Revised directive on overseas representation to be issued. Staffing in London and Washington posts to be significantly reduced.

1. Pathology Laboratories
2. Policy Advice on Aspects of Health Care
3. Institute of Anatomy 4. Statutory Qualifications for the
Director-General ofHealth 5. School Dental Scheme 6. International Health 7. Portfolio Advisory Committees

Health
The transfer of the pathology laboratories to the States to be taken up with State Governments.
Staffing levels in areas dealing with environmental health, toxicology, food standards, preventative medicine, nutrition and epidemiology to be rationalised.
Institute ofAnatomy ultimately to become part of proposed National Museum. Relevant legislation will be amended to remove the statutory requirement for the
Director-General ofHealth to be a qualified medical practitioner. To be transferred to the States. Level of Commonwealth staffing and involvement to be reviewed. Operating costs to be significantly reduced.

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1845

Function 8. National Acoustics Laboratories

Government decision
The major portion of NAL's work to be carried out by the private sector with Australian firms tendering for the manufacture and assembly of hearing aids.
NAL will continue to fit and repair aids for eligible persons.

1. Australian Archives 2. Film and Television School 3. 'Life. Be In It' Program 4. Uranium 5. Environmental Protection (Nuclear
Development)
6. Australia!) National Parks and Wildlife Service (ANPWS)
7. Australian Archives Charge for Services 8. Women's Issues
9. Cultural and Heritage Matters

Home Affairs and Environment
Archives premises to be shared with States where possible.
Film and TV School to be directed to pursue full cost recovery for its Open Program activities.
Commonwealth support for the program to be terminated.
Responsibility for the regulation and control of nuclear activities in Australia to be implemented as far as possible by the States and Northern Territory, with the Commonwealth maintaining a co-ordinating role.
Responsibility for the financing of Northern Territory environmental Regulatory services be transferred to the Territory Government (subject to the Territory establishing an independent environmental regulatory agency and continuing to have the Alligator Region Co-ordinating Committee and the Supervising Scientist consider the annual programs of the Northern Territory).
ANPWS to maintain control of marine parks and its present policy functions. Operations functions, other than through management advice, to be gradually
scaled down.
Except where the Commonwealth is requested by a Territory to maintain full control, operation of non-marine parks, other than through management advice, to be left to the Northern Territory and Territory administrations to conduct under delegation.
Essential Commonwealth interests in the Kakadu National Park to be maintained.
Charging for archival storage of records of Commonwealth business undertakings to be initiated.
The Office of Women's Affairs in the Department of Home Affairs and Environment and the Women's Bureau in the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs to be continued.
Other Departments to integrate their women's unit functions with their Departmental functions.
Staffing levels in the Department and associated authorities concerned with cultural and heritage matters to be reviewed.

1. Design of Major New Works
2. Minor Works, Repairs and Maintenance
3. Advisory Services
4. Mugga Quarry and Hotmix Complex (ACT)
5. Monitoring Building Industry; Housing Costs; Housing Policy Advice
6. Management Structure
7. Glebe Estate . . . .
8. Housing Loans Insurance Corporation (HLIC)

Housing and Construction In-house design activities to be reduced from 60 per cent to a maximum of 50 per
cent of total Commonwealth need. In-house activities to be reduced by around 50 per cent.
Experimental Building Station to be disposed of. Increased role for CSIRO, AMDEL and private sector in the provision of techni-
cal advice in this area to be examined. To be sold.
Level of activities and staffing to be reduced.
Management structure of Department to be reviewed in light of changes in scale and pattern of works program.
Discussions to be held with a view to transferring Glebe Estate to NSW Government (or, if the State rejects that transfer, to otherwise dispose of it).
HLIC to be sold (subject to the understanding that the purchaser maintains the level of services presently provided).

1846 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

Function

Government decision

1. Assisted Passage Scheme
2. Citizenship 3. Information Services 4. Committee on Overseas Professional
Qualifications (COPQ) 5. Adult Migrant and Refugee Education
Program
6. Population and Labour Market Research
7. Translation/Interpreting Services
8. National Groups Directory 9. Overseas Services 10. Temporary Entry to Australia 11. Advisory Bodies

Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
Assisted Passage Scheme to be terminated forthwith. Negotiations to be sought with migration agreement countries to phase out As-
sisted Passage Scheme. Special provisions to continue to apply for refugees. Administrative procedures for granting citizenship to be streamlined. Production of certain publications to be terminated and others rationalised. Department's information role to be rationalised. Charges for examination of qualifications to be introduced where appropriate.
Commonwealth's role to be restricted to arranging and co-ordinating only by relinquishing responsibility for the conduct of individual programs.
Field activity to be contracted out to State and non-government bodies. Allowance payments to be made by Department of Social Security. Population and labour market research activities to be rationalised between De-
partments of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and Employment and Youth Affairs and staffing to be reduced. Translation Services to be:
transferred to private agencies where they can provide the service; withdrawn in areas of prime State responsibility. Charges to be introduced on a cost recovery basis. Telephone Interpreting Service hours of operation to be reduced. Telephone diversion equipment to be used to enable larger capitals to service
smaller States. National Accreditation Authority for Translators and Interpreters to become
self-funding as soon as possible. Production to be discontinued. Overseas based staff associated with the recruitment and selection of persons for
permanent settlement in Australia to be reduced. Requirements and procedures to be streamlined. Single advisory council to replace:
Australian Ethnic Affairs Council; Australian Population and Immigration Council; Australian Refugees Advisory Council.

1. Australian Government Clothing Factory
2. Ordnance Factory, Bendigo
3. Ship Design 4. Ship Building
5. Advisory Committees

Industry and Commerce
Factory to be offered to private sector for sale or lease as a going concern.
To be sold to private enterprise (with protection of defence intetests). Some activities to be transferred to Maribyrnong factory. Function to be transferred to private sector. Ship Building Board to be abolished. ShipbUilding assistance functions to be scaled down. Advisory Committees to be rationalised.

I. Industrial Training
2. Coal Mining Industry Long Service Leave
3. International Employment and Labour Relations
4. Industrial Relations Bureau
I. Australian Atomic Energy Commission Research
2. Regional Development and Regional Development Program
3. Soil Conservation Program 4. Energy Policy

Industrial Relations Trade training activities of the Departments of Industrial Relations and Employ-
ment and Youth Affairs to be rationalised. Negotiations to be held with States, industry and unions with aim of termination
of current arrangements involving Commonwealth.
Activities between the Departments of Industrial Relations and Employment and Youth Affairs to be rationalised.
To be retained.
National Development and Energy
Cost recovery to be sought from private sector.
Commonwealth to withdraw from regional development activities. Regional Development Program and Decentralisation Advisory Board to be
abolished. Expenditure under Ord River Irrigation Act to be terminated after existing com-
mitments have been met. To be transferred to the States. Departmental staffing to be rationalised.

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1847

Function

Government decision

1. 'Australian Fisheries' Magazine 2. Australian Plague Locust Commission 3. Policy Advice, Research and Support
Functions in Department 4. Food and Agricultural Organisation
(FAO) 5. Commonwealth Council for Rural Re-
search and Extension 6. Rural Extension Services 7. Wool Testing Authority 8. Wool Stores
9. Wool Promotion 10. Wheat Board Interest Subsidy
11. Charging for Export Inspection
12. Forestry and Forest Products
13. Meat Inspection

Primary Industry
Production costs to be recovered by charging a fee. Commonwealth staffing involvement to be terminated. Commonwealth to continue to meet 50 per cent of costs. Scope for staff reductions to be examined.
Australia's representation to be scaled down. Activities to be concentrated in Department of Primary Industry. Abolish.
Direct Commonwealth involvement in rural extension services to be terminated. To be sold to private sector. Minimum storage capacity needs to be retained. Australian Wool Corporation to arrange for sale of some Commonwealth equity
in Wool Stores. Commonwealth contribution to remain at same money level for 3 years. The differential between the interest rate on commercial borrowings by the Aus-
tralian Wheat Board for the Wheat Board interest subsidy scheme and the cost of borrowing from RCD of the Reserve Bank to be reduced by one percentage point. Export inspection charging to be extended at 50 per cent cost recovery rate to:
fish and dried fruit from 1 July 1981; livestock, dairy products, eggs and honey from 1 July 1982; fresh, canned and processed fruits and vegetables from 1 January 1983. Expenditure on forestry under Softwoods Forestry Agreement Act and Tasmanian Native Forestry Act to be discontinued when current arrangements expire. Proposals for rationalisation of meat inspection arrangements to be finalised by the Australian Agricultural Council in August 1981.

1. Audit of NT Authorities by Auditor General
2. Mandata . . . .
3. Interchange Program

Prime Minister and Cabinet
Service performed by Auditor-General for the Northern Territory Government to be discontinued.
Mandata to be terminated, with consequent staff saving in PSB and within the existing staff ceilings of affected Departments.
Staff Interchange program to be expanded.

1. Baseline Air Pollution Station 2. Productivity Improvement-
Industrial Management Productivity Promotion Council of
Australia Productivity Development Pilot programs for Innovation Assistance to Inventors Scheme
National Materials Handling Bureau Technological Transfer
3. Industrial (Physical) Working Environment
4. Advisory Bodies

Science and Technology
Operation of the Station to be contracted out.
Activities to be substantially reduced and the remainder transferred to the Department of Industrial Relations.
Grant to be reduced by 14 per cent and Commonwealth staffing to be phased out over two years.
bepartment's activities in this area to be scaled down.
Administration of Scheme to be streamlined. Above three functions to be the subject of a further report to the Minister con-
ducted by persons from the private sector. Functions to be transferred to a research organisation funded by the private sec-
tor or, failing that, wound up. Commonwealth activities to be substantially reduced. Technology Awareness Program to be discontinued. Funding of Technological Transfer Council to be retained until 1982 and con-
tinuing Commonwealth involvement evaluated. Grant to Industrial Design Council of Australia to be discontinued. Function to be scaled down. Any residual activities to be transferred to Department oflndustrial Relations. The following bodies to be abolished:
Meteorology Research Advisory Committee; National Consultative Committee on Occupational Safety and Health; National Committee on Occupation Safety and Health in Government
Employment; Information Technology Council; Employee Participation Steering Committee; Advisory Committee on International Scientific and Technological
Activities;

1848 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

Function

Government decision

5. Review of Laboratory Services 6. Business Information Centres

Astronomy Advisory Committee;
Australian Inventions Advisory Committee; Australian Numerical Meteorological Research Centre Advisory
Committee; Balloon Launching Station Co-ordinating Committee; Technology Transfer Council Advisory Board;
The following Committees to be amalgamated: the Antarctic Names Committee of Australia, the Antarctic Polar Medal Assessment Committee and the Heard Island and McDonald Islands Names Committee of Australia; the Antarctic Research Program Planning Committee and the Antarctic Re-
search Policy Advisory Committee; the Queen Elizabeth II Advisory Committee and the Australian Research
Grants Committee; ,
the Queen's Fellowship Advisory Committee and the Australian Marine Sciences and Technologies Advisory Committee-,Funding Advisory Panel.
An inquiry into government laboratory services to be carried out by a committee with representatives from the private sector and tertiary institutions.
Trial Centres to be terminated. Activity to be undertaken by Post Offices (see Communications).

1. Regional Office Network 2. Advisory Committees
3. Development and Administration of Welfare Program
4. Administration of Department

Social Security
Rate of expansion of Regional Offices to be reduced. Co-location of DSS and CES Offices to be extended. The following committees t6 be incorporated into the State and Territory Con-
sultative Committees on Social Welfare: Children's Services Sub-Committees of the ACT and NT; ConSUltative Committees on Social Welfare; Homeless Persons Advisory Committees.
Women's Welfare Issues Consultative Committee to be abolished and its interests incorporated into the National Consultative Council on Social Welfare.
Social work activity to be confined to that relating to Departmental functions. Social Welfare Division of Department to be scaled down. A review be undertaken of:
resources devoted to area management; Productivity Control System.

1. International Commodity Organisations
2. 'Export Now' Campaign 3. Uranium 4. Export Incentives

Trade and Resources
Examination to be made of: industry payment of full direct cost of membership of international commodityorganizations; membership to be withdrawn where the industries are not prepared to meet these costs.
To be terminated. Uranium Export Office staffing to be significantly scaled down. Export Expansion Grants Scheme to be continued on its present form to June
1982 and extended to June 1983 with grant rates reduced by 50 per cent. Export Market Development Grants Scheme to be continued in its present form
to June 1983. Current and future methods of assisting the expansion of export of goods and ser-
vices to be referred to the lAC for report by 31 December 1981.

1. Engagements and Discharges of Merchant Seamen
2. Transport Planning and Research
3. Provision of Explosives Handling/Support Facilities for Defence and the PrivateSector
4. Deregulation of Australian National Railways and Australian National Line

Transport Supervision to be reduced.
Assistance to be terminated (except Australian Road Research Board and Australian Railways Research and Development Organisation).
Full cost recovery to be sought for commercial activities at Port Wilson facility.
ANR staffing level to be determined as a commercial judgment without reference to the Public Service Board.
The salary of the General Manager of ANR to be determined by the Remuneration Tribunal.
ANL and ANR to determine salary levels below that of General Manager. Alternative superannuation schemes for ANL and ANR employees can be devel-
oped if appropriate.

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1849

Function

Government decision

5. Australian National Railways 6. Australian National Line 7. Ministerial and Industry Councils 8. Departmental Oversight of Qantas 9. Qantas Financial Directive
10. Airports . . . . . . . . . .
11. Transport Research 12. Urban Public Transport 13. Office of Road Safety 14. Lighthouses 15. Coordination of Transport Policy
1. Co-ordinator General of Public Works 2. ACT Companies (Life Insurance Hold-
ingCompanies) Ordinance 1968 3. Reserve Bank Staffing 4. Australian Mint
5. Foreign Investment 6. Office of the Australian Government
Actuary 7. Advisory Committees . . . . . . 8. Office of Life Insurance Commissioner,
Office ofInsurance Commissioner 9. Valuation Services of Taxation Office 10. Statistical Collections

The Minister to approve a basis for fare and freight rates.

Further deregulation proposals relating to expenditure control, access to capital

markets and compliance with Commonwealth directions to be considered.

Value of contracts requiring Ministerial approval to be raised to $2m or such

other amount the Minister. determines.

ANR staff working-for South Australian State Transport Authority to be trans-

ferred to that Authority,

ANL to develop a corporate plan to achieve a trading profit within a specified

time.

Minister to discuss with States the integration of the Australian Transport Advis-

ory Council and Marine and Ports Council of Australia.

Aviation Industry Advisory Council meetings to be held only twice a year.

Departmental oversight of Qantas particularly in the area of financial perform-

ance, to be reduced.

,'

Minister to take up with Qantas inclusion of the following matters in a new

Financial Directive:

tariff charge approval to be by Minister not Secretary of Department of

Transport;

simplification oftariff approval procedure;

elimination of power to set minimum fares.

Depending on the result of other reviews affecting air traffic, consideration to be

given to offering the domestic airline terminals throughout Australia for sale

and for the provision and maintenance of all new terminal facilities to be

undertaken by the private sector.

The scope for contracting maintenance of major civil aerodromes to be examined.

Scope for contractors providing certain airways equipment to be examined.

Further approvals for airport funding to await development of a co-ordinated ap-

proach to priorities including:

the scope for private sectorjairline involvement in construction of facilities;

the scope for a more modest standard of facility.

Ownership of the following airports be transferred under aerodrome local owner-

ship plan:

Mackay

Maryborough

Cambridge (Tas)

North West Tasmania

other regions where reasonable access to an alternative airport available.

References to the Bureau of Transport Economics to be restricted to major

studies.

Function to be transferred to the States.

Activities of the Office to be scaled down with efforts to be concentrated in areas

of greatest significance.

Lighthouse demanning program to continue.

Divisional structure to be rationalised in conjunction with a top structure review.

Treasury
Function to be terminated. Ordinance to be repealed.

A review ofstaffing levels has been initiated by the Governor of the Bank.
Scope for further sub-contracting for coinage blanks to the private sector to be reviewed.
Private sector tenders to be invited for the sole rights to market and distribute all Australian numismatic coins within Australia.
Notification requirements to Foreign Investment Review Board for acquisitions of shelf and shell companies and corporate reorganisations to be eliminated.
Real estate threshold level to be increased from $250,000 to $350,000.
Charges for wider range of services provided to statutory authorities to be introduced.
Government Economic Panel and Consultative Group to be amalgamated. Financial Corporations Act advisory committees to be rationalised. Activities to be reviewed with a view to reducing supervision of industry.

Charges for a wider range of services provided to statutory authorities to be introduced.
Certain lower priority collections to be eliminated or reviewed in conjunction with the States.
Frequency of other collections to be reviewed.
Levy to be changed for collections carried out at the request of business.

1850 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

Function

Government decision

1. Defence Service Homes Scheme 2. Repatriation, Artificial Limb and Ap-
pliance Centres
3. Veterans Disability Pensions for Veterans suffering Serious Service Related Mental Illness

Veterans' Affairs
Level of staff for Defence Service Homes Scheme to be reduced. The number of artificial limbs and appliances contracted out for private manu-
facture to be increased. Maintenance deductions to be abolished. Control of pensions to be handed over to States.

1. Contracting Out of Services 2. Management Services in Departments
3. Development of Computer Software 4. ADP Acquisition Procedures 5. Part-time Study Leave in Public Service
and Statutory Authorities 6. Remuneration of Members of Advisory
Bodies 7. Printing Services in Departments (See
DAS3) 8. Data Collection . . . . 9. Administrative expenditure
10. Major capital works projects
11. Commonwealth/State Administration
12. Review of Statutory Authorities

General
Contracting to be further extended to private sector where practical. Revised and more efficient arrangements to apply to:
common services; reporting on efficiency; elimination of non-essential services; useofADP; decentralised management cells; level of stenographic assistance and control oftyping resources;
delegations; Public Service Board to monitor resource use more closely. Development work and technical advising to be contracted to private sector
wherever practical. New procedures to be established for computer acquisitions. CSIRO to be main technical adviser to Government. Paid time off to be given only in essential cases and only to officers who accept a
continuing employment obligation with the Commonwealth. As a general rule no remuneration to be paid to members of Government advisory
bodies (although individual cases of hardship or real need will be considered on their merits). In-house printing by departments to be rationalised with a view to essential printing being undertaken by AGPS and commercial printers to the greatest possible extent. 'Paper burden' on private sector to be significantly scaled down. For 1981-82 a 3 per cent real reduction on 1980-81 levels of departmental expen-
diture to apply to: furniture and fittings; repairs and maintenance; property; fitting out of leased premises; acquisition of sites and buildings; other non-Defence administrative expenditure; administrative expenditure of statutory authorities.
No funds in 1981-82 budget for following projects: Canberra Law Courts (deferred for 3 years);
National Library (deferred for 2 years); Townsville Commonwealth Offices; Australian Federal Police Heallquarters; ASIO headquarters; National Biological Standards Laboratory; Australian Dental Standards Laboratory; Adelaide Commonwealth Offices (deferred for several years); Australian Museum and Canberra Convention Centre to be deferred indefinitely
Sydney-Melbourne rail electrification not to be proceeded with. In future all budget financed capital works, including proposals for projects to be
included on Design LislC, will be considered only in the Budget context. In future the following principles are to be used by Commonwealth Departments
and Authorities in the administration of Commonwealth/State Programs: Commonwealth guidelines for joint programs are to embrace general objectives only and deal in broad terms with the manner of achieving them; Commonwealth administrative involvement is to be limited to ensuring the project is progressing satisfactorily; and accountability reports are to be limited to the minimum necessary to satisfy the Auditor-General and the Commonwealth authorities concerned that Commonwealth funds have been expended properly.
Ministers to scrutinise all authorities within their portfolios and report to the Prime Minister on: those that should be terminated; those that should continue; those that should be reviewed in depth.

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1851

Function 13. Follow-up Procedures

Government decision
PSB to review extent of departmental oversight of statutory authorities and other bodies and report to the Prime Minister on the scope for eliminating or substantially reducing the functions and staffing involved.
A Joint Parliamentary Standing Committee to be established to review the performance, role, functions and continued need for all authorities, with references to the Committee to b~ initiated by a Minister or by either House of the Parliament.
Rigorous follow up on implementation of Report. Ministers for Industry and Commerce, .Finance, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Treasurer to review follow-up and monitor implementation.

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Separate attachments to this schedule also summarise assets to be sold, advisory bodies to be abolished, capital works proposals, colleges of advanced education affected by funding changes, details of changes to taxation concessions, statistical collections which are to be eliminated or reviewed and the detailed terms of reference of the proposed defence review. Altogether some 350 separate decisions are involved.
Given the range, depth and importance of the decisions I have announced today, the Government regards it as essential that there be a vigorous follow-up of their implementation. The task of reining in the growth of government is a continuous process, and we are determined to ensure that there is positive progress in implementing today's decisions. To this end a committee of senior Ministers, chaired by the Minister for Industry and Commerce, will have responsibility for reviewing progress and monitoring particularly those areas where implementation is not proceeding satisfactorily. The committee will report to Cabinet on a regular basis.
The Review has covered a vast span of Commonwealth Government activity. Many of the changes will not be achieved quickly. Legislative action will be required in some cases, as will negotiations with State governments. Other changes involve the sale or transfer of assets to the private sector which necessarily will take some time.
Staff Savings
Cumulative!y"ihese decisions will have a major impact on the size of the Commonwealth bureaucracy. The reallocation of functions between Commonwealth and States and between government and the private sector, together with the decisions in relation to the Commonwealth's own activities, will result in a reduction of 10,000 to 11,000 in the number of Commonwealth Government employees. Over and above the specific staff savings resulting from the reduction or abolition of functions, the Government has decided that it should work at achieving an objective of a further

2 per cent reduction in the number of Commonwealth Government employees in the area subject to staff ceilings over the next two years. As I have indicated, some of the changes depend upon negotiations with the States and private sector but on the basis of staffing assessments made so far it is expected that this will lead to a total reduction in staffing of 16,000 to 17,000. These estimates exclude further possible savings from the major reviews into defence administration, Telecom and the National Capital Development Commission and from other reviews and examinations of functions.
The magnitude of the staff reductions involved means that a massive redeployment operation will be necessary. However, mainly in cases where the functions to be changed involve highly specific job skills, there could well be some categories of persons for whom the Commonwealth has no continuing employment and where some retrenchment will therefore be inevitable. The Government will seek to confine any retrenchments to these types of situations. In order to ensure that maximum opportunities are taken to redeploy surplus staff the Public Service Board will be oversighting closely all appointment and promotion action in departments and authorities. Staff identified as surplus will have the protections afforded by the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act and Public Service Arbitrator's Determination No. 509 of 1977. The Public Service Board will be in touch with departments and Public Service Act authorities regarding the arrangements required to keep staffing in line with the reductions to be achieved.
I wish to emphasise that the Government believes that the Public Service has fully adequate capacity to make these reductions with consequent improvements to efficiency. The Government has a high regard for the quality of service provided by the Commonwealth Public Service. The Government recognises and appreciates the contribution that the Public Service as a whole makes and the staff savings identified do not

1852 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

reflect on the efficiency or dedication of the individuals involved. Rather we believe it is time to redress the balance between the public and private sectors.
Expenditure Implications
It will be clear by now that the review of Commonwealth functions has been much more than an exp~~diture review exercise. Indeed many of the deCISIOns such as those involving contracting out to the private sector or transfers to the States do not have immediate expenditure savings as their principal objective. Nevertheless the Government has regarded the review of Commonwealth functions as making an important contribution to th~ objective of further reining in government spendmg, to make room for private sector growth and pave the way for significant reductions in the burden of taxation.
Compared with the costs of continuing programs on the basis of existing policies and arrangements, the estimated overall effect of these measures will be an eventual ongoing saving in Budget outlays of the order of $560m. Government revenue will also be boosted from the sale of assets and from a broad-ranging reduction in various forms of assistance to industry through the tax system, saving some $130m. The Government's attitude to expenditure restraint will again be firmly in evidence in its approach at the forthcoming Premiers Conference and Loan Council meet- ~ng and in our determination to hold down outlays 111 the 1981-82 Budget, where further savings can be expected.
Conclusion
. ~et me refer again to the context of today's deCISIOns. They are a further expression of the Government's determination to make sure that the Commonwealth's operations are as streamlined and efficient as they can be and that there is room for the private sector to grow. The decisions I have just announced will benefit all Australians. They will contribute to the further pursuit by the Government of lower inflation, higher economic growth, lower taxes, better wages and less centralised government. These decisions are a major step in the reversal of the growth of government. A further step in the readjustment of the role and size of government to the needs of the new stage o~ change and development is now opening up. Smce the Government came to office in 1975 inflation has been controlled, and private secto; employment has increased, while the number of Commonwealth employees has fallen. We have

given high priority to reducing the Commonwealth deficit. The cost of the growth of government that occurred between 1972 and 1975 was obscured by the deficits which were run up in those years; deficits which Australians have had to keep paying back ever since.
In the late 1960s and early 1970s, deficit financing was popular in democratic societies. The feeling grew up that people needed only to ask, for governments to be entitled to spend. Unrealistic expectations were generated, and they in turn increased the damage caused by this approach. We have led in saying that that view is wrong, and many countries are now following Australia's example. Let me also make it plain that small and limited government bears no relationship to mean and ungenerous government. On the contrary, by strengthening the economy, limited government provides the foundation for generous social security arrangements. Lt has been a fundamental concern of this Government to give priority to helping those in need. They are among the beneficiaries of more efficient government. To emphasise this fact unmistakably, no reductions in income security provisions have been made as a result of this review.
Economic growth also provides a foundation for bringing down taxes but only provided that government expenditure is held down. Economic growth over the next few years, in combination with continued restraint of government spending, will lead to a reduction in the relative size of the public sector and to higher real incomes for Australians. Limited government means a better working economy and a more responsible society. Bloated and excessive government means the reverse. It also encourages impossible expectations.
The Review of Commonwealth Functions has had to make many hard decisions. Decision about priorities are always difficult. But the Review Committee has been very clear about its priorities-that the overall well being of Australia must come first; and that the conditions of an even better future for Australia must be firmly established. Only by achieving the kind of turnaround to which this review has made such a significant contribution; only by scaling down big government; only by a relevant and balanced distribution of powers between the Commonwealth and the States; and only by the Commonwealth fixing its own priorities within the resources which it can legitimately command, can the Government discharge its responsibility to Australia and to the future of all Australians.
I thank the Committee-I thank the Chairman, Sir Phillip Lynch in particular-for the enormous

Beejlndustry(IncentivePaymentsjAmendmentBill30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1853

amount of work it has undertaken in the course of this review which has laid the foundation for the far-reaching decisions I have announced today. I present the following paper:
Review of Commonwealth Functions-Ministerial Statement, 30 April 1981.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the statement.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hayden) adjourned.
BEEF INDUSTRY (INCENTIVE PAYMENTS) AMENDMENT BILL 1981

This anomaly was unforeseen when the Act was introduced and the Government proposes that it should now be corrected. To that end, we propose to amend the Act to enable all these interrelated claims to be assessed in the order which maximises the total of the amounts payable. This will ensure that no claimants suffer a disadvantage because of claims being lodged in one order rather than another. Most claims have already been assessed in this way and consequently the amendment will not require any substantial additional payments to be made.

Bill presented by Mr Nixon, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (3.29)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of the Bill is to remove an anomaly in the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977 which affected the amounts which lawfully could be paid to certain claimants. Honourable members will recall that the beef industry incentive payments scheme was introduced in 1977 as one of a number of Government measures to assist the then ailing beef industry. It was aimed at assisting the cash flow position of producers and enabling them to maintain desirable standards of cattle husbandry. Producers were eligible for a payment of $10 per head of cattle receiving any one of certain approved husbandry treatments during the 12 months from September 1977. Payments were limited to a maximum of $2,000 per producer. Payments made under the scheme totalled $118m. The assistance provided went a long way in helping beef cattle producers to maintain a satisfactory level of husbandry in difficult financial circumstances.
The anomaly which the Bill sets out to correct concerns sets of producers who between them own more than one cattle herd. A typical example is where two individuals each own a herd of their own and as partners also own a third herd. As the Act stands, payment of the maximum $2,000 against a claim by the partnership rendered each of the partners ineligible for any further payment in respect of their individual herds. If, on the other hand, claims were first lodged and paid in respect of the individual herds, each of the claimants could receive $2,000 for a total between them of $4,000. The partnership would then not qualify for any payment. These provisions mean that the amounts which lawfully could be paid to groups of producers with similar herds and ownership arrangemt'nts could vary depending only on the order in which claims were lodged and paid.

Initially, the Department of Primary Industry assessed claims made by sole proprietors separately from claims by partnerships. This procedure was found not to accord with the Act and to have resulted in overpayments. Claims were then reassessed and action to recover the overpayments was put in hand. The overpayments totalled $432,000 on 300 claims, some 83 per cent of which have since been recovered.
Honourable members may recall that these matters attracted comment by the Auditor General in his 1978-79 report to Parliament. Subsequently, they were the subject of an inquiry by the Parliamentary Joint Committee of Public Accounts. In re-examining related claims received from sole proprietors and partnerships the Department of Primary Industry assessed claims in the order which maximised the collective payments to the set of claimants. This was done without regard to the order in which individual claims were actually lodged or paid. Subsequent advice from the Attorney-General's Department indicated that this course was appropriate only for claims which were capable of being assessed concurrently. Without amendment to the Act it was inappropriate to include a previously paid claim in the reassessment as if it had not been paid. The requirement to take order of payment into account in assessing related claims is the anomaly which this Bill redresses.
As I have explained, the majority of claims already have been assessed and paid in the manner now proposed. Only a handful of existing claims, which have not been fully paid pending a government decision on the procedures to be applied, remain to be finalised. Such payments are estimated at $50,000. If the Act is not amended as the Government proposes, payments totalling some $700,000 in respect of 542 claims willlegaUy be classed as overpayments. That situation results simply from the fact that the claimants involved did not lodge their claims in the order which gave the most beneficial result permitted by the Act.

1854 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Census and Statistics Amendment Bill

I turn now to the specific provisions of the Bill. Sub-clause 3 (1) inserts a new section 9A in the Principal Act. The new section overcomes the anomaly to which I have referred. It provides that where the total of two or more incentive payments would vary depending on the order in which payments are made, then the payments shall be made in the order which maximises the total of those payments. Sub-clause 3 (2) provides for further payments to be made in accordance with the new section 9A against the small number of claims yet to be finalised. Sub-clause 3 (3) provides that no previous lawful payment shall be converted to an overpayment by virtue of operation of the new provision whereby the order of payment of claims is disregarded. This is considered to be a necessary safeguard even though an examination of claims has not disclosed any cases where this would occur.
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the new section 9A of the principal Act shall be deemed to have come into operation from commencement of the principal Act on 10 November 1977. The other provisions to which I have referred will come into operation on the day on which the amendment Act receives royal assent. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr YOill,1g) adjourned.
PIG SLAUGHTER LEVY AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Nixon, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (3,35)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act 1971 to raise the maximum permissible rate of levy for promotion purposes from 20c to one dollar per pig. The amendment relates only to the maximum rate of levy, not to the operative rate oflevy paid by producers which is set by regulation. A levy has been paid by pig producers since 1975 to provide funds for the promotion of pig meat. Promotion is funded entirely by the industry, and expenditure has been increasing because of expanding activities at wholesale, retail and consumer levels and because of rising media costs.
The request for an increase in the maximum rate of levy has been made by the national body of the pig industry, the Australian Commercial Pig Producers' Federation. The Federation has sought the amendment as increases in the -operative rate have taken the levy to 20c, which is the

maximum currently permitted under the Act. Without this amendment there is no scope to raise the levy further and to expand promotion expenditure in the future. Any subsequent increase to the operative rate requires a recommendation from the Pig Meat Promotion Committee to the Minister. The Committee consults with the industry before making its recommendation to the Minister. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.
CENSUS AND STATISTICS AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.37)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
In statements to the House on 20 November 1979 and 10 September 1980, I announced Government decisions on the recommendations made by the Australian Law Reform Commission in its report 'Privacy and the Census' which was tabled by the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) on 15 November 1979. The main purpose of this Bill is to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905 to incorporate those decisions which are required for the conduct of the 1981 population census.
The Law Reform Commission noted that the secrecy provision of the Census and Statistics Act 1905 was defective in that it did not apply to persons who had ceased to be officers of the Australian Bureau of Statistics; as the term 'officer' was not defined in the Act it was not clear that the census collectors were bound by the secrecy provision; and a penalty of $100 for a breach of the secrecy provision seemed hardly appropriate either as a deterrent or an affirmation of theimportance of the principle of confidentiality. As an affirmation of the importance of the principle of confidentiality, the Government is moving to close the defects that have been identified and to upgrade substantially the penalty for unauthorised disclosure. In addition penalties for all other offences under the Act are also being substantially upgraded to reflect 'both current values and the seriousness with which these offences are viewed.
This 'Bill also amends certain machinery matters relating to the conduct of the population census. It authorises the following two administrative procedures, which were recommended by the Law Reform Commission. Firstly, the use of a special sealed envelope by persons wishing to maintain the privacy of their census schedule by by-passing the census collector; and, secondly the

Companies Bill

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1855

mailing back of census schedules to the Bureau of in Australia. Company law, of course, is one area

Statistics if the usual personal collection by a cenin which a measure of uniformity was achieved in

sus collector is, for some reason, not effective. the 1960s but did not continue. Under the co-

These procedures will help preserve the essential operative scheme, we have a mechanism for con-

privacy of personal details collected in the census. tinuing uniformity. An inevitable consequence is

I commend the Bill to the House.

that I, as the Commonwealth Minister, have only

Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.

1 vote in 7 in determining the content of the legislation which I introduce into the Commonwealth

COMPANIES 'ln~L 1981.

Parliament as all such legislation must be ap-

Bill presented by Mr Moore, and ,read a first . proved by the Ministerial Council for Companies

time.

.

and Securities. Indeed, after the initial legislation

Second Reading

has been enacted it is conceivable that I would be required to introduce legislation of which I did not

Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business approve. Amending legislation requires the ap-

and Consumer Affairs) (3.42)-1 move:

proval of only a simple majority of members of

That the Bill be now read a second time.

the Council. However, it is apparent from the

I will be introducing today various Bills pursuant spirit of co-operation and give-and-take which has

to the Commonwealth's obligations under the coemerged already in the Council's deliberations operative companies and securities scheme. Bethat any future legislation will also be the product fore I discuss the individual Bills, I would like to of consensus.

outline, for the benefit of honourable members, It is not surprising that a scheme of this magni-

the administrative and legislative context in tude has taken some years to get off the ground.

which the Bills will operate.

By the time that the companies code is in oper-

Formal Agreement on Companies and Securities
The formal agreement executed by the Commonwealth and all the States on 22 December 1978 provides the framework for a cooperative Commonwealth-State scheme for a uniform system of law and administration regulating companies and the securities industry. The scheme covers the relevant law operating in the six States and the Australian Capital Territory. There is' also provision for the scheme to be ex. tended to the Northern Territory and to the external territories of the Commonwealth. Background material on the Formal Agreement and on the four basic elements of the co-operative scheme is set out in paragraphs 7 to 36 of the explanatory memorandum on the Companies Bill which has been circulated to honourable members. The basic aim of the scheme is to ensure that wherever possible, any person or company should be able to deal on all general companies and securities matters as if that person or company were subject to only one system of law and administration throughout Australia. The co-operative scheme thus provides a framework for uniform general

ation, it is expected that the parliaments of Australia will have enacted more than 50 Bills. But it is only after the initial legislation has been enacted that the real fruits of these labours will become apparent. There will no longer be any need for action by State parliaments to keep the scheme uniform as amendments passed by this Parliament will flow automatically into the laws of the States. Even when the Ministerial Council decides that the amendments should operate slightly differently from one State to another so as to pick up some local evidentiary differences-for example, this can be achieved by translator amendments-regulations will be made in one State varying the Commonwealth amendments in their operation as laws of that State.
Uniform legislation is, of course, only half the package. Uniform administration of those laws by the National Companies and Securities Commission acting through the various Corporate Affairs Offices is the feature which will set the scheme apart from existing practices. Legislation setting up the National Commission was passed in 1979 and the members appointed early last year.

laws on companies and securities matters that will apply throughout Australia. It was, however, never intended to fetter the sovereign right of any parliament to pass particular laws which are not inconsistent with the general legislation agreed to under the scheme.

The Substantive Codes In addition to the legislation establishing the National Companies and Securities Commission and supporting its operation in jurisdictions other than the Australian Capital Territory, the substantive legislation for the scheme at this stage

Keeping Company Law Uniform

will be contained in four codes:

There have been far too few examples of uniform laws being achieved across State boundaries

(a) A share acquisition code which will regulate the acquisition of company shares;

1856 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Companies Bill

(b) A securities industry code which will regulate the securities industry;
(c) A companies code which wiIl cover the remaining areas dealt with in the current companies and marketable securities legislation; and
(d) An interpretation code which deals with the interpretation of the Commonwealth legislation under this scheme.
Public Consultation
The formal agreement foreshadowed a major exercise in legislative uniformity and law reform where this was necessary. In embarkincr on this exercise, this Government and the other govern.. ments which are parties to the formal agreement have sought to ensure that there is at all times adequate opportunity for the proposed legislation to be considered by interested persons. Comments were sought and received on the proposed acquisition of shares, securities industry and companies codes.
The. Companies Bill which I am introducing today IS an amended version of the Bill which my predecessor introduced on 27 August last year. Notwithstanding a period of public exposure of an earlier draft prior to that introduction additional comments were sought on the Bill as introduced into the House. In addition to the process of public consultation, committees of interested Government and Opposition members have continued to receive regular briefings on the scheme.
Progress in implementation of the co-operative scheme
A point has now been reached where ~ub~tantial pro.gress has been made towards bringmg mto operatlOn the co-operative companies and securities scheme. The original Commonwealth
cAucrtistireesliantidnugsttroytchoedsehaarnedatchqeuiisnitteiorpnrcetoadtei~tnhceosdee-
have already passed through this Parliament and received royal assent. Our aim is to bring these codes into operation in the Australian Capital Territory and the six States on 1 July 1981 and we ar~ hopeful that the companies code will be operatlVe from 1 January 1982. I would now like to . discuss very briefly the first of the Bills that I am presenting today, the Companies Bill.
Companies Bill 1981
Having considered the submissions, I am pleased to be able to say that the reaction to the Bill has generally been favourable and that the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities has not found it necessary to make nearly as many

changes to the Bill as introduced in August last year as were necessary for the earlier exposure draft. An outline of the principal features of the companies code and, in particular, the main changes it makes to existing companies legislation, is set out at paragraphs 37 to 43 of the explanatory memorandum which has been circulated.
Clearly the most important feature of this Companies Bill and of the previous exposure drafts which differentiates them from the existing law is the 'one place of registration' concept. These modifications to the existing law are required to ensure that an Australian company incorporated in a jurisdiction covered by the cooperative scheme can lodge all its documents with the local corporate affairs office in its jurisdiction of incorporation without the need to lodge documents anywhere else. Similarly, overseas corporations will have only to register in one of the jurisdictions covered by the co-operative scheme.
The Australia-wide nature of the scheme has also been reflected in several major parts of the Bill. For example, in the areas of special investigations, schemes of arrangement and liquidations, the provisions of the existing law have been recast to overcome jurisdictional difficulties which have been faced in the past. The national emphasis of the co-operative scheme is also reflected in the clauses providing for a national system of registration for auditors, liquidators and official liquidators. The capacity of companies to change their headquarters has also been improved with the provisions relating to transfer of incorporation. There are also a number of other improvements to the existing law which have been made independently of the need to provide for an Australia-
wide system of company law.
There are some areas of the Bill such as the Division concerned with registration of charges which reflect both categories of change. Provision is now made for charges over company property wherever situated to be registered in only one participating State or Territory. At the same time, however, the consequences of registration or failure to register will be fundamentally different from the existing law. In brief, it reflects a change from a partial invalidity system to a priority system as recommended in the seventh interim report of the Eggleston committee. Further changes have been made in the current Bill from the exposure drafts which involve some departures from the Eggleston committee recommendations in the light of public comments. To identify quickly the other changes from the last draft of the Bill I direct the attention of honourable members to Appendix D of the explanatory memorandum to the Bill. There is also a comparison, in

Companies Bill

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1857

Appendix C, of the provisions in the April 1980 There are two additional matters which are not

and August 1980 exposure drafts.

~overed by this Bil~ but which may yet be the sub-

Ject of an amendmg Bill when the Ministerial

It will be apparent from an examination of the Bill and a comparison of Appendices C and D that the changes made in the current Bill generally represent fine tuning changes rather than ambitious law reform exercises. Whilst everyone agrees in the broad that there are areas of company law in need of fundamental reform, it is not as simple to achieve general agreement in the community on any particular measure of reform. Accordingly, in order to get the scheme into operation without any further delay, the changes in the current Bill, though many, are not radical.

Council decides upon the extent to which certain disclosure principles should operate. The first is the disclosure of the operations of trading trusts. Honourable members will recall that provisions concerning disclosure by companies operating business through trusts formed part of the first exposure draft of the Companies Bill. When introducing the August Bill into the House last y~~r my predecessor indicated that these proViSiOns had been removed but that Ministers would be giving further consideration to the inclusion of more appropriate provisions at a later stage. The examination of this matter is still pro-

Some of the areas where there have been further refinement of provisions in the exposure drafts include Divisions relating to the powers of inspection of the National Commission, radfication of contracts made before formatio'n of companies, companies financing dealings in their own shares, the duties and liabilities of directors disciplinary proceedings against auditors and liquidators, and substantial shareholdings.

ceeding and, in the interim, the Companies Bill does not contain special provisions relating to the operation of trading trusts.
The second matter highlighted by my predecessor as requiring further work was that concerning the extent to which overseas incorporated companies should disclose information as to their Australian operations. Again, this is a matter which will require further work to be done before the Ministerial Council is in a position to consider

Perhaps I should also mention some things

which are not in the Companies Bill which never-

theless are of considerable practical importance.

The first is that the Companies Bill does not con-

tain provisions corresponding to the Ninth Sched-

ule to the Companies Acts and Ordinances in

force in the various States and Territories. The

Ninth Schedule deals with the content of accounts

and group accounts to be lodged by companies.

That does not mean that company directors will

be able to determine for themselves what matters

to include in their accounts. It simply means that

,,:i~h a vi~w to having flexible accounting pro-

VISions whiCh have some chance of remaining rel-

evant to the purposes for the Ministerial Council

wfohricChotmhepyanaireesdaesnidgnSeed~

curities has decided that these provisions should

take the form of regulations. The aim is, or course,

to enable these provisions to be amended more

readily than would be the case with such pro-

visions contained in the principal legislation. Lest

this decision should give rise to any apprehension

as to the ultimate content of those regulations, I

hasten to add that the proposed regulations will

not involve significant departures from the exist-

ing Ninth Schedule. The regulations will contain

the provisions as exposed for public comment,

~mended in a few relatively minor ways in the

bght of public submissions. These proposed

amendments to the legislation. It may well be that d:aft accou~ting requirements relating to such disclosure will need to be submitted for public comment before being submitted to the Parliament. Accordingly, legislative amendments on ~his subje~t may be some time away. Whilst drawmg attention to the possibility of additional accounting requirements, I would like to mention one matter of particular concern to the accounting profession, namely, the permitted size of account~ng part~erships. Ministers drew particular attention to thiS matter when seeking public comments on exposure drafts of the Companies Bill. The Ministerial Council will be making a decision on this matter in the near future.
I should mention that I envisage introducing some amendments to this Bill during the second half of this year. I am introducing this Bill and seeking it.s passage at this stage, however, to enable the SiX State parliaments to pass legislation in the second half of this year adopting the Companies Bill. This should then enable the entire scheme to be operational by 1 January 1982. Experience with the other codes has demonstrated that the need for some modifications to the principal legislation will become apparent only when the States adopting legislation and the Commonwealthregulations are being settled. I commend the Companies Bill to the House.

changes are set out in paragraph 1,300 of the exDebate (on motion by Mr John Brown)

planatory memorandum to the Bill.

adjourned.

1858 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Companies Legislation

COMPANIES (FEES) BILL 1981 Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time,
Second Reading Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (3.58)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Companies (Fees) Bill is related to the Companies Bill in that it deals with the fees payable under the Companies Bill, The actual amounts of those fees will be set out in regulations to be made under the Fees Bill, Details of the Bill are set out in the explanatory memorandum which has been circulated for the benefit of honourable members. The Bill has been approved by the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities for introduction into the Commonwealth Parliament, I commend the Companies (Fees) Bill to the House,
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
COMPANIES (TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time,
Second Reading Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (3,59)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The object of the Companies (Transitional Provisions) Bill is to enact, for the Australian Capital Territory, the transitional provisions that are necessary for the introduction of the new companies code, This Bill will come into operation on the same day as the commencement of the Companies Bill itself. The States will not be having separate Companies (Transitional Provisions)' Bills, Each State will, however, include in its Companies (Application of Laws) Bill appropriate transitional provisions which will be modelled on those contained in the Bill that I am now introducing, with such modifications as are necessary to take into account the particular circumstances of that State. As with the Companies (Transitional Provisions) Bill itself, the transitional provisions in the various State (Application of Laws) Bills will require the unanimous approval of the Ministerial Council. I commend the Companies (Transitional Provisions) Bill to the House,
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.

COMPANIES (MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.1)--1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time..
The Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill contains miscellaneous amendments to certain Commonwealth Acts consequent upon' the repeal of the Australian Capital Territory Companies Ordinance 1962 and the enactment of the Companies Bill 1981. The Bill does not affect the States as it only relates to Commonwealth Acts. Each State will however, need to pass similar legislation in relation to any State Acts that contain references to the existing State companies Acts. Details of the Bill are contained in an explanatory memorandum that has been circulated for the benefit of honourable members. Because this Bill and the Crown Debts (Priority) Bill do not form part of the co-operative scheme legislation they therefore do not require the approval of the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities. The Miscellaneous Amendment Bills passed by each State will again not be part of the scheme legislation. There will also be a separate Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Ordinance containing consequential amendments to Australian Capital Territory Ordinances. I commend the Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
CROWN DEBTS (PRIORITY) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.3)-I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Crown Debts (Priority) Bill reflects the Commonwealth Government's view that the Crown in right of the Commonwealth should be placed in the same position in an insolvency situation in relation to ordinary debts as any other creditor. This decision was announced to the House by the then Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, Mr Fife, on 13 September 1979, following a report that was tabled in the Senate by the Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs concerning the right of the Crown to be repaid debts owing to it in priority to

Companies Legislation

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1859

other creditors in matters of bankruptcy, corporate liquidators or other cases of impecunious persons or corporations.

COMPANIES (ACQUISITION OF SHARES) AMENDMENT BILL (No.2)
1981

The Senate Committee, in its report, recommended the complete abrogation of all Crown

Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.

priorities in insolvency administrations. The Government examined the report and was in agreement with the main thrust of the Committee's argument. The Government supports uniformity of insolvency administration which was of particular concern to the Senate Committee. It also acknowledged the desirability of placing the Crown on an even footing with the private sector so far as possible.
Accordingly, the then Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs announced that the Government had decided to abolish all remaining Crown priorities in the Commonwealth sphere except in relation to tax instalment deductions and withholding tax on dividends and interest remitted overseas and to seek the abolition of all remaining Crown priorities in the State sphere. Special considerations apply in relation to these two categories of taxation debts and separate them from other Crown debts. Other changes have already been made to bankruptcy and taxation legislation in pursuance of the Government's

Second Reading Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.6)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Bill (No.2) will amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980 consequent on the provisions that are set out in the Companies Bill 1?~1 and will also amend the substantive proVISIOns of the share acquisition code. Details of the amendments are set out in the explanatory memorandum which has been circulated.
Provisions in the Bill consequential on the Companies Bill will come into operation when the Companies Bill commences and the other provis~ons ~il1 come into operation when proclaimed. ThiS BIll has been approved by the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities for introduction into the Commonwealth Parliament. I commend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Bill (No.2) to the House.

decision.
The Crown Debts (Priority) Bill will abrogate the prerogative priority of the Crown in right of the Commonwealth and will ensure that, in the case of the insolvency of a corporate or unincorporate body, the Commonwealth is under an obligation to repay preferential payments in circumstances where other creditors would be obliged to do so and that it is bound by any compromise or arrangement entered into by such a body. Details of the Crown Debts (Priority) Bill are contained in the explanatory memorandum which has been circulated for the benefit of honourable members.
The Crown Debts (Priority) Bill is not part of the co-operative scheme since it only affects the Crown in right of the Commonwealth. The Bill I am here introducing accordingly did not need the approval of the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities. Nevertheless, as the drafting of the terms of the Bil is interrelated with that of the Companies Bill it has been decided that both Bills should come into operation on the same say. I commend the Crown Debts (Priority) Bill to the House.

Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
COMPANIES (ACQUISITION OF SHARES-FEES) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consll:mer Affairs) (4.7)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Bill makes a minor amendment to the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1981. This amendment will bring these provisions into line with equivalent provisions in the Companies (Fees) Bill 1981. Details of the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Bi111981 appear in the explanatory memorandum which has been circulated. The Bill has been approved by the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities for introduction into the Commonwealth Parliament. I commend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Bill to the House.

Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown)

adjourned.

adjourned.

1860 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Companies Legislation

SECURITIES INDUSTRY AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.8)-I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Securities Industry Amendment Bill (No.2) has two separate functions. Part II of the Bill makes certain amendments of a technical nature to the substantive provisions of the Securities Industry Act. Part III of the Bill amends the Securities Industry Act 1980 to take account of certain provisions in the Companies Bill 1981. Details of the amendments are set out in the explanatory memorandum which has been circulated for the benefit of honourable members.
Provisions in the Bill consequential on the Companies Bill will come into operation when the Companies Bill commences and the other provisions will come into operation when -proclaimed. The Securities Industry Amendment Bill (No.2) has been approved by the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities for introduction into the Commonwealth Parliament. I commend the Securities Industry Amendment Bill (No.2) to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
SECURITIES INDUSTRY (FEES) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.9)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The 'Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Bill 1981 makes a minor amendment to the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980. This amendment will bring these provisions into line with equivalent provisions in the Companies (Fees) Bill 1981. Details of the Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Bill appear in the explanatory memorandum which has been circulated. The Bill has been approved by the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities for introduction into the Commonwealth Parliament. I commend the Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.

COMPANIES AND SECURITIES (INTERPRETATION AND
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1981 Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.1O)-I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Bill (No.2) alters two definitions in the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980. The Bill will come into effect when the Companies Bill comes into operation. Details of the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Bill (No.2) appear in the explanatory memorandum which has been circulated. The Bill has been approved by the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities for introduction into the Commonwealth Parliament. I commend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Bill (No.2) to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
CUSTOMS AMENDMENT (TENDERS) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr MOORE (Ryan Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.13)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide a legislative basis for the allocation by tender of import tariff quotas on a range of textile, clothing and footwear products. The Bill is part of a legislative package. The other Bills in this package are the Customs Securities (Penalties) Bill and the Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Bill. The decision to allocate this quota by tender follows the Government's in principle acceptance of the Industries Assistance Commission's recommendation as contained in its report No. 240 of 30 April 1980 entitled 'Textiles, Clothing and Footwear'.
From 1 January 1982, a seven-year assistance program for the textiles, clothing and footwear industries will come into operation. It will include two forms of tariff quota to be known as base

Customs Bills

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1861

quota and tender quota. Base quota will entitle importers with established import performance to annual allocations based on 85 per cent of an initially established quota ceiling. Generally, once determined, the ceiling of quota available to base quota holders will not vary during the seven-year program.
The tender quota comprises the remainder of the annual quota ceilings. The tender quota will be allocated to persons who submit successful tenders. The proportion of goods allocated by tender may be increased according to a liberalisation factor and market growth, which will be determined annually following consideration of a report by the Textiles, Clothing and Footwear Advisory Committee. Tender quota entitlements and duty rates will be determined each year following the evaluation of tenders. Persons wishing to continue to acquire the tender quota will still be required to submit tenders each year. The Government considers that this tender system will provide a greater degree of flexibility within the quota regime. It will permit easier access to quota imports by new importers, and importers wishing to expand their market shares.
The Bill provides for the formulation of schemes by the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs. Tenders will be called for and dealt with annually pursuant to these schemes. To discourage frivolous bidding, tenders will not be accepted unless accompanied by a written undertaking to the effect that, if successful, a tenderer will import all of the import quota allocated to him under the scheme. Consistent with the administration of import tariff quota generally, provision has been made for the approved transfer of all or part of the tender quota to another person. Such a transfer would acquit the undertaking by the transferor to the extent of the amount transferred. However, the obligation to import that amount will be passed on to the transferee who must give a corresponding undertaking before the transfer will be approved.
The other parts of the legislative package provide for the imposition of penalties in cases where a successful tenderer does not give a security for compliance with his undertaking, when required to do so, or if he subsequently breaches the undertaking. The Bill contains a provision to amend section 42 of the Customs Act to enable the Customs to require and take the appropriate securities for payment of any penalty that may be incurred by reason of a breach of an undertaking. The Bill also makes provision for the determination of two of the factors relevant to the amount of penalty which may be imposed under

the other two Bills. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
CUSTOMS SECURITIES (PENALTIES) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Mool'e, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr MOORE (Ryan - Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.18)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to provide for the imposition of a penalty for a refusal or failure to give certain securities to Customs when required to do so in relation to the importation into Australia of certain tariff quota goods. This Bill forms part of a package of Bills designed to give effect to the Government's decision to allocate by way of a tender scheme, a proportion of the import tariff quota available on a range of textile, clothing and footwear products. If a tender furnished pursuant to the proposed Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 is accepted it will be necessary for the successful tenderer, if required by Customs, to give a security that may be applied as a penalty if the undertaking given under that proposed Act is breached.
This measure is designed to discourage persons from submitting frivolous tenders. Such tenders would operate to the disadvantage of the genuine tenderers if they influenced the tender duty rate. Undue delays in determining tender duty rates and quota entitlements which resulted from frivolous tenders would make it difficult for genuine tenderers to vary their overseas orders and still fully utilise their 'tender quota' within the quota period. The penalty payable under the Bill will be equivalent to the penalty that would be payable under the proposed Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 for a total breach of an undertaking given pursuant to the proposed Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
CUSTOMS UNDERTAKINGS (PENALTIES) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.20)-1 move:

1862 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill

That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to provide for the imposition of penalties for breaches of undertakings required to be given under the proposed Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981. This Bill forms part of a package of Bills designed to give effect to the Commonwealth Government's decision to allocate by way of a tender scheme a proportion of the import tariff quota available on a range of textile, clothing and footwear products. It is all: essential element of this tender scheme that the Import tariff quota offered by tender should be fully utilised. Successful tenderers should not be able to restrict imports through underutilisation of the 'tender quota'. Such action could increase the scarcity value of quota goods and could cause shortages in the local market. This Bill provides for the imposition of a penalty where a person, who has given an undertaking to import 'tender quota' goods under the proposed Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 and has been allocated a specified quantity or value, does not fully utilise his 'tender quota' allocation. Any penalty payable will be proportionate to the quantity or value of 'tender quota' goods not imported. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
STATES GRANTS (SCHOOLS ASSISTANCE) AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Bill presented by Mr Fife, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education) (4.22)-I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill has two C(SSential purposes. Firstly, specific purpose grants to government and nongovernment schools in the States and the Northern Territory, which are administered by the Schools Commission, are adjusted for cost increases and the Bill authorises this in respect of 1980 and 1981. Secondly, prior to the last election, the Government made a number of commitments both to extend programs and to introduce new programs and this Bill gives effect to those commitments, the details of which I shall give later in this speech.
The amendment of the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 will finalise the adjustment of 1980 grants. The additional grants in respect of the increase in the cost of the salary and wage content of recurrent grants will involve a further appropriation of $7.3m. The amendment of the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980 provides for an adjustment of $27.7m for 1981

programs. Included also is provision for the new programs. These programs are designed to provide a higher level of assistance to those areas which have been identified as having the greatest need.
As the first stage of the Government's commitment to provide over three years a total of $25m for capital grants for new places in nongovernment schools thr~ughout Australia, $7.4.m will be made available In 1981 under the legISlation before the House. This is in conformity with the Government's resolve to ensure equality of opportunity and freedom of choice for all Australian school children and their parents. The legislation also provides funds for the first stage of the Government's undertaking to compress the existing levels of non-government schools, as defined by the Schools Commission, to three levels and to continue the linkage of nongovernment schools general recurrent funding to a percentage of government school running costs. The Government has undertaken to complete this process within the life of the Parliament.
To give effect to the Government's announced promise to develop education programs for severely handicapped children, the Bill also makes provision for the introduction of a new scheme to facilitate the development of such programs in institutioll;S or in ~h~. ~o~es of severely handicapped chIldren. ThIS InItIatIve follows the release of a report on the National Survey of Special Education undertaken for the Schools Commission by the Fred and Eleanor Schonell Education Research Centre, and is in addition to existing Commonwealth expenditur~ on the education of handicapped children amounting to $19.3m in 1981 under the Commonwealth Schools Commission's special education and integration ~rograms.
In conclusion, the Bill also implements a further election policy commitment for the introduction of a program to assist non-profit part time ethnic schools. Under the program an annual maximum of $30 a head may be paid to these schools in respect of children undertaking approved supplementary community language and cultural education programs. The States Grants (Schools Assistance) ~ill 1980 will a~ain be adjusted for further cost Increases later thIS year. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by' Mr John Brown) adjourned.

States Grants Amendment Bill

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1863

STATES GRANTS (TERTIARY EDUCATION ASSISTANCE) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Fife, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education) (4.28)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978. In accordance with established procedures, for current programs the Bill makes appropriate adjustments for movements in costs applicable to grants for tertiary education covered under the existing legislation. The Grants were last adjusted in the Budget sittings in 1980. The adjustments to the grants for all sectors amount to an appropriation of $115m in respect of the years 1980 and 1981.
In addition, the Bill will provide for a deferral of an amount of $117,000 from the 1980 program of specified building projects in the advanced education sector to the 1981 capital program for the same sector. The replacement of schedule 7A, the 1980 capital programs, in this amendment will also enable adjustments to be made to amounts in the schedule which have been the subject of approved variations since the schedule was enacted. The Bill will increase by $6,500 both the 1980 and 1981 grants in respect of contributions to the National Institute of Dramatic Art to provide for rental increases. The Bill will also provide for the transfer of portions of the 1981 recurrent capital and equipment grants currently available in the principal Act for the Tasmanian College of Advanced Education-TCAE-to the University of Tasmania. The amendments implement agreed arrangements for the transfer of certain courses from the Mount Nelson campus of TCAE to the University of Tasmania.
The Bill will adjust the per capita rate applicable to grants for non-government business colleges to allow payment of full supplementation in respect of these grants. Anomalous wording in the principal Act currently precludes final adjustments from being made on a retrospective basis. The Bill will provide for minor technical amendments such as a revision of the definition of college purposes in section 5 and the definition of full time students in sub-sections 6 (2) and (3) in the principal Act. These minor amendments do 'fiOt alter the intention of the original provisions. The Bill will also introduce a transitional provision to recognise the repeal of the State legislation which established the Victorian Institute of Colleges and

State College of Victoria systems. Responsibility for those systems is now vested in the Victorian Post-secondary Education Commission. I commend this Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
NATIONAL HEALTH (PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFITS)
AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 29 April, on motion by Mr MacKellar:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education) -Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill and the Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Bill as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)-ls it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these two measures? There being no objection, 1will allow that course to be followed.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (4.31)-1 note first of all that the two Bills we are debating today-the National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Bill and the Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Billwere introduced into this House yesterday and are being debated today. I informed the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) that we on this side of the House would co-operate in getting these Bills through. But I also told him that we would make quite clear our opposition to the way in which this has been done. We are co-operating because we believe that the pharmacists have a justifiable case for as early a settlement as possible in relation to their remuneration, and therefore we wish to contribute towards that immediate solution. Nevertheless, there is no excuse for the House or the Opposition being treated in this way. There is no massive backlog of health legislation. In fact, there has been a complete dearth of health legislation in the past few months. So it is not that the Government has the excuse that it has had a lot of legislation to defll with rapidly.
The National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Bill is a relatively simple Bill. It is designed to set up a remuneration tribunal for pharmacists. It is based very much on the recommendations of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts inquiring into pharmacistsre-..
muneration. Those proposals are nearlY:, ni9~ ..

1864 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

National Health Amendment Bill

months old. It is a relatively simple' Bill, the application. The iSsue has been put off fortnight

outline and key elements ,of which were recomby fortnight. One can trace the answers to ques-

mended to the Government nine months ago. The tions, by the Minister back to some time in March.

Minister has clearly stated for the last 12 months Any response from the Government has been put

that by 1 July a determination was to be given to off fortnight by fortnight. The last date we were

pharmacists. That was another reason for a little given for a response was 27 April. There was no

more careful advanced planning. We on this side indication in the Minister's speech which was

of the House say-I hope that many honourable delivered on 29 APt:il about what response had

members on the other side would agree-that it is been made .to ~t interim application if any had

just not good enough to treat measures in this been made at all. Here we bave-a problem that has

way; to have to debate them the day after they are been apparent for some time. Yet we have had, as

introduced. There are customary understandings I say, a gross discourtesy paid to this House in the

in this House concerning time for these measures way that this recognised problem has been

to be given proper consideration in the party comtreated.

.

mittees. That has been virtually denied in this case because of the procedure which has been adopted. The Government's approach is typical of the vacillation and procrastination on health issues which has typified this Minister and this Government. As a result we are now pressurised into the current situation.

However, we do recognise the degree of urgency in this case. We, on this side of the House, have not the resources nor the detailed information to make judgments about the exact degree of price increase involved. We do recognise however, considerable justice in the pharmacists' claim. We do recognise that there is a considerable

There have been months of procrastination on degree of urgency. We do recognise the_procrasti-

the issue of pharmacists' remuneration. The pharnation from which pharmacists have'suffered. Of

macists have had no increase in the dispensing fee course, they are not unique in this regard in the

in the three years since 1977-78 despite an inflahealth field. So many organisations have suffered

tion rate of between 30 per cent and 40 per cent in the kind of procrastination which has gripped the

that period, calculated however one likes. The Health Department for 18 months, though there

Minister has been well aware of this problem. are now signs of galvanised activity. We will co-.

Pharmacists have certainly been busily agitating operate with the Government in trying to get this

on the issue and I think that their agitation has a Bill through the House as quickly as possible.

fair amount of justification. Not only have they had no rise but also they have had certain punitive measures taken against them by the Minister arising out of the much debated overpayments issue. Whatever view we take on that, in addition to having had no rise, there was a 4c reduction per prescription in 1980. Again there was no flow-on from the manufacturers price rise last November. So the pharmacists have received no increase and certain punitive measures have been taken against them.

If the 1 July date for the determination is to be realised-if the commitment of the Minister to provide a determination of pharmacists remuneration is to be achieved-a considerable amount of work has to be done even after the passage of this Bill. Once the Bill is passed and goes through its formal promulgation, a chairman of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal has to be appointed. The Minister has indicated that he has a person to fill the position of chairman ready and waiting. He certainly needs to be ready

In addition, I think it can be argued that their and waiting given the job he needs to do in the

problems have been compounded, particularly next eight weeks. Support machinery has also to,

this_ year, by tardy governmental payments to be established for the chairman. However, I pre-

them. In the early part of this year there certainly sume there can be considerable use of the re-

was a significantly increased lag in payments to sources previously available to the Joint Com-

pharmacists by the Department of Health and mittee on Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing

particularly by the Department of Veterans' Arrangements. Then the chairman has to call for

Affairs. Further their problems have been comsubmissions and evidence, all of which has to be

pounded because there has been a decline in the advertised. So it seems difficult indeed to imagine

volume of prescriptions. For some months the that the actual submissions and evidence could

Minister has been aware of those problems but come before the Tribunal much before the begin-

has procrastinated on the question of an interim ning of June. Even that is a pretty optimistic date.

payment for pharmacists. Indeed, it is not clear The Tribunal is given power to determine

yet whether the Government has made any recriteria-a very difficult problem-and to reach a

sponse to the Ludeke request in March for a determination. I suggest, in all politeness, that

governmental response to the Pharmacy Guild's perhaps the best thing the Tribunal could do is to

National Health Amendment Bill

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1865

reach an interim decision by 1 July, because I do not think the major tasks will be accomplished by
that date.
The Bill follows very closely the recommendations of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts. I congratulate the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee and all members of that Committee from both sides of the House for the proposals that they have made. I congratulate them because they have stimulated the Health Department into activity and I doubt that the Health Department was capable of producing some solution to the long-running saga of the problem of the Joint Committee. The Bill establishes a Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal to replace the present Joint Committee on Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing Arrangements. Let me make some contrasts between the Joint Committee and the Tribunal. The Joint Committee consisted of a chairman and representatives from two bodies. Four members were from the Pharmacy Guild of Australia and four representatives were from the Department of Health. The Chairman was a Deputy President of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. The chairman of the tribunal again is to be a Deputy President of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. The other two members are to be independent members. In this sense the rather privileged position that the Pharmacy Guild and, to a lesser extent, the Department of Health possessed has been removed. The composition of the Tribunal has been changed. The Tribunal is a much more independent body. It does not now involve the direct participants in the dispute in the composition of the Tribunal itself. The Tribunal will now sit in judgment of the participants.
I said a moment ago that the reaching of the determination by 1 July would require considerable speed. I should note, of course, that only the chairman will conduct that first stage of the Tribunal. The other two members will not participate. One hopes that, as soon as possible, the full Tribunal will be meeting. I accept the Minister's explanation on the appointment of the chairman only at this stage. He has the power, of course, to act without the other two Tribunal members. The situation in relation to the Tribunal is a much more independent one compared with that of the Joint Committee. That is the first and distinct advantage.
Secondly, the Joint Committee conducted its business in private. It might be said that this Committee was rather an in group committee. It comprised members from the Pharmacy Guild and members from the Department of Health

with somebody holding the ring between them. I have great admiration for the man who was required to hold the ring between those contestants. In many ways it was a rather private in group body. Of course, its discussions and deliberations were held in private. By contrast, the Tribunal will take issues into a much more public arena. Most of its work will be conducted in public, although there is provision in the Bill for the chairman to use his discretion on matters of confidence. Interested parties are given an opportunity to participate in the debate. The Friendly Societies Pharmacies Association, the Pharmaceutical societies of Australia and the Australian Federation of Consumer Organisations are groups which have expressed a desire to participate in this place on pharm:lceutical remuneration. I think that is a preferred situation.
Various groups which have a concern and interest will make submissions to the Tribunal and argue the case in public. Those contrasts----:that is, the contrast between an in group and a much more independent body and the contrast between a rather private discussion and a public inquiryare ones of which we approve. However, we have to be careful. Some problems will be involved in this kind of open adversary situation. I think this will be an experiment. Let it be noted that in these types of tribunals there are dangers of rather very broad or rather extreme positions being advocated in the hope that a compromise can be found somewhere down the middle. I hope that this Tribunal will work in a much more realistically way. Certainly we will want to watch the functioning of the adversary situation for determining pharmacists' remuneration.
I would like to turn now to the possibility that such a splendid tribunal could be applied to other organisations in the health care field. Pharmacists are not the only group in this field very dependent on public subsidy. Members of my party would like to see such tribunals making decisions in relation to other professional groups in the health care field which are very much dependent for their incomes, either directly of indirectly, on subsidies provided by the taxpayers. I note that that was also the view of the Public Accounts Committee. The Committee in its report entitled 'Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme-Chemists' Remuneration'stated:
. . . Commonwealth Government, through the Department of Health faces almost identical requirements to adjust remuneration not only for chemists, but also for doctors, optometrists and other providers of health services. Such remuneration is presently determined either in special forums, or by specific tribunals. The PAC considers that it would be more economical, administratively convenient and would enable the development of greater expertise if determination of

1866 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

National Health Amendment Bill

medical and para medical remuneration all vested in a judicial organisation having a nexus with the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.
I think that there is much in that recommendation to be considered, particularly after one sees how the tribunal works in relation to pharmacy remuneration. We on this side of the House certainly would be sympathetic to that extension, particularly if the tribunal appears to work well. I note that the Minister in his second reading speech said that he was considering the other recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee. I hope that he is giving serious consideration to them.
Another Public Accounts Committee consideration which I would like to mention is the proposal to establish a bureau of health economics. I think, particularly given the decisions of yesterday, that this country is very much in need of a bureau of health economics. The Public Accounts Committee suggested that we need a relatively independent monitoring unit which will provide us with information to allow us to judge the quite dramatic and, I would suggest, draconian changes that are now taking place in the health system. We need to secure national information about the working of the health-system, particularly if the Government is successful in abdicating its responsibilities for hospitals. I think that the need has grown for this kind of national information and this national monitoring role to be played by a relatively independent group. Therefore 1 think the recommendation to establish a bureau of health economics deserves consideration by the Minister, particularly as it may help him to judge the success or otherwise all the schemes on which he has now embarked.
Let me say finally that the experience of the Joint Committee on Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing Arrangements has not been a happy one. H has had a long history of continual conflict. I do not bc:;lieve that at any time the present method of setting fees has proved a very satisfactory one. Indeed, the history of that Committee is simply one of ructions, quarrels and conflicts. I think the responsibility for that lies with both sides. I do not want to say that one participant or the other is responsible. I think that the history of the Joint Committee in recent years-and I do not excuse different governments from this-has been rather unsatisfactory. I hope that the Tribunal which we now propose to set up will break that rather unhappy situation which has developed in the determination of pharmacists' remuneration. I believe that the basic principles behind the establishment of the Tribunal offer a real hope that we may be able to get this vexed issue on to a basis-it will

never be a non-conflict basis-where all those who participate in the Tribunal will have confidence about the judgments made by the Tribunal. A lot depends on the original appointments made to the Tribunal; a lot depends on how the Tribunal first works; and a lot depends on a determination being made quickly evenif that determination has to be an interim one because of the much wider issues I have talked about which may require more detailed consideration. We on this side of the House look forward to the operation of the Tribunal. We will follow its activities closely. We hope it will display much greater speed in decision-making than some others in the field of health. We wish it well.
Mr HODGES (Petrie) (4.49)-The honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) in his opening remarks expressed concern about the haste with which this legislation is to be passed. I share his concern in that regard. I must say that I am most appreciative of his co-operation and the co-operation of the Opposition in allowing the course that is being taken. When I entered this Parliament almost seven years ago I made it abundantly clear that although I was a pharmacist I carried no particular brief for pharmacy. I confirmed, as I do now, that I represent my electorate of Petrie and concern myself with the problems and issues that affect my electorate. Over the years, first in Opposition and then in government, I have maintained an ongoing interest in health and welfare matters.
One important facet of the Government's health policy is the operation of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. As the only pharmacist on the Government benches and, indeed, as the only pharmacist in this chamber, surely it is not unusual that I have maintained a deep interest in pharmacy and the Government's Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. As a master pharmacist I have been conscious not to be seen to be pushing a personal barrow, although I must say that I have not noticed a reluctance on the part of some other honourable members and senators to pursue a subject on behalf of their constituents where they personally have a like interest or investment. Whether they are manufacturers, ex-union bosses, farmers, tradesmen, doctors or labourers, members on both sides of this chamber have taken up the cause of individuals and groups. Therefore I consider myself reasonably well qualified to speak on behalf of Australia's 5,000 master pharmacists.
Thelocal chemist is a vital link in the health de-
livery chain. l doubt whether there is a single per-
son in this nation who in the last year or two has

National Health Amendment Bill

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1867

not sought the sound advice of his local pharmacist. Many people are regular visitors to their chemist, who, apart from dispensing their prescriptions and advising them on general matters of health, is always ready to listen and offer kind words and help and advise on a whole host of problems affecting the personal lives of people. The local chemist, like the local doctor, is one of the nation's most significant and important social workers.
I ask honourable members to name another retail business in any shopping centre where the general public can enter freely and receive this high standard of professional advice without any monetary payment? The only return a chemist receives for his services is the profit on the items sold, and there are many instances when advice is given and no product is sold. Therefore, it is essential that the nation retain a viable retail pharmacy industry. If there is a substantial diminution of services provided by pharmacy undoubtedly the general health of our people will suffer. It should be pointed out that retail pharmacy was providing a second to none service to Australian communities long before the Federal Government first ventured into the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme in 1947. The scheme was expanded considerably in the early 1960s and the original patient charge of 50c per item has progressively been increased to today's level of $2.75.
The establishment of a tribunal to determine the level of remuneration to pharmacists for dispensing replaces the existing Joint Committee on Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing Arrangements. It will be the first time that hearings of claims by pharmacists for dispensing fee increases will be heard in public. Previously the negotiations have been conducted in private. It has been only in the last few years that an independent arbitrator has arbitrated on deadlocks between the Government and the Pharmacy Guild of Australia. With 93 per cent of all dispensing being in the form of pharmaceutical benefit prescriptions it is easy to see how the level of payment of dispensing fees has a major effect on the profitability of pharmacy. It is my considered opinion that past governments have used their positions 'of power through the increasing dependence of retail pharmacy on the pharmaceutical benefits scheme to squeeze the industry to breaking point. Governments are always looking to reduce expenditure. What better way of doing that than in an area where they have almost total power?
No other business in this country is so subject to direct influence and power of government as is pharmacy. Certainly no group of professionals in

private business is so controlled by government. Recently, through sheer desperation and frustration, the pharmacists of this nation embarked on a campaign to make contact with their local Federal member of parliament and senators to make them aware of their plight. I believe members on both sides of this chamber-if not all members, the vast majority of them-are convinced that retail pharmacy is in a deal of financial trouble and that increases in dispensing fees are essential if many hundreds of local chemist shops are to be saved from going out of business.
This legislation provides for a fees determination by the new Tribunal by 1 July 1981. The Government must act promptly to pay the fee increases, otherwise further financial hardships will be endured. It is now four years since pharmacists have had a fee increase. Indeed, chemists' professional fees were reduced by 4c from I May 1980, resulting from so-called overpayments to chemists arising out of a stated computer error several years ago. Because of the actions of past governments through the unreasonable stances of some Department of Health officers not only is retail pharmacy in some trouble but also the pharmaceutical manufacturing industry has suffered. The Ralph Inquiry into the Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Industry confirmed what the industry had known and complained of for some time. Governments had been forcing down prices through dictatorial methods used by some departmental officers to such an extent that the industry was in grave trouble.
The Ralph inquiry recommended assistance to the industry through increased payments. This is but another instance of what happens when governments get their sticky fingers too deeply into an industry. However, when the Government acted and decided to pay the pharmaceutical manufacturer an across the board increase of 20c an item last year it reduced the chemists' professional fee by a further 5c, this being equal to the 25 per cent mark-up on the extra 20c paid for the manufacturer's product.
The profit margin on cost enjoyed by the chemist is a low 25 per cent for pharmaceutical benefit items. A few years ago it was 33-!- per cent. Many retail outlets apply mark-ups of 50 per cent, 66t per cent and some even 100 per cent and greater. Most chemist shop lines-that is, over the counter lines-are marked up by 50 per cent and 66t per cent on cost, although on some the mark-up is as low as 33-!- per cent. With pharmaceutical benefit items the chemist receives a mere 25c profit on an item that costs $1. With this low profit margin on

1868 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

National Health Amendment Bill

cost it is essential that the dispensing fee, his professional fee for service, be at a faif and sensible level.
This legislation, although providing fOf retrospective payments in the transitional period, does not empower the Tribunal to make retrospective payments to pharmacists when making a determination. Personally, this aspect does not perturb me greatly because, unlike previous arrangements when fee increases were adjusted every two or three years, this legislation requires the Tribunal to determine fees at least every 12 months. Under previous arrangements, because of the infrequency of fee determinations, retrospectivity had to apply. However, because fee determinations are unlikely to be made more frequently than 12 monthly, I believe the Minister fOf Health (Mr MacKellar) should indicate that the Tribunal should take a prospective view when setting fees.
Chemists' overheads, like those of all other businesses, are subject to inflation, particularly the large overhead component of staff wages. Increases in overheads must be paid when demanded. Therefore, I would like the Minister, in his summing up of this debate, to indicate his support for the Tribunal to take into consideration inflation in prospect when making its determination. Any other retail business, or indeed manufacturing or commercial undertaking, is not forced to absorb increases in overheads for 12 months. Therefore, I believe pharmacies should not be singled out. I repeat that I believe the Minister ought to give support to this view, show leadership and indicate that this should be one of the criteria taken into consideration by the Tribunal.
I now turn to the Jamison Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals insofar as it affects pharmacy and the dispensing of prescriptions. Existing hospital cost sharing arrangements have encouraged greater utilisation of outpatient facilities at public hospitals. This has been at the expense of communitybased medical practitioners and pharmacists. Why so many members of the general public would want to sit for hours in hospital outpatient departments when they can, in most cases, get better and quicker service from their local doctor and chemist baffles me. Obviously hospitals have a fascination for some people. I agree with the finding of the Jamison inquiry that patients should be encouraged to visit local general practitioners rather than the relatively costly outpatient departments of hospitals. The clause in the present Medibank agreements with the States

which precludes prescriptions written in recognised hospitals from being dispensed in community pharmacies, except in emergencies, is ludicrous and should be abolished.
Under present arrangements this Government is sharing 50 per cent of the cost of dispensing all drugs in recognised hospitals whereas a large proportion of this cost should be borne by the individual when he takes his prescription to the local chemist. At the present time the average prescription cost is approximately $4.50 with the patient paying $2.75. This means that the Government is paying $1.75 an item. With the hospital dispensing this item, governments are paying the full $4.50. The Commonwealth is paying half, or about $2.25. Similarly, only with greater cost to the Government, patients seen by hospital doctors-I hope that the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) is listening to me-are costing the Government more than if those patients were seen by their local community doctor. It is far better for the patient to build up relationships with his local general practitioner and pharmacist than be subjected to so many different doctors in hospitals and suffer impersonal treatment in such an institution.
I now turn to the subject of delayed payments to pharmacists. I have been advised by the Pharmacy Guild that hardship has been caused to pharmacists in some States because of late payment for dispensing prescriptions which come under the National Health Scheme and the Department of Veterans' Affairs. This can cause severe liquidity problems for many pharmacists who have been forced to lose settlement discounts with wholesalers and pay greater amounts of interest on overdrafts. It must be remembered that, whilst some wholesalers require payment of accounts within 30 days of the end of the month, many wholesalers nowadays require settlement within 14 days. The problem has been brought about by inadequate staffing levels in the New South Wales division of the Department of Health and a poorly managed transition when the processing of veterans' affairs prescriptions was taken over by the Department of Health. The situation with veterans' affairs payments has improved but the measures taken to improve the position--that is, by sending some of the workload to other States----has caused delays in other States, particularly Victoria. Whereas previously there was a big problem in one State we now have a smaller problem in several States. I ask the Minister to investigate thoroughly this matter of delays in payments to chemists because

National Health Amendment Bill

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1869

I am not convinced that the answers given by departmental officers to me recently are completely
correct.
T now turn my attention to the matter of whether there are too many chemist shops in Australia. The Pharmacy Guild has long recognised that there are too many pharmacy outlets in Australia. The population to pharmacy ratio is too low. Undoubtedly one of the reasons for this situation is the fact that the profitability of pharmacy was much better in the 1960s than in the last 10 years. The industry had an expectation that was based on the level of remuneration available. When that profitability dropped too many pharmacists became unprofitable; hence, the closure of shops and the difficult times that have befallen others. On a number of occasions this Government has implied that the industry's problems arise because there are too many pharmacies. Late last year the Pharmacy Guild put a proposition to the Minister for Health aimed at improving the position in relation to the oversupply of chemist shops. I understand that the Minister has not as yet responded to this submission.

to merge and close the doors of one shop or one pharmacist sells to another who closes the door of one shop, the very next day another registered pharmacist can come along, open another pharmacy, be licenced by the State Government and be given immediate approval by the Commonwealth to dispense National Health Scheme prescriptions. There is no easy solution to effecting a rationalisation of pharmacies; nevertheless, it should not be put in the too hard basket. As far as T am concerned, the issue ought to be the subject of intense investigations and discussions by a meeting of Commonwealth and State health Ministers. At this stage, I seek leave to incorporate two tables in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-
DISTRIBUTION OF PHARMACIES AND POPULATION TO PHARMACY RATIOS
Population to Pharmacy Ratios in Australia

Ycar (at 30 June)

Population

Australia's Number of to pharmacy

popUlation pharmacies

ratios

The control of the number of chemist shops is a 1950

very vexed question. On the one hand, the licensing of chemist shops comes under State jurisdic--

1955
1960 1965

tion. On the other hand, the approvals to dispense 1970

pharmaceutical benefit prescriptions is a Com1975

monwealth responsibility. We have the absurd situation that, if in one area two chemists decide

1979 1980

8,307,481 9,311 ,825 10,391,920
11,505,408 12,663,469 13,600,924
14,418,200 14,615,900

3,080
3,923 4,696
5,375 5,876 5,366
5,399 5,417

2,697 2,374 2,213 2,141
2,155 2,444 2,671 2,698

PHARMACEUTICAL CHEMISTS DISPENSING PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFITS PRESCRIPTTONS-STATES AND TERRITORIES 1973 TO 1980 (Number at 30 June)

State or Territory

1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 31.3.81

New South Wales Victoria Queensland
South Australia Western Australia Tasmania
Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory
Australia

2,257 1,617
922 534 410 lSI
n.a. n.a. 5,891

2,154 1,587
920
510 408
148
21 69 5,817

2,102 1,573
897 502 408
146 20 71
5,719

2,034 1,532
883
490 396
146 20 65
5,566

2,014 1,496
880 487 405 146
19 62 5,504

1,996 1,449
881
469 405 140
20 66 5,426

1,985 1,420
892 463 408 139
18 67 5,392

1,984 1,405
910
458 417 137 19 69 5,399

2,000 1,401
902 456 429 143
19 67 5,417

1,989 1,385
910
454 426 144
18 67 5,393

Commonwealth Department of Health.

A* uFsitgraulrieasnfBoru1re9a7u2

of Statistics. for NT and ACT

are

included

in

those

for

SA

and

NSW

respectively.

MI' HODGES-I thank the House. The first table illustrates population to pharmacy ratios in Australia. It commences with the year 1950, when an average of 2,697 people supported every pharmacy. The table finishes with the figure for 1980, when 14,615,900 people supported 5,417 pharmacies-2,698 people per pharmacy. The table clearly indicates that the population to
pharmacy ratio worsened from 1950, until the

mid 1960s. Fortunately, there has been a healthy trend over the last few years.
The second table indicates the number of pharmacies in Australia since 1972, when there was a total of 5,891. The most significant figures show that by 1978 there had been a loss of some 500 pharmacies. The number dropped to 5,392. There was a steady decline over those six years. In 1979 there was an increase of seven pharmacies

1870 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

National Health Amendment Bill

throughout Australia and in 1980 there was an inMr BEAZLEY (Swan) (5.9)-The Oppo-

crease of a further 18 pharmacies. But in the nine sition supports the National Health (Pharmaceu-

months to 31 March 1981 there was a decrease of tical Benefits) Amendment Bill and the Repatri-

24 pharmacies. It is obvious that the financial situation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Bill

ation of pharmacies today is not good and therewhilst noting the deficiencies in the decision-

fore we are .seeing a forced reduction in the making processes of the Minister for Health (Mr

number of pharmacies-and, of course, a reMacKellar) which have delayed their appearance

duction of service to the community.

before this House. Since last October's election;

The final question I wish to raise concerns the concessional or subsidised Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. Since the abolition of the subsidised health benefits plan in 1976 there has been no means whereby disadvantaged persons such as the unemployed, lone parents, low income families or persons with chronic illnesses have had access to concessions on pharmaceutical benefits. For the purpose of bulk billing for medical benefits, doctors have now been granted the power to decide which members of the public are disadvantaged. Surely an anomaly exists in that the Government is paying the doctor 75 per cent of the common fee-it will be 85 per cent as a result of the announcement yesterday by the Minister for Health-for the consultation whilst the patient in many instances is unable to afford the $2.75 contribution for each item prescribed by the medical practitioner. It is not an uncommon occurrence for a family to have two or three chronically ill children and it would not be uncommon for such a family in one week to receive up to eight or 10 prescriptions from its local doctor which, at $2.75 each, cost it more than many families can afford. I propose that a system similar to the subsidised health benefits plan that operated prior to 1976 be introduced whereby a

and despite his relatively long period in officefor the Fraser Ministry-this Minister has' been incapable of presenting to this Parliament legislation on a variety of matters which he has had under consideration for some time. In other areas he has had the problem of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) to deal with and, as we have found out in recent days, that is not an inconsiderable problem. However, it must be doubted whether in this aspect of his legislative responsibility he has encountered the same degree of Prime Ministerial interference. Therefore, it must be assumed that delays in legislation appearing before us are due to sloppiness in his own procedures and decision-making processes. We thus have thrust upon us what is in fact a fairly simple piece of legislation which could have been brought down at any time after the Joint Statutory Committee of Public Accounts report of September last year. However, it has been delayed until now and the new Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal will be given a baptism of fire by being ordered to report by July this year. It has been requested to complete a review in two months which the Government, through the old Joint Committee, has been unable to complete in three years. I wish it luck.

reduced patient contribution is paid per prescription item for those patients who are nominated as disadvantaged. Beneficiaries would include supporting parents, the unemployed and sickness and special beneficiaries.

As I have said, this simple piece of legislation could have been introduced in December last year. It could have been introduced at the beginning of this session. Tortuous as are the Minister's ways of arriving at decisions, nevertheless he was

The Pharmacy Guild believes that the Governtalking about setting up the Tribunal at the begin-

ment should introduce a concessional pharmaceuning of February. This might have at least given

tical benefits category with a lower patient contrius something useful to debate in the last couple of

bution. The Guild believes concessional months and given the new chairman of the Tri-

pharmaceutical benefits should be made available bunal reasonable time to arrive at some reason-

to all persons nominated by doctors as disadvanable conclusions. Pressure might also have been

taged for the purpose of bulk billing, such as taken off this new tribunal if the Minister had

patients suffering from nominated chronic disused the Joint Committee for an interim settle-

eases which necessitate continuous medication, ment of the pharmacists' claims for an increase in

Aboriginals and children under the age of 16 prescription charges. The joint committee of pub-

years. I believe it would be simple for prescription lic servants and pharmacists, in 20 years of oper-

forms to have on them a box which could be ations, proved utterly incapable of arriving at an

marked 'CPB' or something similar and these preagreed methodology for determining the cost of

scriptions could then be put in a separate bundle dispensing a Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme pre-

by the chemist for forwarding for payment. I supscription. However, it might have enjoyed a useful

port both Bills and I commend my suggestions to swan-song had it been instructed to produce,

the Minister.

without prejudice to subsequent investigations, a

National Health Amendment Bill

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1871

temporary cost of living adjustment using the base 37 pharmacies are serving a slightly greater aver-

amount of $1.31 a prescription, agreed upon by age number of people. The Public Accounts Com-

the parties last year. The new tribunal might then mittee pointed out that the average United King-

have had some time to bring down a considered dom pharmacy serves about 5,000 people and the

review without, as it now must, running the risk of Swedish pharmacy about 14,000 people. J am not

alienating interested parties with a hasty decision. sure that these comparisons are, in fact, very use-

The tardiness of this move generally can be seen ful. British and Swedish cities are much more

when one recalls that in November 1976 the then closely settled than ours. To illustrate this point 1

Minister for Health said that the aim of the Comrefer to a conversation that I once had with a Bri-

monwealth was to remove from the political tish member of parliament. As honourable

arena the important question of fees paid to members would be aware, the average size, in

chemists, to bring an end to the acrimony that had population terms, of a British electorate is much

developed over the years between chemists an~ the same as ours. That member of parliament

successive Commonwealth governments, and to represented an area in London which was very

achieve smooth administration of the Pharmaceusimilar in its social composition to my electorate

tical Benefits Scheme. According to the Minister's of Swan. The constituents in my electorate of

speech, they are all reasons for the introduction of Swan are spread over an area of about 120 square

this legislation four years later.

miles. The British member of parliament pointed

out to me that in his electorate they live in an area

If the Minister wishes to make excuses, the only one acceptable on this side of the House is the effect of Public Service staff ceilings. Nobody who

of about four square miles. That gives an indication of the likely convenience of services available to persons in his area. It is to be expected that greater inconveniences confront the Australian

sits on the Public Accounts Committee, as I do, customer. In comparison with the British user, I

can fail to be impressed by the frequent reference would say they are very much greater.

in the recent Auditor-General's report to the

damaging effect these have had on Public Service

efficiency. However, given his involvement in the The trend in Australia has been towards

decisions which have produced this situation, not decreasing availability of pharmacies. In 1970

even this amounts to an excuse for his administrasome 5,876 pharmacies were servicing an average

tion. The Opposition, as the honourable member of 2,155 persons. In 19805,417 pharmacies served

for Bonython (Dr Blewett) has indicated, has 2,650 persons. The question of availability is be-

maintained for some time that it does not oppose coming increasingly important in my home State

an increase in this aspect of the pharmacists' reas a result of the State Government's closure of

muneration. We are aware that the growth in infacilities in major hospitals. The honourable

come per pharmacy from benefits has risen by member for Petrie (Mr Hodges), the previous

about 4 per cent since 1977-78 whilst average speaker in this debate, referred to those facilities. weekly earnings have risen by about 25 per cent. A very fine service provided at the Royal Perth

One pharmacy in my electorate-Blackburn and Hospital where all users of the general clinic had

Hewitt Enterprises-has written to me advising that it cannot absorb rising costs. It is being forced to absorb drug wholesalers' surcharges and the rising costs of borrowing. It faces a liquidity crisis made more critical by the less than buoyant retail sales it is experiencing. It has had to reduce its staff by three and I am told that further redundancies may well follow.

prescriptions filled free of charge has been shut down. Many pensioners and disadvantaged persons had been able to get, at great convenience, long term free supplies of pharmaceuticals from doctors familiar with their cases. This required only occasional visits. If they continue to use this service they must now have their disadvantaged status determined by the hospital doctors. They are entitled to only two weeks supply of medi-

cines. Pensioners may, but without certainty, get

Throughout the country we are faced with a an extension. As was the Government's intention,

future of pharmacy closures which will mean a rethese persons must now use their general prac-

duction in services to people who need them. It titioners who mayor may not be conveniently

has been argued that some rationalisation in outlocated to pharmacies or to the pensioners. An

lets should take place. Indeed the Public even more serious situation has arisen at the

Accounts Committee viewed such a development Shenton Park Rehabilitation Centre, which

with some favour. It pointed out that around handles disabled persons and war veterans. It has

5,400 pharmacies in Australia were servicing similarly been restricted to two weeks supplies.

about 2,650 people each. In my electorate about Disabled outpatients are confronted with the

1872 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

National Health Amendment Bill

problem of more frequent visits to GPs and pharmedicines that vast numbers of the disadvantaged

macies which may not be convenient.

are now effectively excluded.

Recently I conducted a phone-in at my electorWe have argued for the indexing of fringe

ate office on the restrictions of these pharmaceubenefits. The Government's failure to keep up

tical benefits, among other health matters. I with Whitlam Government standards on this mat-

received numerous telephone calls related to ter means that most pensioners have either lost

these issues. One lady who is now almost blind has this aspect of their fringe benefits or are very close

been forced to cease using the Royal Perth Hospito doing so. One woman pensioner who called me

tal and to start using her local general pracon my phone-in, who just falls over the line of in-

titioner. He has to apply regularly to the Governeligibility for the fringe benefits, had just returned

ment to secure authority for one of her essential home with a $42 pharmacy bill. She could not

medications. This had been readily available to afford to pay it. Doctors in my area report that

her from the RPH clinic until the restrictions that other people in the categories I have been discuss-

I mentioned came into force. The question of coning have been presenting pharmacies with doc-

venience is vitally important in my electorate. We tors' prescriptions and requesting them to select

have more aged and invalid pensioners in Swan from among them the item which is most essen-

than in any other electorate in Western Australia. tial. They cannot afford to pay for the whole lot.

They cannot be expected to travel distances to fill The Government must, concurrent with its estab-
utterly essential needs. Therefore r have some lishment of a health fees tribunal, give these mat-

sympathy with the view expressed by the Pharters urgent attention. It must also move to im-

macy Guild of Australia in a recent submission it plement another of last year's recommendations

sent to me which revealed that if the bottom 42 of the Public Accounts Committee. A recommen-

per cent, in profitability terms, of pharmacies dation was made for the establishment of a bureau

were closed it would produce less than a 5 per of health economics. I seek leave of the House to

cent saving in costs on pharmaceutical benefits, incorporate in Hansard the relevant section of the

and that is assuming the recipients went nowhere report of the Public Accounts Committee.

else. However, if prescription payments are to rise there is an immediate need for the Government to

Leave granted.

review some related matters of hardship. Some of The report read as follows-

these, I am pleased to say, were raised by the Bureau of Health Economics (Chapter 9) honourable member for Petrie, I think in a sym17. The PAC, throughout its inquiry into the excess pay-

pathetic manner, even if his solutions were not entirely adequate. The Government's definition of the disadvantaged in relation to those who are entitled to receive Pharmaceutical Benefits

ment of pharmacists, was concerned with the general lack of independent objective economic advice on health matters. With total health expenditure throughout Australia of about $9,000 million in 1979-80, the Committee considered that the Department of Health should be serviced by a group of

Scheme listed medicines free of charge must be specialists advising on health jwelfare economic matters.

drastically altered.

18. The PAC considers that this group of economists should

The Government has listed the unemployed

be technically independent in their operations, and free from day to day administrative matters. Accordingly the Com-

people as disadvantaged in its calculations as to mittee has recommended that a Bureau of Health Economics

who will have to pay for their own health costs. The unemployed are not so listed for free access to PBS medicines. Returning to the Royal Perth Hospital pharmacy, which J mentioned earlier, the Unemployed Workers Movement in Western Australia estimated that some 50 per cent of the

be established and that it operate and function in a similar way to the Bureaus of Agricultural Economics, Transport Economics, Industry Economics and Labour Market Research.
Recommendations (Chapter 9) (i) A Bureau of Health Economics be established to pro-
vide independent, objective and publically available analysis

users of this facility--again, the previous speaker wondered who these odd people could be who wanted to use hospitals-were unemployed and, as a result of using it in the form in which it was then offered, were able to gain the free access to medicines which the previous speaker mentioned

of economic facts and issues relating to the Australian health industry.
(ii) The Bureau of Health Economics to have a charter and powers similar to other Economic Bureaus.
(iii) The Commonwealth Government consider establishing an external independent committee to assist the Bureau of Health Economics.

as being so important to them. State and Federal (iv) The Bureau of Health Economics be formed within

governments now bear down very heavily on the one year of the date of tabling of this report, and become operunemployed and disadvantaged in many areas. ational within two years of the tabling of this report.

Furthermore, so infrequent have been the adjustMr BEAZLEY-I thank the House. The

ments in maximum permissible pensioner earnGovernment has not yet given any indication as to

ings in relation to eligibility for free access to PBS whether it will implement the recommendations

National Health Amendment Bill

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1873

of the Public Accounts Committee. The ComPetrie (Mr Hodges), who demonstrated this after-

mittee's final recommendation considered this noon an outstanding capacity not only to rep-

matter an urgent necessity that should be deterresent his electorate but also to represent the

mined by the Government within one year of the pharmacy profession of Australia, I am not a

report. That one year period, I would suggest, is pharmacist. But, as one who in every sense of the

very rapidly approaching. The Government has word is new to this area, I learnt a tremendous

lost sight of the fact, I believe. This is one of the amount about the pharmaceutical industry and

reasons that I am not particularly confident it will the problems of the pharmacy profession from my

implement this scheme. This was indicated in the involvement in that inquiry.

report of the razor gang, that today expert advice saves money and ensures justice. The Government has been given an opportunity to reverse its normal pattern of behaviour. I believe it must do so. The Bills should be supported. Honourable members on both sides of the House should press the Minister on this matter and the other matters which I have raised to ensure that no injustice results from the implementation of the recommen-

I think it is fair to say that the quality of the debate today to a large degree demonstrates the fact that when members of this House have the opportunity to work and to prepare their speeches on the basis of a factual analysis of a specific problem, such as the remuneration of pharmacists, we see in this House an undoubtedly higher standard of debate than we see on other occasions.

dation. I repeat that I do not believe the pharmaSpeakers for the Opposition in this debate

cists themselves are obliged to carry social welfare claimed that the Government had been somewhat

benefits that ought to be charges on the whole tardy in this area. I believe that some very unkind

community. The Government is obliged, particuremarks were made about my colleague the Min-

larly as it is implementing a measure which will, ister for Health (Mr MacKellar). I place on

we hope, raise the remuneration to pharmacists, record the fact that the report which we are con-

to investigate the areas of disadvantage which are sidering in relation to these Bills was tabled in this

not being picked up, and seriously do something House on 17 September 1980. From my experi-

about them.

ence, which is not inconsiderable in this area, the

Mr CONNOLLY (Bradfield) (5.24)-1 am very pleased that the House is facing a rare demonstration of unanimity on the National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Bill and the Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Bill. The matter is of great importance to every Australian citizen. We all know that the pharmaceutical industry is an essential com-

response which the Government has managed to demonstrate to date in this most important area is most commendable. This certainly is not to be seen as an isolated area, especially as only yesterday we saw introduced into this House most significant changes in the entire health service program for Australia which no doubt will be in operation for a number of years.

munity service to the people of Australia. It has It is in that context that we have to commend

always been a firm policy of this Government-I the Government on its decision to establish a re-

think of all governments-since Federation that muneration tribunal. That decision is fully in ac-

Australians, wherever they may be, should always cordance with the recommendation made by the

have the opportunity to gain access to drugs at a Public Accounts Committee. We talked in terms

price which they can afford and through the faciliof an independent health fees tribunal. At that

ties of a private system of pharmacies throughout stage we saw some advantage in bringing medical

the land. Regrettably, however, over the years and pharmaceutical costs under the same con-

probably one of the few industries which have trolling apparatus. But, for reasons which I ap-

been to a large degree influenced by the policies of preciate, that was not possible at this stage. There

government has been the pharmaceutical is no doubt that the decision to establish a re-

industry.

muneration tribunal relating to pharmaceutical

Last year, as Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts, I was requested by the Parliament and, through the Parliament, by the Minis-

benefits in particular should go a long way towards overcoming a deep-felt problem among chemists.

ter for Health to conduct a major review of the Members of the Opposition drew attention to

pharmaceutical benefits scheme, with specific refthe fact that the Minister had announced pre-

erence to the remuneration of chemists. That viously that the proposed tribunal would be

arose out of a difficulty found by the Auditorrequired to make its determination by 1 July this

General in the previous year concerning what year. I agree that there is a time problem. I accept

were then deemed to be significant overpayments. the point made by my colleague the honourable

Unlike my colleague the honourable member for member for Petrie that a further examination

1874 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

National Health Amendment Bill

must be made as soon as possible following the establishment of the tribunal but also as to whether the tribunal should bring down an interim settlement if at that stage it is unable to bring down a final determination. On the basis of our investigation last year, I have to say that this subject is so extraordinarily cOinplicated that I think it will take some time before we will be able to have a reasonable arrangement acceptable to the parties in relation to the tribunal.
All of us as politicians appreciate only too well that it is not easy to persuade any professional group to accept the determinations of either government or independent bodies. Unfortunately, however, what has happened over the past 20 years in this industry has demonstrated quite clearly that there has been a total breakdown of previous methodology and the approach adopted by successive governments to try to come to a reasonable arrangement with the Pharmacy Guild of Australia.
In our recommendations last year the Public Accounts Committee made a number of suggestions which, again, the Minister has accepted in this legislation. For example, we drew attention to the fact that under the previous arrangement, of what could be called a tripartite joint committee making the determinations, that committee consisted of a chairman, who was a deputy president of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, supported by two others, one representing the Pharmacy Guild of Australia and the second representing the Department of Health. Their investigations and deliberations were conducted completely in camera. In our investigation we found that a most unsatisfactory arrangement. I cast no aspersions on the Pharmacy Guild, but its members were placed in a position in which they were totally dependent upon information coming from the Guild-there was no other source of information whatsoever. In addition, when three people are working in such a . situation there is always a risk that ultimately the chairman has no function other than to make a declaration if the other two members have reached agreement. In such a situation it can be found that the Department and the Pharmacy Guild reach a settlement which they regard as satisfactory but which ultimately is not necessarily in the interests of the pharmacy profession, or the community.
Under the new arrangements submissions will be made in public. All interested parties, including organisations throughout Australia-not the least of which should be the consumer groups-will be given an opportunity to come before the tribunal and to state their points of view. Thus, in a totally

open environment the people of Australia, the pharmacists and the Government will be able to see the basis upon which determinations have been reached. An extraordinary revelation during our inquiry was that for many years nobody except the Department of Health was privy to the basis upon which such determinations had been reached. During our inquiry I had the pleasure of opening up the matter to public view, shall we say, with the result that at last people were able to look back to 1967 and to see how the formulas and so forth had been applied. Undoubtedly, access to inspection will represent a major step forward. One aspect of the Bill is, I think, quite significant. Proposed new section 98B (I) states:
The function of the Tribunal is to determine the manner in which the Commonwealth price of all or any pharmaceutical benefits is to be ascertained for the purpose of payments to approved pharmaceutical chemists in respect of the supply by them of pharmaceutical benefits.
I draw the attention of the House in particular to the word 'manner' and the expression 'which the Commonwealth price of all or any pharmaceutical benefits is to be ascertained'. In our original report we suggested that, because of the very significant complexities in that area and the total failure over 20 years to get both the government and the pharmaceutical bodies to agree on the methodology which should be applied, once again there was perhaps a case for conducting a further review into the mechanics of the industry itself to analyse in depth precisely what its problems are.
We made that recommendation for one important reason, namely, that we were unable to satisfy ourselves that in this country we had a sufficient depth of accurate information upon which specific determinations could be made. For example, it could be demonstrated that about the top 20 per cent of all pharmacists are doing extremely well, even on the basis of existing stat~ istics. It could be demonstrated also that the lower 20 per cent of pharmacists were doing extremely badly, according to available information. But the case cannot be proved one way or the other. Therefore, it is not unreasonable to expect that those pharmacists, especially at the bottom end of the spectrum, have tended to feel over the years that, in the full sense of the term, they have been given the 'wrong end of the stick'.
It has been pointed out by previous speakers that, whereas in recent years pharmacists have received an increase of approximately 4 per cent, at the same time they have had to absorb a 40 per cent increase in costs. For any industry that would be a matter for concern, especially at a time of a higher inflation than we have tended to experience in Australia during most of this century. It is

National Health Amendment Bill

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1875

especially so when the percentage of the comCommittee of Public Accounts agreed that on in-

munity which has access to pharmacIes has ternational comparisons the pharmacy to popu-

tended to grow while the trend towards using lation ratio in Australia was high and likely to be

chemists' prescriptions has tended to fall. The unnecessarily so, even allowing for the need to

pharmacy profession is most significant. For provide reasonable pharmacy services, as I men-

example, "at the present time there are aptioned earlier, in isolated and remote areas. How-

proximately 5,400 pharmacies in Australia, each ever, the point has been made-rightly so-by a

of which provides a service to approximately previous speaker that whereas the distribution of

2,650 people. If we compare those fi~ures 'Yith drugs is essentially a Commonwealth re-

those of other countries, such as the Umted Kmgsponsibility, the licensing of pharmacists rests

dom or Sweden-as the previous speaker did-we with the State governments. This is an area in

see that, for example, the figures do not necesswhich I would strongly urge both the professional

arily mean all that they say.

bodies and the Federal Government to consider

The point has been made, and validly so, that in a large country such as Australia we must ensur.e that all Australians have access to pharmacological services with the result that even in country towns subsidies have been made available to pharmacists to ensure that that principle is achieved, namely, that all Australians will have access to pharmacological services.
However, when one examines the basis upon which remuneration has tended to be paid in the past some important points have come through which again I draw to the attention of the House

discussions with the State Ministers for Health to see whether or not it is possible to come to a more rational basis. On the basis of our investigations last year 1 am convinced that there is a case of excess pharmacological services in various parts of metropolitan areas of the capital cities and so forth in Australia. However, I am not convinced that a serious attempt has been made by the various levels of government with the professions and with the universities who graduate the pharmacists of tomorrow to see whether it is possible to bring this area under greater control.

and the Minister because I believe these matters must still be given further consideration. Past attempts to determine the basis for remuneration have tended to have five main characteristics. Firstly, they have been negotiated between two groups only-the Commonwealth Government and the Pharmacy Guild of Australia-with all other parties being excluded. Secondly, they have been conducted in private without public scrutiny. Thirdly, attempts at determining an objective method of remuneration have been conducted using no independent objective expertise. Fourthly, past surveys have taken a long time to complete and, upon completion, the results generally have been rejected. Finally, after a breakdown in these attempts to determine an objective basis, political negotiations have resulted. In other words, the history of governmental relationships with the Pharmacy Guild and the pharmacy pro-

We recommended, for example, that pharmacists consider joint operations where there might be two or three pharmacists in the same village. There would be a good case for them to share the market more equitably and so forth. But there are difficulties in this, not the least of which is the fact that from our investigations pharmacists are probably the ultimate in small business in the full sense of the term. They are proud of their independence; they want to run their own show; they do not particularly wish to be forced into a coalition with other people in the same area and, if they want to do so, of course, there is every opportunity at present. Nevertheless, this is a problem which the Pharmacy Guild is currently considering. It is a problem about which the Government is most concerned. I hope to see in the not too distant future a better structure in that area.

fession, especially over the last 20 years, has left much to be desired. Unfortunately, the complexities in finding adequate bases upon which determinations can be reached are very intricate indeed. For that reason we suggested that it would not be sufficient just to establish a new tribunal but rather a further analyses in depth would have to be conducted to try to get to the facts of the situation facing such an important profession as the pharmacological profession in Australia today.

With the permission of the House r would like
to incorporate in Hansard a table demonstrating some of the points I have been making relating to the average costs of dispensing Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme prescriptions in 1977-78 in the eight strata of pharmacies which were considered by previous investigations. The important point about this table is that it demonstrates, for example, that the average cost per prescription for stratum 1, which incidentally is the pharmacy group which is virtually uneconomic, was 214.8c

I mentioned earlier the question of comparicompared with an overall average of 161c. In

sons. All witnesses appearing before the Joint stratum 8, which undoubtedly comprises those

1876 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

National Health Amendment Bill

who for various reasons are most economic, pharmacists were able to process a prescription for 123c compared with the 214.8c I mentioned earlier. Honourable members will be able to see that there is a significant difference in the financial capacity within the industry. I seek leave to incorporate that table in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The table read as!o/!ows-

Table 9 AYerage Cost of Dispensing a PBS Prescription: 1977-78*

Stratum grouping

Number of prescriptions
handled per month

Average
cost per PBS prescription
(cents)

Stratum 1 Stratum 2 Stratum 3 Stratum 4 Stratum 5 Stratum 6 Stratum 7 Stratum 8 Overall average

1896 897-1,151 1,152-1,390 1,291-1,641 1,642-1,905 1,906-2,309 2,310-2,971 2,972+

214.8 179.9 175.2 164.4 161.2 138.0 139.0 123.0 161.1

Source: Joint Committee on Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing Arrangements, Results of 1977-78 Inquiry into Pharmacy Earnings, Costs and Profits.
* In a submission to the Joint Committee. the Guild for-
mally repudiated the Survey findings. Consequently, the absolute levels of cost data in the above and following tables needs to have this constraint nOled. However, the relativities expressed in the data are probably reasonably accurate.
Mr CONNOLLY-I thank the House. I wish to finalise my remarks by referring once again to the substance of the Bill. As I said earlier, I applaud it. It is a step forward.It is fully in accordance with the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee report oflast year. I believe it will demonstrate to all the Australian people who are interested in this. most important area that there is nothing underhand about the determination of fees. All pharmacists will have access, if they wish, through their organisations or individually to the Tribunal. It will be made up of three persons. The chairman will be a Deputy President of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, as has been the pnictice in the past, and one of the other two persons on the tribunal-both selected by the Governmentwill, of course, have considerable business acumen and background. As I said earlier, this is terribly important in an area which is made up principally of small businessmen who are ultimately the backbone of our society. For example, in my electorate I have no fewer than 70 pharmacists. I have kept a very close relationship with them during the last

two years of this inquiry. They have been extremely helpful to me in the preparation of evidence and in briefll1g me on the realities of their profession. I repeat that, as an outsider who has been brought into contact with this profession, I am sympathetic to the problems that they have and I am equally concerned, as is the Government, to find adequate solutions to their
problems.
Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (5.42)-This legislation provides for the setting up of an independent tribunal to determine the remuneration paid to chemists for the supply of pharmaceutical benefits. Prior to dealing with the provisions of the National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Bill I would like to outline to the House the history of pharmaceutical benefit schemes. The National Health Service Act 1948, which was introduced by the Chifley Government, had not come into operation before that Government was succeeded by the Menzies Government in December 1949. Partly through regulations under that Act, the Menzies Government introduced a series of measures as part of the national health scheme during the early 1950s. The substance of those regulations was later incorporated in the National Health Act 1953.
The first of the measures introduced was a pharmaceutical benefits scheme under which a restricted range of life saving drugs prescribed by doctors was made available to patients without charge. In July 1951 this scheme was extended to provide a wider range of drugs on the free list for pensioners and their dependants. The benefits provided under the general Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme introduced by the Menzies Government in 1950 were much narrower than those proposed under the legislation of the Chifley Government, being restricted to a list of the most costly life saving and disease preventing drugs. The prices of the drugs included in the formulary resulted from negotiations between the manufacturers and the Department of Health. The reimbursement paid to the pharmacists included a mark-up of 33+ per cent and a dispensing fee. Rising costs and the prospect of that situation continuing led to the introduction of amending legislation in November 1959 which changed the basic concept of the scheme. The general list was widened ~ery substantially to cover practically the same comprehensive range of drugs and medicines as the pensioner list. At the same time a charge of 50c was imposed upon people other than pensioners for drugs and medicines prescribed from the extended general list.
Concern about the growing cost of the scheme led to the McMahon Government introducing

National Health Amendment Bill

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1877

amending legislation which, in November 1971, dispensing fees with retrospectivity to 1 July 1977.

raised the patient contribution from 50c to $1 for This brought the professional fee to $1.16 for

each prescription. Pensioners and their dependready prepared items.

ants covered by the pensioner medical service

continued to receive pharmaceutical benefits free In his report for 1977-78 the Director-General

of charge and special arrangements were made for of Health reported that in other negotiations with

people enrolled under the subsidised health the Guild. through the joint committee a major

benefits plan. As part of an attempt to control the breakthrough occurred in May 1978 when the

growth of public expenditure, the last Budget of committee agreed to recommend revised rates of

the Whitlam Government introduced in August remuneration for chemists. This change, which

1975 increased the patient contribution in Sepwas to apply from 1 August 1978, provided for

tember from $1 to $1.50 for each prescription for more of the chemists' remuneration to be paid by

the general public, and from 50c to 75c for way of professional fee and less mark-up. A

beneficiaries under the subsidised health benefits consequence was that the mark-up for products

plan. Some six months later, quite early in its term supplied by chemists under the Pharmaceutical

of office, the Fraser Government again increased Benefits Scheme was to be 25 per cent and the

the patient contribution from 50c to $2 a prescripprofessional fee for ready prepared items $1.30.

tion. As in the past, eligible pensioners were not to

be charged for their pharmaceutical benefits. I turn to the current situation and the effect

However, the amending legislation removed the that price increases have had on Australia's 5,400

pharmaceutical benefits concession for retail chemists over recent years. We have seen in

beneficiaries under the subsidised health benefits recent years a great many chemist shops being

plan. The Fraser Government raised the patient transformed into veritable supermarkets, with the

contribution to $2.50 a prescription as from 1 July traditional chemist wares being pushed into the

1978. When introducing the legislation the then background and greater attention being given to

Minister for Health said that the increase of 25 the sale of confectionary, glassware, kiddies toys,

per cent was broadly in line with the movement in et cetera. In most cases, of course, chemists are

prices and incomes since March 1976 when the being forced to take such action because of two

last increase took place and therefore was more of reasons: An oversupply of chemists and a lack of

an adjustment than a charge.

sufficient return on the supply of pharmaceutical

During most of the first two decades in which the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme operated the chemists appear to have been relatively well satisfied with its working. One indication of that was that until 1976-77 the number of pharmacies rose at a faster rate than the population, to a point which constituted a considerable amount of excess dispensing capacity. The numbers continued to incease until 1970-71 when they reached

benefits. Therefore, two things must happen: There must be a voluntary reduction in the number of chemists' retail outlets by amalgamations and proper remuneration must be paid to
chemists for the supply of pharmaceutical benefits. This should enable chemists to work towards acting and being seen as members of the health care team and to be relieved of the pressure to compete with supermarkets and other stores.

a peak of 5,912.

The way in which the present Government has

During the second half of the 1960s chemists delayed, over recent years, by doing nothing posi-

expressed concern about the adequacy of their retive to alleviate the situation is nothing short of a

muneration, for the growth of their incomes from disgrace for a government which so often espouses

mark-ups had been contained because of pressure its virtue of being in support of private enterprise.

from the Commonwealth Government on manuThis present legislation will probably be of little

facturers' prices. The Pharmacy Guild attempted assistance to the 25 per cent of chemists already in

to exert some political pressure and the Gorton financial difficulties. Unfortunately, those in the

Government granted an increase from 1 July 1970 greatest difficulties are the small corner shop

of 2c in the dispensing fee-the first increase since chemists who are trying to provide a genuine

1961. After protracted negotiations between the medical service and who have to compete with the

Guild and the McMahon Government fees were large super sales outlets. Chemists have been hard

increased by 7c from January 1972. The new fees hit twice by Government decisions to reduce pre-

thereby became 39c for ready prepared items and scription payments. Their only period of tranquil-

64c for extemporaneously prepared items. Three lity followed the overpayment of $235m as a re-

separate increases in chemists' fees totalling 23c a sult of what the Minister for Health (Mr

prescription were made during 1976-77. In May MacKellar) described as a computer program-

1978 Mr Justice Ludeke announced a rise of 9c in ming error in 1974.

1878 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

National Health Amendment Bill

In the past 15 years the share of prescription payments met directly by the public had risen from 25 per cent to 60 per cent. The public now pay $2.75 of the $4.50 average prescription payment. Pharmacists now receive an average of about $4,000 a month in pharmaceutical benefit payments from the Health Department. About one-third of pharmacists' average turnover is made up of national health prescriptions. I mention also that a number of chemists in my electorate are suffering financial constraints and have had to reduce staff because of the Government's delay in reimbursing costs under the Scheme. It is taking up to 12 weeks for reimbursement. I think that is a matter that the Minister might look at with the object of trying to speed up the payments and to reimburse chemists for the amount that they have already paid to wholesalers.
It is obvious that the user pays system cannot continue to be applied to matters affecting the health of people. Usually, the greatest cost falls on those least able to pay-the lower middle income earners with large families. Health care, including the supply of medical prescriptions, should be covered by general revenue expenditure, in the same way as social security benefits are, and not on a user pays basis. At present this is affecting many low income earners who just cannot afford the cost involved in having multiple prescriptions filled. They are forced to pick the most necessary item and to leave the rest, thus adversely affecting their recovery from whatever illness they are forced to see their doctor about.
Another matter not mentioned by the Minister is the problem facing the Australian pharmaceutical manufacturers because of the lower remuneration paid to them by the Government for the manufacture of products under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. Many local manufacturers employing thousands of people will be forced to close if their returns are not . increased. This would mean that our medical products would need to come from overseas coun-- tries. This is, of course, a further reason why the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme cannot be financed from the patients' prescription payments. It needs to come from general revenue. I can only trust that the proposed Tribunal of three members will do better than the existing Joint Committee of nine members.
Mr FISHER (Mallee) (5.53)-The National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Bill gives effect to a decision of the Government to establish an independent Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal to determine the

remuneration to chemists for the supply of pharmaceutical benefits. In the past the rates of remuneration payable to chemists for the supply of benefits have been determined by the Joint Committee on Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing Arrangements. This Committee has comprised four representatives of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia and four Government representatives under an independent chairman. The advantages of this independent public Tribunal will be to remove from the political arena the question of the level of fees paid to chemists. Therefore, both the chemists and the Government will be bound by this Tribunal's decisions. The Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal will also provide a forum in which all interested parties may publicly argue their case while ensuring that the levels of chemists' remunerations are determined by an independent body. Of course, it will remove the need for the Government to finance cumbersome and costly inquiries of the sort--there have been three-that have been conducted since 1964-65.
It is probably not widely appreciated in the general community that pharmacists are experiencing serious financial difficulties. Over the past 12 months it has become increasingly obvious that chemists who are the most accessible link in our health delivery system have had to rely more and more on their shop front and counter sales to remain in business. Sadly, many pharmacists have not been able to bear this burden and to expand their sales volume. Many closures have been evident. In one city in my electorate the number of businesses has been reduced by half. I quote from a letter from one of those pharmacists:
Yesterday, I had to do one of the hardest things I have experienced in 18 years of being in-
He then referred to the town in which his pharmacy is located. The letter continues:
I had to reduce staff . . .
It is not that the business hasn't increased in both number of customers and over-the-counter turnover. It has!
It is just the rate of increase in wages in excess of the rate of increase in net profit.
Our huge dispensing volume, approximately half of the total prescriptions dispensed in-
This city-
have resulted in over the counter sales increasingly subsidising our dispensing activities.
As you ponder the validity of that statement, think of the Melba Health Clinic operated in the Health Department in Canberra and its increasing losses.
That pharmacy has no, or very few counter sales to offset dispensing activities. In that case the Government meets the loss incurred.
In the case of private enterprise, I cannot let losses occur, hence the staff level had to be curtailed.

National Health Amendment Bill

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1879

The problem is that this industry has to be subject to continual Government control and restriction and often unfair treatment. It has been morally unfair that this one profession in the health care team has been subject to such continual pressures. It is not my intention to delay the passage of these Bills, but I have to raise one further matter in relation to pharmacists and their relationship to Government. I refer to the subject of delayed payments to chemists for pharmaceutical benefits dispensing. In recent weeks 1 have met almost every pharmacist in my electorate and on many occasions I have had to make representations to the Department of Health in order to speed up payments, some of which have been delayed in excess of three months. Chemists do not belong to a benevolent society. The Commissioner of Taxation gives no leniency to taxpayers, and therefore it is wrong that a government instrumentality should deny payments due to pharmacists or to anyone else longer than a reasonable period. I therefore ask the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar), in replying to the debate on these Bills, to explain the reason for the delay in payments to approved chemists for prescriptions dispensed under the Pensioner Health Service. Why are there increasingly longer periods between claim lodgment and payment? What are the reasons for this delay? Can the Minister also explain what measures his Department is contemplating to reduce these delays to more acceptable periods? I support the Bill.
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health) (5.57)-in reply-Time does not allow me to respond tonight in relation to the matters raised by honourable members. I thank them for their contributions to the debate. I will be replying to them by letter to pick up the individual points.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.

Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr MacKellar) read a third time.
EXTENSIONS TO INTERNATIONAL TERMINAL FACILITIES, BRISBANE
AIRPORT, QUEENSLAND Reference of Work: Public Works Committee
Act Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources) (5.58)-1 move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report: Extensions to international terminal facilities, Brisbane Airport, Queensland.
Since the existing international terminal facilities were completed in 1975 the passenger loading on aircraft has significantly increased to the extent that congestion is now occurring in several critical areas. The Government therefore proposes to enlarge the passenger holding lounges, the check-in areas and the baggage claim areas to alleviate congestion now and in the future. It is intended that these extensions be available in time to handle the increased passenger traffic expected through Brisbane Airport during the Commonwealth Games in September 1982. The works proposed will provide for passenger numbers expected during the Commonwealth Games and at the same time extend the life of the international terminal until approximately 1990. Even if a new international terminal building were to be built, the proposed extensions would still be necessary to cope with the increased passenger traffic which is expected before a new terminal could be completed. The estimated cost of the proposed works at February 1981 is $2.8m. I table plans of the proposed works.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

Bill (on motion by Mr MacKellar) read a third time.
REPATRIATION (PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFITS) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading Consideration resumed from 29 April, on motion by Mr MacKellar:

Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
REVIEW OF COMMONWEALTH FUNCTIONS
Ministerial Statement Debate resumed.
Suspension of Standing Orders

That the Bill be now read a second time.

Motion (by Mr Fife)-by leave-agreed to:

Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Leader of the Opposition speaking for a period not exceeding 65 minutes.

1880 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the OppoPrime Minister tell the people six months ago?

sition) (8.1 )-Earlier today the Prime Minister Why did he not have the courage of his con-

(Mr Malcolm Fraser) came into this House and victions and say honestly what he proposed to do

delivered a 44-page speech on why his Governif the people re-elected his Government? He did

ment is not fit to conduct the affairs of this not dare do it and he knows why. He knows that

country. The decisions that the Prime Minister the Australian people would have repudiated this

announced were the end result of what the program and would have thrown his Government

Government describes as a review of Commonout of office. So we have more deceit from a Prime

wealth functions. It was nothing of the sort. What Minister well versed in the practice of dishonesty.

the Prime Minister announced to this Parliament today was nothing less than a massive liquidation sale of national assets and public confidence. It was a disgraceful and despicable speech that dishonours the Government's election mandate, condemns the Australian people to even more hardship and distress and utterly destroys the last vestiges of any claim that the Prime Minister may still have had to trust and credibility. There is no national pride, no commitment to the future and no sense of proper standards in anyone of the 44 pages of what the Prime Minister had to say. It is the ultimate confession of failure-failure after 5-t years of economic mismanagement and administrative incompetence. For instance, what has happened to all those glowing promises and futile forecasts which the Prime Minister and the Treasurer (Mr Howard) have been so fond of mouthing every time they get into trouble?

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The Leader of the Opposition is entitled to challenge anything that the Prime Minister had to say, but he is required to do so within the parameters of parliamentary language. The terms the honourable gentleman uses are not within those parameters.
Mr HAYDEN-I withdraw. The reality is that despite all the fine promises made since 1975, the Fraser Government is now opting out of health, education, legal aid, immigration and migrant services, housing, transport and research and development. Profitable state-run activities are being handed. over to private corporations, real estate developers and the Government's friends and supporters in big business. The States will have foisted on them the burden of responsibility for functions and services which the Fraser Government has proved itself too incompetent to handle.

In 1975 the Prime Minister promised to switch People will be hurt and jobs will be destroyed.

on the lights. In 1977 he assured Australians that The Prime Minister pretends that in reaching

'our nation is on the move'. A year later, in 1978, these decisions the Government is being tough

he proudly boasted 'the runs are on the board' and and realistic. Yet all the Government is doing is

Australia 'has made the breakthrough into a walking out on its responsibilities to the Aus-

period of real prosperity'. Last year, facing tralian people. This is not small government, it is

another election, the Prime Minister insisted that gutless government. It is exactly the same way

a 'new spirit and new enthusiasm' had been given that the Prime Minister was too gutless to put

to Australia by his Government. Despite all this these proposals honestly before the people at the

rhetorical humbug and these outrageous slogans election last year. The Government is gutless in

of dishonesty, we arrive at the reality of what this deciding to walk away from its proper respon-

Prime Minister has achieved. It is all there in his sibilities of national administration.

speech today, from the 17,000 jobs he promises to destroy, to the state-run agencies he promises to close, to the 40 inquiries he will set up, to the government's programs he will slash and the government enterprises he will sell off to his party's business friends and supporters.

I said, and I repeat, that this proposal presides over a massive liquidation sale of national assets. It takes another severe swipe at the Public Service. The Australian Capital Territory is brought to a dead halt. Thirty colleges of advanced education are to disappear, while the symbols that the

The Prime Minister said nothing at all about Prime Minister likes to protect for personal pride,

this wholesale slaughter of national responsibilithe $2m car racing track in Canberra, the Casey

ties during the election campaign six months ago. University-that protected white elephant-and

He refused to take the Australian people into his the College of Advanced Education at Warrnam-

confidence. He was certainly not given a mandate bool, in his own electorate, which was recom-

to carry out this grotesque program which he has mended by a Victorian inquiry should be closed,
now announced to the people. Again, he is guilty are preserved. It is a huge sellout of national

of the rank dishonesty that has been so much a enterprises conferring monopoly rights on the

part of his Prime Ministership over the last 5-t beneficiaries. It is a retreat from effective industry

years. If he believed these decisions were really in regulation. The Prices Justification Tribunal is

the best interests of Australia, why did not the gone; the Trade Practices Commission is being

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1881

hobbled; already its staff has been reduced by 25 cannot seem to understand that if total revenue is

per cent. There is, I repeat, no national pride in low total government is low. That is the fact. The

this Government, no sense of commitment to betfacts are that there are only very few indus-

ter goals in this country under its administration trialised nations which have a lower proportion of

and no commitment to a sense of better standards government spending than does Australia and

for the people of Australia.

they are relatively backward. I speak of countries

n seems to me that the principle boils down to
this: If there is profit in it, hand it over to your friends in business; if there is a burden of responsibility, give it to the States. Now it is being proposed that this is all necessary on the pretext of achieving small government as if, innately,

such as Turkey and Iceland. We are not far ahead of them. What does the Prime Minister want us to do~reduce our standards to the standards of Turkey with all of its problems? The man has not thought his way through the implications of what he is proposing.

small government were a virtue in itself. Firstly

the Prime Minister claimed that the Government

had been responsible for reducing the size of the

public septor in this country. The measure that

really counts is the proportion of gross domestic

product going to all public authorities in

Australia. The reason is simply this: The Govern-

mboeonkts.hans

resorted has been

to rigging the public account pushing commitments out of

the Budget to the open loan market with public

authorities; it has been shifting national respon-

sibilities on to the States. While it might appear

that it has contracted some commitments in that

sense, the public sector of the Budget has, in fact,

increased. Even in the Budget sector the pro-

portion of gross domestic product, on average, in

the five years of Fraser Government is higher than

on average for the three years of Labor Govern-

ment. Let me cite the figures for all public

authorities. The Fraser Government claims that it

has been responsible for reducing the level of

government. The average for our three years of

government until the end of 1975 was 36 per cent.

The average for five years of Fraserism is nearly

39 per cent. Of course, he works on this principle:

He writes it and he sees it; he says it and he hears

it; therefore it must be real. It is a myth. He be-

lieves in fiction.

Is the public sector all that bad? There are people in this country, literally millions upon millions of them-not just the poor, not just the working class but the middle class-who can never hope to achieve independence and real freedom in this country to experience a decent quality of life unless there is a greater role by government in a range of responsibilities such as health, education, welfare and urban improvement. But not even business can function successfully unless government is there backing it up and supporting it. I talk not just about the obvious regulatory mechanisms necessary for business to function successfully; I am talking also of this so-called mineral development we hear so much of-the boom, as the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) likes to call it. The Minister is a knight of the realm or, if I may quote Dylan Thomas's Under Milk Wood, Squire of Llaregyb. If there is to be this sort of mineral development quite clearly there will have to be infrastructural development, there will have to be better ports, there will have to be better coal handling facilities, there will have to be more power stations and there will have to be better communications such as road transportation and rail transportation. A whole range of these things will have to be provided by the government sector. If there is to be a

Is the public sector innately bad? Let us get a rather rapid growth in the mineral sector there

few facts straight. If a larger public sector is bad will have to be a larger government sector just to

for the economy of the country, why is it that Gerprovide for those things.

many does so consistently well? It does much bet-

ter than this country. Indeed, I seem to recall the The Minister for Industry and Commerce is no

Prime Minister is on record that he wished, as a doubt overwrought by the mineral boom. I notice

great achievement of his period of administration, that he was repudiated by the Australian Mining

he could make the Australian economy as strong Industry Council in the course of this week. Mind

and as resilient as that of West Germany. Very you, this was done very safely well after the elec-

few countries have a level of government spendtion, never before as one would expect from a

ing as a proportion of gross domestic product as cipher such as the Mining Industry Council. But

low as Australia. The mechanical man of the again, is the public sector inherently bad? We

Government whom it winds up every Question heard the Prime Minister's rather strange ap-

Time, the Treasurer is prone to saying that proach to economics. We heard from the

Australia has, by world standards, a low level of Treasurer that qualifications in economics are not

total revenue collections. He will go on to another a necessary requisite for an adviser to him. That is

platform and say that government is too big. He fairly obvious from the mess they have got the

1882 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review of Commonwealth Functions

country into. We have heard the strange economics that the Prime Minister is putting up. I am not sure whether it is Thatcherism, Fraserism, fracture or whatever.
Suddenly economic recovery is getting under I way. Mind you, there are problems because it is . not effectively under control. It is happening
spontaneously in the sense that a number of in~ gredients are now at work in the economy to bring this about. What do honourable members think they are? They are increased government employment, especially at the national level; increased government expenditure resulting from the last Budget; increased real expenditure by 3 per cent; increased wage settlements which the Government opposed and which allow people to go out in the market place and buy more goods and services, get production going and get the economy under way; a building boom on the east coast which may well be squashed out with the. credit squeeze that is coming in now; and increased money supply. These are all of the ingredients, unintentional on the part of the Government, that go to make up post-Keynesianism. Can we imagine it-the Prime Minister, Malcolm Fraser, being a closet post-Keynesian? It is a little like Leonid Brezhnev carrying an American Express credit card whenever he goes overseas.
The Government says that it is necessary to do the things it has outlined today because it wants to transfer commercial functions to the private sector, where the consumer is in control-where there is consumer sovereignty-and the market forces will have free play. That situation has never been believable in Australia. Australia, because of its size in geographic terms and the smallness of its population which is spread sparsely over that area, has been a country where in productive terms there has been a high level of monopoly and oligopoly and all of the abuses that go with that. In those circumstances it is sheer nonsense to talk about market forces working in this country. Does anyone believe that the rural socialists would subscribe to market forces workinganyway?

There is no doubt about it; a small investment in the election funds of the Liberal and National Country parties gives one a handsome return these days. We will never get the Liberal and National Country parties subscribing to public disclosure of the sources of funds to their parties. They have been barikrqlJed, t.hey have been bought out and they have been' totally corrupted, especially by the mining companies in this
country. r will give the House some illustrations of what r mean. I refer to the sell-out of airline ter-
minals. The airline terminals operate profitably. Surely this businessman's government can continue to operate them profitably. Why hand over those profits to the private sector? Why not keep them in the public sector? Handing them over means that the Government will get no more than about 43 per cent at the most as a return in corporate tax. So the Government will get much less. It will have to make up the shortfall with additional revenue somewhere else, have a deficit or cut into public spending. It is just nonsense. Again, selling out airline terminals will confer monopoly rights on the purchasers. We all know of the sorts of rewards which are available from the concessions which are leased in airline terminals-the cafeterias and the various speciality shops that operate there. Airline terminals ought to be a public instrumentality so they can be controlled in the public interest by the public representatives.
I regret that the Government Whip, the honourable member for Bendigo (Mr Bourchier), is not here tonight because some devastating blows have been directed against Bendigo. The Bendigo Ordnance Factory is about to go. I know that the honourable member for Bendigo is not here, otherwise he would be bubbling over like a cheap bottle of uncorked after dinner champagne, which is appropriate at this hour of the night for him.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) -Order!
Mr HAYDEN-The Bendigo Ordnance Factory is about to go.

r will tell the House what the Prime Minister is
doing. He is not trying to oil up the market forces at all; he is conferring monopoly rights On the beneficiaries who will move in and buy up some of the State enterprises which he wants to sell out, which are operating well and which are highly profitable. He is going to neglect social aspects of some of these enterprises. He is going to surrender essential regulatory authority over standards. Many of the things he proposes are just straight out gifts to the people who will buy into them.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will withdraw.
MrHAYDEN-Withdrawwhat? Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman, I have no doubt, is listening--
Mr HAYDEN--What is wrong with saying that a man is vivacious at night time?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will withdraw.

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1883

Mr HAYDEN-I will not waste time by arguing. Yes, 1will, although you are quite wrong. The man is vivacious; that is what it boils down to.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will withdraw. That is not the manner in which he can challenge a ruling of the Chair. .
Mr HAYDENYes, I do. 1withdraw.
Mr Dawkins-Make him come in arid we will prove it.
Mr HAYDENWhat did the honourable member say?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member may continue.
Mr HAYDEN-The Bendigo Ordnance Factory is about to go. It plays a major welfare role in Bendigo. Any private purchaser will close it down and move to another area. So there will be a loss of jobs, a loss of a local business undertaking and it will set back the local economy. Honourable members will notice from the Prime Minister's statement that the local engineering school is about to go. Bendigo will get nothing from regional development programs in the future. [ remind my colleagues who at least will be interested in this that as from the last election we required a swing of only 1.4 per cent to win the seat of Bendigo. The handbook we will be working on in Bendigo is tonight's speech by the Prime Minister. The wool testing laboratory is to go to the private sector. It is making over $lm profit a year. Why hand out this sort of guaranteed return to the private sector when the money can be coming into the Government, as it has been coming into the Government, can add to revenue and can be used for constructive purposes on behalf of this country?
The Australian Government Publishing Service bookshops are about to be handed over to the private sector. The consequence is obvious. There are many publications which are produced from government sources in relation to the official workings of government-inquiries and so on and things associated with this Parliament. These are publications of vital importance to people of specialised interest in the community. It is essential that those people should have easy access to those publications. I go beyond that. If necessary these bookshops should be generously subsidised so that we can disseminate information about how the system of government and how the democratic processes are functioning. The private sector will not be carrying these sorts of publications about which I am talking. The Housing Loans Insurance Corporation is to go to the private sector. It has been outstandingly successful, applauded

by a vast range of private enterprise groups in the home building industry. For instance, in March this year the Housing Industry Association said:
We would submit that now is not the time to sell HUe because: in the absence of Government regulation Hue by its
dominant position in the market place (60% of business) sets prudential standards of management it could lead to a serious reduction in the availability of low deposit loans, particularly
in remote areas Hue has been instrumental in assisting the
development of innovative home ownership lending schemes it would risk major disruption to the housing finance market during a period when claims of all mortgage insurers have been increasing significantly it would close off the possibility
of having Hue develop an Australia-wide secondary mortgage market Hue could playa vital role in enabling funds to
move from surplus areas to capital deficient regions.
If the Government wanted to be creative in the way in which it provided funds for home builders and insurance support for mortgagors and mortgagees and in the way in which it regulated the flow of liquidity at various times in the economy, the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation would be an excellent mechanism for it to take up. I give a firm undertaking that the Labor Government, after 1983, will re-establish it as a public instrumentality. The profitable courier services are being handed over because they are successful as competitors with the private sector. The acoustic services will also be handed over. Only certain stipulated people are able to use the acoustic services of the Federal Health Department. They are largely, but not exclusively, people of moderate means. They will now be forced to go to private sources where, quite frankly, they will be ripped off because the hearing aid industry is one of the big rip-offs in this country.
Mr Carlton-That is not true. You misread the paper.
Mr HAYDEN-Here is the man the people of Australia support! This will be a savage blow against families. I said earlier that the Australian Capital Territory will be stopped dead in its tracks. There will, the Prime Minister announced today, be a reduction of 17,000 jobs in the Public Service. By definition the bulk of them will have to take place in Canberra. Canberra will become an area of massive social distress and little future.
Mr Carlton-Ha, ha.
Mr HAYDEN-I know that unemployment is not of much concern to the honourable member who is giggling. I do not know whether he is giggling because another honourable member has joined him. One of his predecessors who is no longer in the Parliament, the former member for Canberra, said that the unemployment benefit should not be provided for the young unemployed. The implication was that they should be starved back to work or into death and out of the

1884 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

way. That is why the present honourable member for Canberra is with us. The capital works program has been brought to a halt. The Canberra convention centre, the Museum of Australia, the National Library extensions, the Federal Police Headquarters, the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Headquarters and the National Biological Standards Laboratory have been deferred. This means, very simply, that the recovery which was mildly getting under way in Canberra after an extended and deep recession is about to be aborted by government action. Given more than that, the Government's decision is a reflection of a lack of national pride. Many of Canberra's buildings serve a national purpose in inspiring people to visit this city. The Convention centre, the Museum of Australia and the National Library extensions would have been in the same category. To his credit, the late Sir Robert Menzies was very proud of this city. More than anyone else, largely because of the time he had available to him as Prime Minister, he made a very determined effort to develop Canberra and make it a city of which all Australians could be proud and with which visitors from overseas would be enormously impressed. That has all gone by the board.
The Public Service has been made a scapegoat. I pointed out that 17,000 public servants are to lose their jobs as a result of the decisions announced today. Let us use the employment multiplier. We could use the Viner employment multiplier, which is about 10, depending on the temperature of the day but we will use a more realistic one of three. Seventeen thousand multiplied by three means that well over 50,000 will be unemployed with multiplying effects. The total effect is that close to 1 per cent of the workforce will become unemployed because of the Government's decisions tonight. This review is a policy for more unemployment. The consequences are contrary to what the Prime Minister has said. Standards will slide. Let me quote from the March 1981 report of the Auditor-General. A number of statements in that report ought to be put on the record because they effectively rebut the claim of the Prime Minister that we can give the Public Service more work and fewer people and it will be more efficient. In relation to the Administrative Services Department the Auditor General's report stated:
It is a matter for concern that, at the time of the audit, claims examinations were significantly in arrears, the backlog being estimated at approximately lOman-years . . . the arrears in the Financial Services Section have resulted from staffshortages in that area:
In relation to the Department of Finance the report stated:

Seventy-four expenditure statements and audit certificates received pursuant to development programs and projects had not been examined at the time of audit . . . Approximately 80% of these statements had been held by the Department for longer than 6 months . . . The number of unexamined statements has resulted from staff shortages over the last 18 months.
In relation to the Health Department the report stated:
In January 1981 Audit made further representations to the Department of Health on the need for early introduction of a system to validate pensioner health benefit numbers quoted on claims.
I ask honourable members to listen to the following statement:
Concern was expressed at the lack of such a system in view of the significant expenditure involved.
We are talking about very large sums of money amounting to many millions of dollars. The report continued:
The Department recently advised arrangements had now been made to obtain information from the Department of Social Security to provide sufficient details to validate these numbers but because of priority commitments on that Department's staff resources the information may not be available until at least mid-1981.
On the Department of Home Affairs and Environment the report stated:
Measures taken to reduce the backlog in clearing 'openperiod' records include setting priorities for records to be examined; undertaking appraisal, rather than detailed examination, where this can be done safely; and recruiting additional staff when ceilings and other priorities permit. .
What a forlorn hope. What that nails is the lie of the claim of those on the Government side who say that fewer Public Service staff members can turn out more work. I repeat that with the sorts of demands building up through mineral development and a range of other undertakings in the community there will be a need for more, not fewer, members of staff in the Public Service. Let us look at how the Government's policy on staff ceilings in the Public Service affects people. I refer to a letter to Sir William Cole, the Chairman of the Public Service Board, in November last year from the office of the Secretary to the Department of Transport. I shall not quote the whole letter. It states:
I am concerned that the Department will be unable to undertake the Government's directives on these matters--
the letter refers to the new domestic aircraft-
if the additional staff are not forthcoming, and the Government should be advised accordingly . . . you indicated that the Prime Minister had asked why the various programs and activities of this Department could not continue to be performed within the end-September staffing figure by redeploying staff from lower priority areas or by dropping or winding down existing functions.
You will be aware that the bulk of the Department's staff is employed in ensurig the safe and efficient operation and maintenance of Australia's air services and to a lesser extent in the

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1885

support and safety aspects of shipping services. It is not possible to reduce the staff levels -at present involved in these facets of the Department's work; on the contrary it is essential that numbers are increased to cater for the growth and new developments in transport activity.

steamed through the Parliament last year its disallowance of Determination No. 503 in a most despicable and unprincipled way. Some 17.000 public servants can now be retired. redeployed or

whatever as a consequence of that action. J put it The letter indicates many of the more serious to the Government that this is unnecessarily proproblems which will arise. It states that the consevocative and undoubtedly will lead to industrial

quences from staff shortages wilf be, amongst other things, 'degradation in policy advice areas'. The letter continues:

disruption of an undesirable dimension. There are some interesting facets, however.
about Public Service cuts. The cuts have been

I should also point out that any wind-down in services proquite severe. They have been applied for a few

vided in the air and marine operations areas would have impliyears. We have been told that they have been ap-

cations for the cost recovery program. This would almost certainly lead to industry complaints of service reductions and probable calls for reduced fees and charges.

plied across the board. Yet if one reads the relevant statistical sources one discovers that the Department of the Treasury. the Department of the

The most alarming aspect is that air safety is being Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Public Ser-

imperilled because of staff reductions. The vice Board have been able to increase their staff at honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) a. time when the number of jobs available in the

has pointed out on many occasions how navigaPublic Service will be reduced by 10,000. The De-

tional aids go out of operation and remain out of partment of the Prime Minister and Cabinet has

operation for extended periods because of staff increased its staff by 17 per cent. Treasury by 10

cutbacks. All the Government is doing is destroyper cent. and the Public Service Board by 5 per

ing the pride of a decent part of the Australian cent to preside over a reduced staffing level in the work force and the career service they chose. Public Service. So we have the Treasury, the De-

They will suffer a loss of esteem because they are partment of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and

constantly being imputed as parasites by this the Public Service Board as a sort of land of lotus Government when in fact their contribution is an eaters in the Public Service.

extraordinarily important and productive one for Other departments are not so fortunate. They

our society.

are the key departments. I refer to the Depart-

There was an interesting but nonetheless highly relevant diversion in this Parliament last year when we debated the decision of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission concerning Determination No. 503. I need spell out no more than that. Determination No. 503 relates to the Commonwealth Employment (Redeployment and Retirement) Act. The Public Service successfully fought the Government's efforts to apply an interpretation on that associated matter in the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. One of the aspects of it was that if work was going outside the Public Service on contract there should be no retrenchments. The decision of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission was, inter alia, this: Before any stand downs could take place the following had to happen:

ment of Social Security and the Commonwealth Employment Office. I notice that in the later statement of the Prime Minister. Treasury and the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet escape unscathed again. The Department of Primary Industry, of course, has to bear some of the burden. It will lose, but lose only, the Plague Locust Commission. Such is the power of the Deputy Prime Minister ~Mr Anthony).
I turn now to education. Some 30 colleges of advanced education are to disappear as entities. They will disappear completely. At the same time, the Prime Minister will preserve the College of Advanced Education at Warrnambool, despite the fact that the Partridge report in Victoria recommended that it should close. In the electorate of the Deputy Prime Minister and Leader of the National Country Party-we all know after the

(6) Discussions shall take place on measures to avoid the disclosures of the honourable member for

need for the declaration of officers or employees including, where appropriate:

Kooyong (Mr Peacock) how powerful the National Country Party is-the Northern Rivers

College of Advanced Education will be kept open.

(d) reviewing the extent of outside contracting work carried on for a Department;

It has an enrolment of no more than about 100 students-a level much lower than 22 of the 30

colleges which are to be closed. The Prime Minis-

What is the significance of that? It is simply that ter is determined that the Casey University-the

what the Government has proposed could not Australian Defence Force Academy will survive.

have been proposed unless the Government had A white elephant that will cost $70m is to play up

1886 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

to the Prime Minister's sense of personal conceit. The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works has rejected it. In its report it stated:
There is no clear evidence that the training of cadets of all Services in a common establishment would of itself provide any improvement of the quality of officers.
It pointed out how existing institutions, at a time when there are clearly too many tertiary institutions, can do this job satisfactorily. The Prime Minister is determined to have one monument to his everlasting glory. After all, he had to accept that the electrification of the railway line between Sydney and Melbourne would be cancelled. What was dearest to his heart could not be achievedthat he would go down in history as the man who had the trains runningcon time.
We have the first instalment of fees being introduced at tertiary institutions. The principle of free tertiary education has now been breached. This will be to the disadvantage of the less well-off in the community. I do not mean the poor; I mean the middle class, the people of modest income. They will have as much trouble as any other group. In education there will be a contraction of the functions of the Schools Commission and a handover of those functions to the States, with all the unevenness of response that will result. In some cases the response will be alacrity and in others indifference to the needs of the most important resource we have in this community-cour young children.
I want to make it clear that the Opposition's approach to education is vastly different from that of the Government. It is not just a matter of producing inputs for industry; it is a matter of developing rounded minds of creative, questioning intellects, of having people who can contribute broadly in the community, not just in the work force but in their recreational associations and in their creative interests; people who can question the system under which we live and ask questions about how it can be improved. All the Government wants is docile hands to pull the plungers and the levers in the work force. What will happen with the restrictions is that the efforts of the Schools Commission to try to bring about equality of resources nationally within the education system will not be achieved. Can honourable members imagine a backwoods man like Sir Charles Court or Mr Bjelke-Petersen being committed to high standards or better quality in our educational system? Mr Bjelke-Petersen is a very rich man and he thinks everyone would be if they had the same acumen as he has. After all, he went into the State Parliament a man of modest means and he became rich in a very short time. The Curriculum Development Centre will go, so the effort

to get some sort of uniformity in curriculums is not on.
Sir Phillip Lynch-Curricula.
Mr HAYDEN-J must say the Squire of Llaregyb has turned up. Public school education always gives one a sort of Latin finish, does it not? I will stick with 'curriculums'; it sounds good Anglo-Saxonism to me. Restrictions on government school building funds will have a severe effect on the quality of the buildings available for education for our children and in which our teachers have to work. They are entitled to decent industrial conditions. Since 1975 there has been a 35 per cent reduction in those funds in real terms; that is, $134m as against $4m for the private schools in real terms. Nearly all of that has been in the catholic parochial schools. The tertiary education assistance allowance is not to be increased. It is now $8 a week less in real terms than it was five years ago. The Government proposes to introduce prime and tougher means testing conditions so that fewer people will draw the benefits.
The Prices Justification Tribunal is to be abolished. The Government surrenders effective regulatory mechanisms in terms of the pricing system of this country. It does so at a time when clearly inflation is breaking out again from an already too high level. The justification of the Government is that the PJT has outlived its usefulness and it has made no significant impact on inflation. The only reason for that is that it has been choked to death by a series of decisions of the Government. Every year in the annual report of the Tribunal we see evidence of the savings to this community in price increases forgone because of its surveillance and in price reductions. In 1973-74 when the PJT started off-it started off with support and, therefore, with confidence and conviction that it could do a job-it said this:
. . . the 12.2 per cent of price notices which were reduced after public inquiries or negotiations amounted to a total saving, on an annual basis of about $253m.
Do not tell me it cannot do an effective job. A more recent report issued in 1978 stated:
. . . 2244 notices of proposed higher prices; 455 of these notices were either withdrawn or resulted in lower-thanproposed price increases following examination by the Tribunal; . . .
It can work, if it is given support. We need that sort of regulatory mechanism in an economy like ours which is so highly concentrated. One need only look at the statistics. The largest one per cent of manufacturing firms in this country employ 30 per cent of the work force; the largest four per cent employ over 50 per cent of the work force.

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1887

That is evidence of concentration-clear eviIf one listened to the way the Prime Minister

dence, on the face of it, of the high level of monpresented the situation in his account today, as

opoly and oligopoly. Look at income levels. The distinct from looking at the implications in the

top six per cent of companies earn 80 per cent of appendices attached to his speech which were cir-

the taxable income. Clearly, on the face of that culated later, one would have thought it was fairly

sort of evidence, we have a very highly fierce stuff. However, the appendices show the

monopolised and oligopolised economy. ThereGovernment is striking business with a velvet

fore, we need mechanisms to regulate them to glove. The investment allowance will be reduced

protect the consumers. Market forces and confrom 20 per cent to 18 per cent-a tiny change.

sumer sovereignty are just sheer fantasy. There The depreciation loading will go down from 20

has to be government intervention to protect the per cent to 18 per cent-again a tiny change.

people.

However, I confess that it is significant for its sym-

We now face a situation in which there is a fresh outbreak of inflation. Unemployment is climbing and interest rates are up and will go higher. It will be a long time before they come down. The sort of reaction we expect from the Government will result in an aborting of the economic recovery which is now beginning to show. One of the essential ingredients to economic management in the forthcoming period is some good old fashioned but thoroughly workable postKeynesian economic principles, plus a prices-

bolism because the level to be changed was introduced in the last Budget, only a few months ago, and already it has been hacked back, like so many promises. The capital expenditure write-off for mineral and oil field development has been reduced from six years to five years, and the petroleum shareholding rebate is to go down from 30 per cent to 27 per cent. The full write-off conversion from oil-fired plant is now to be calculated over two years instead of one year. They are tough measures.

incomes policy. If we do not have an effective Is government treated toughly? We hear that

prices-incomes policy we can write off the whole we need more independence, enterprise, resource-

.exercise. We cannot expect to have an effective fulness and initiative in this country because that

prices-incomes policy when the trade union moveis the sort of thing on which private enterprise is

ment and the professional associations stand back based. The report of the Myers Inquiry into Un-

and see that they will be subjected to the surveilemployment Benefit Policy and Administration

lance of the Industrial Relations Bureau, a gilded shows that tax concessions for business in 1979-80

drone that cost $12m and has produced nothing. cost taxpayers $3,500m. Budget allocations to

There has been a 70 per cent Increase in its work business this year totalled $825m. There is no

force while the work force of other departments doubt about it, if one is resourceful and has initiat-

has been reduced. The trade union movement will ive, one can get a lot of help. The protection trans-

stand back and see that it is subjected to that surfer from consumers to producers will cost about

veillance but that business is no longer subjected $5,500m this year. So we are talking about sup-

to a proper price overview-and we will not get port, directly and indirectly, for business in this

an effective prices-incomes policy. It is as simple country of the order of more than $lO,OOOm this

as that. This is the government that believes in year, or $1 in every $7 that consumers spend. That

equality in the sharing of the burden of sacrifice. is the sort of burden they have to bear to keep pri-

That is why the Olympic athletes were not alvate enterprise going. I resent the talk about the

lowed to go to Moscow but the wool and the bludgers on social welfare handouts when I see

wheat were!

that sort of thing. I do not condemn it in all re-

We see the same thing in relation to business. Tough measures have been taken against the people. Many welfare benefits have disappeared and there has been a reduction in Aboriginal wel-

gards; in many respects it is important. But, it does evidence the preferential way in which this Government goes about distributing the burden of sacrifice.

fare spending all at a time of serious ill-health I want to mention a few small things, including

amongst Aborigines. There are health, housing the contracting out proposal and construction de-

and employment problems as well as the general sign work. The arrangements, resources and staff

needs of the urban community. Poverty in are already there but hiring them out to the pri-

Australia, one of the wealthiest nations in the vate sector will lead to increased, pumped up

world, has doubled to include nearly two million prices. Legal and accounting work will go out to

people in five years of Fraserism. Look at all the the private sector. It has been shown by the report

sacrifices hurled in that direction. One would of the poverty inquiry of a few years ago, which

expect some equality, some tough measures in redealt also with legal matters, and more recently by

lation to business.

the Law Reform Commission, that work done by

1888 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review o/Commonwealth Functions

lawyers in the private sector is two to three times dearer than work done in the public sector. How the hell does the Government think it will save money there? It is quite obvious that there is a bit of pork-barrelling going on here. Government printing will go out to the private sector, although we have a printery already which is capable of meeting our needs.
Research and development for departments
such as the Department of Defence 'mIl go out to
the private sector, in some cases to universities. But they will not get any extra money. How will they do it? I ask myself how much of this will stay in Australia anyway. The export expansion grants are to be reduced at a time when export volumes are down 12 per cent, when the Australian dollar is revaluing and therefore disadvantaging the competitiveness of Australian industry and when there is a depressed world economic market. I accept the views of the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) when he points out that there are better ways to promote trade than to do this, but the Government is not proposing to seek better ways. It proposes just to save money at a time when exports are going down, when the current account is in a very sick condition and internationally there are not very encouraging prospects.
There will be a review of the functions of Telecom Australia to see whether they can be more efficiently performed by private enterprise. This is interesting because the Government already has the McKinsey report on Telecom, the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) has announced the King inquiry and the Prime Minister, to maintain his standard as outlined by the honourable member for Kooyong this week, has announced a third inquiry running over the top of the rest. I do not think the members of the Ministry ever talk to each other. When one looks at and hears them, one does not blame them. Where does the Deputy Prime Minister stand in relation to the proposal that Telecom ought to be dismembered, with the profitable parts going out to the private sector? I ask the Deputy Prime Minister that because the cost of uneconomic services provided by Telecom, very largely to the rural area, is $23Om. So there is a hidden cross-subsidy taking place within the overall operations of Telecom. These rural socialists might not impress us as being very bright, but they know how to get the redistributional process going. Will they stand by while that happens? If this takes place and if the loss-making areas are left with the public instrumentality, where will the Government get the money?
We heard about health last night. There has been a shuffle on the balance sheets, and we will

all end up paying more. A total of 80 per cent of medical treatment is doctor-initiated, according to the report of the Jamison Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals. The proposals the House had put before it last night will provoke over-utilisation by doctors and encourage over-resort to medical treatment by the public. The Government is. promoting. a headlong rUsh into the American-type of health mess. Like the Bourbons, this Government knows' nothing and it learns nothing, because these are the very ingredients of the debate which took place in this country in the 1960s and early 1970s leading up to the establishment of Medibank.
There have been remarkable reforms in the employment area. The Government is to change the statistical system again. It has changed it already on a number of occasions. It had seasonally adjusted unemployment statistics but found them embarrassing because they were higher than the Government wanted. So, how did it reform them? They were eliminated. I imagine that was a good Stalinist measure. It then had statistics for wage and salary earners in employment. The Government wiped them out in April 1980 because they showed a lower level in the civilian work force than the figure it preferred. That comes from the labour force survey, which is still published. Mind you, if honourable members do not mind my getting into a catch-22 situation, the statistics for both wage and salary earners in employment, which are not published any more, and the labour force series are collected and collated. The labour force series statistics, according to the Australian Statistician, are unreliable. The reliable ones, therefore were gotten rid of. The Government now intends to get rid of the Commonwealth Employment Service statistics because they are embarrassing. They show a higher level of unemployment than the Government is prepared to acknowledge. The Government did not acknowledge that if these cuts go across the board there will be something like a 10 per cent cut in the work force in the Commonwealth Employment Service. Let us hear that spelt out.
I now refer to Aboriginal affairs. What sort of commitment of conscience do Liberals have for our black Australians? Housing is a grim area of deprivation. Housing funds will be sent across to the States and general housing allocations will be made. We know what will happen in the two most racist States of the Commonwealth-Queensland and Western Australia. The housing needs of the Aboriginals will be absorbed, neglected and they will disappear. The Sacred Rights Protection Authority in the Northern Territory will be

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1889

handed across to the Northern Territory GovernThe Government says it will save $560m in a full

ment. That Government is in the pocket of the year. Do honourable members know what that is?

mining companies. We know how much will be At the most it is 0.4 per cent of gross domestic

sacred there.

product. In 1980-81 public authorities spending

I turn to the Industrial Relations Bureau, the gilded drone which I referred to earlier. Well, Andrew Peacock goes and the IRB stays! It is as simple as that. The Prime Minister has made it hallowed ground. The IRB cost $12m and it has had a 77 per cent increase in its work force. I said before that the increase was 70 per cent, but it was 77 per cent. Other departments of more iinportance, which were at least productive, have had their staff cut back. The translating and interpreting services of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs will be disposed of. That will create inefficiencies in departments which require highly sensitive matters to be

was 38.8 per cent-nearly 39 per cent-of gross domestic product as against an average of about 36 per cent for all public authorities betwen 1972 and 1975. That will bring the spending down to 38.4 per cent at the most. That will hardly put a dint in it. What is the Prime Minister about? It has nothing to do with smaller government. The evidence shows that he believes in big government for his big and powerful friends in the corporate sector. He makes it tough for ordinary people. This is just a sell-out. It is a camouflage for the sell-out to the friends who have been supporting him. There is much straining for so little saving, but it has nasty effects where it is directed.

interpreted, such as the Department of Defence. Let me make some further observations. Last

It will mean higher costs for government. It will September the Prime Minister told us in his usual

mean less satisfactory work because the evidence pedestrian fashion why we should be optimistic

is that outside translation services have not been about the future. He claimed that his Govern-

as good. It will mean delays and added costs for ment was responsible for 'a new spirit, a new en-

migrants seeking work in relation to qualificathusiasm, a new dynamism at work in Australia'.

tions, birth certificates and other necessary cerWell, it was not the Minister for Industry and

tificates. The cut backs in the Telephone InCommerce who is over there. The Prime Minister

terpreter Service are further evidence of the went on:

disregard of this Government for the migrants of We are entitled to be confident of our capacity to march

the community.

through the decade ahead at a pace better than almost any

The Government has stopped nowhere. It has other nation.

even got into the petty cash box. It intends to sell Of course, an election campaign was just begin-

out the numismatic coin marketing area to the ning then. Today, after weeks of straining by the

private sector. That function was particularly Lynch committee, the Prime Minister has given us

profitable. The recent issue of the $200 gold coin a different view altogether. It is the view of a

was fetching a premium of $310. Why pass that narrow-minded and miserable government, con-

over to the private sector? The responsibility for temptuous of the people and sympathetic only to

the safeguards of uranium is to be passed to the its friends. The Prime Minister congratulated the

States. That is like giving a blowtorch to a pyroLynch committee for the work that it had done. In

maniac for a plaything. The Opposition will the view of the Opposition, and the great majority

totally oppose that. It is my considered opinion, of the Australian people, in only one sense does

on the advice I have been given, that this is most the committee deserve congratulations. It has

likely in contravention of the Treaty on the Nondemonstrated beyond the call of duty how blind,

proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the agreemean-spirited and gutless this Government really

ment which Australia has with the International is. Ten years ago a former Liberal Prime Minister

Atomic Energy Agency for the application of was forced to scrabble through his filing cabinet

safeguards in connection with the Treaty on the for help when he was asked for his vision of

Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

Australia. The prospect shown to us today is no

Having said all that, what has been achieved by more encouraging and no less humiliating.

the Government is a saving of $560m. The We had an hour of words from the Prime Min-

Government is particularly coy at not giving deister adding up to no more than a sell-out list of

tails as to how this saving is calculated. What are cut price specials and ignominious retreat from re-

the constituent parts and how were they arrived sponsibility. The Government has shown by this

at? We are always hearing: 'How much will it cost program that it wants us to relapse into a series of

the Australian Labor Party? Where will it get the separate provinces, each with its own place, its

money from?' I would ask the Treasurer the same own parochial interests, and its own priorities.

question. He nods his head. That is all he can do This comes at a time of economic and other social

because he has not been wound up enough yet. challenges which demand rational action and

1890 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

national initiative. The Government wants to strip from the people the services that support them at a time of economic strain that demands they be treated with compassion and sensitivity. Only recently we have learned to prepare for the great and rapid changes taking place in the skills that our children need, the way they will work, and the way they will spend their leisure time. Yet this Government demands that the investment needed to prepare for these changes be reduced and, in places, abolished.
It is absolutely imperitive that we understand and prepare for the great transitions ahead in science and technology and their impact on all our lives. Yet the Government has dismembered the Department of Science and Technology and what was left last year of the Department of Productivity. There is much more on this list of mean and petty decisions which, in conjunction with the proposed new arrangements for health care, bespeak mean and petty minds. They are not Friedmanites on the Government benches; they are Luddites. The program put before us today by the Prime Minister, if not quickly arrested, will put this nation back years. The next Labor Government will, therefore, have as its first priority after the 1983 election the task of restoring the com. munity from the inevitable effects of these de- -'cisions. In the knowledge that the States alone cannot mount and sustain national programs for better education, health services, transport and the like, we will restore the national Government's proper role in developing and coordinating initiatives in these areas with the States. We fully acknowledge that there is a proper place and role for efficient and profitable state-run enterprises. After 1983 we will restore to the care of the people those concerns which this Government intends to sell off to private interests and which we deem essential to be maintained in the public sector.

myopic outlook shown by this program is absolutely at odds, altogether out of step, with this national pride and promise. That is why we on this side of the House totally oppose the program drawn up by the Government and why we deplore the miserable attitude responsible for it.
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH (Flinders-Minister for Industry and Commerce) (9.1)-Every time. I hear the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) speak I am encouraged by the prospects of the next general election., It is not really a matter for me tonight to appear to have any perception of meanness. No doubt there is not a great number of people listening to this debate at this hour and the galleries are not as filled as they were during the earlier part of this debate. But can I share a confidence with you, Mr Deputy Speaker, and those honourable members who are in the House? Why is it that the Leader of the Opposition can come into this House again this week with such a pathetic presentation? 1 am not sure that the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) entirely shares the concern of some honourable members opposite. When 1 sit in this House in a casual and quietly relaxed frame of mind and watch the Leader of the Opposition, who obviously is very nervous and very uptight, assume the ferret-type character that has become a part of him in recent years, I ask myself for how long the front and back benchers of the Australian Labor Party will remain with the Leader of the Opposition. Again in a very relaxed frame of mind tonight I heard the Leader of the Opposition declare that this review of the Commonwealth functions shows gutless government. When 1 first heard that phrase I thought to myself how monumentally inappropriate it was for the honourable gentleman to use that phrase in this House. As I recall-the honourable member for Wills mayor may not wish to recall it-Geoff Duncan, reporting on the program PM on 18 July 1979 said:

In the realisation that the nation must be ready for the profound change which is on the way we will reinvest the people's energy and resources in scientific and technological research and development. Above all, we will work to restore our sense of national identity and pride, which will be so battered by the regressive proposals put to the House today. The Australian people have an intense feeling for their country-a vigorous sense of pride in what has been achieved and what is
possible to achieve after 80 years as one nation. We have attracted and we still attract new settlers from every other continent. We speak in international forums as a sane and influential community. We rejoice in the economic and social
potential of our country. The conservative and

In an extraordinary outburst . . . Mr Hawke

launched into a vitriolic attack on Mr Hayden, denigrating

him because he didn't have the guts to stand up against the

Party's Left-wing.

'

I recall also the Australian Associated Press report of 19 July 1979-1 dignify the honourable member for Wills's apparent statement of that
type-which is stated:

Mr Hawke told delegates outside the Conference on Tuesday night that he regarded Mr Hayden as 'gutless' and that he no longer had any regard for him.

I could refer to many other statements that have been'made. I really do qot want to dignify a debate of this type with thos'e references.

Mr Barry J ones-Mr Deputy Speaker, 1take a point of order. I think the House deserves better

ReviewojCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1891

than this. This really has nothing whatever to do with the report. Mr Deputy Speaker, I ask you to direct the Minister for Industry and Commerce to return to the subject of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiI1ar)- Order! The ~right honourable gentleman no doubt has completed his introductory remarks. I ask him to be relevant to the question before the House.
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-Let us concentrate on the fundamental issues which are the subject of dialogue tonight. In fact what the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has exposed in the House in the course of this day is really the fundamental dichotomy, the difference, the void, which exists between the philosophies, the practices and policies of the Opposition and the Government. I welcome opportunity to involve myself directly in this debate. In 1975 and at every election since 1975 the Australian people have indicated a total reluctance and opposition to accepting the Labor Party alternative to the philosophies and the policies which have been so inimitably outlined and evidenced by the Prime Minister in the course of this debate today. The Review of Commonwealth functions, contrary to what the Leader of the Opposition has asserted in this debate, has in fact sought to achieve and, I believe, has achieved the restoration of national assets to the Australian people.
Mr Holding-To your mates who have been slinging to you for years.
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-Can the honourable gentleman contain himself for a moment? I accept that you can mount--
Mr Holding-We know what you are about.
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH--The honourable gentleman can mount on his own in the privacy of his own mind.
Mr Holding-Don't talk about assets. You know about assets.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Melbourne Ports will remain silent.
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH---Mr Deputy Speaker, the honourable gentleman and his colleagues can mount, as the Australian people are very much aware, a case for regulation, for big government, for more diversified and additional government resources and a larger private sector and all the taxation imposts and burdens that go with that proposition. I accept that that case can be mounted. That is a proposition that the Liberal and National Country parties reject without qualification.

The Leader of the Opposition referred to national resources. Under the policies and philosophy of this Government no more will these assets and resources be absorbed by the insatiable demands of that form of faceless bureaucracy which characterised the Labor Party's Administration from 1972 to 1975. The Leader of the Opposition, as a member of the Labor Administration of that time, as the gallery of this House would be very much aware, witnessed and condoned a massive increase in the size of the public sector, the unfettered spread of regulation throughout all the sectors and the dimensions of Australian industry and, at the same time, the destruction of business and community confidence. While the honourable gentleman remains in his present chair he will be a constant reminder of those years because he is a regulator and he is the man of big business. He is the high taxation man and the preserver of resources in the public sector. Those honourable members who sit behind him at present, as unhappily the honourable member for Wills does, must of course be prepared to be counted in that form of dialogue.
Honourable members of this side of the House welcome the debate. We very much appreciate what the Prime Minister has brought down. If this debate proves anything, if it puts anything on the table of this Parliament tonight it is that fundamental dilemma between the policies which the Opposition has practised before and which have been found wanting. It is that dilemma between the centralisation of power or the devolution of authority. It is the choice between a large or a small government. It is a choice between a larger bureaucracy or a centralisation of power and the opportunities of private citizens to grow and to be self-reliant and strong. This Government rejects any suggestion of big government or higher taxation or the tyranny of those regulations which characterised the Labor Party in past years. I believe the alternatives in this debate are very clear. We reject utterly and categorically that philosophy proposed by the Leader of the Opposition tonight. The Australian Labor Party has always been a paternalistic party. Its attitude is bureaucratic and it is sadly out of touch with the social moves and the sense of reality which characterise the Australian community at present.
This Government is determined to seek taxation reduction, to seek a continuing attack on the war against inflation, to put scarce resources where they are the most needed and to seek the raising of real wages. This can be done only by the reduction of public sector spending and not by the soft options which the Leader of the Opposition has sought to propose in this debate. Let me say

1892 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

that this Government, representing the Liberal and National Country parties, is determined to ensure by the review statement made by the Prime Minister this afternoon that bureaucratic government duplication and waste is eliminated and that the taxpayer gets maximum value for his tax dollar. This is a government with a consistent philosophy, policy and practice that is committed to achieving small, efficient government to allow private enterprise freedom to grow and develop, to take the initiative in Australia's economic future and to allow individual Australians the right to determine what they do with their earnings.
I believe the area of big government-certainly this is so if one thinks back to 1972-75-has been seen and found wanting. Now new directions are required in Australia. They have been taken by the coalition parties of this Government. No other government has been more consistent in moving away from the juggernaut of the Whitlam years towards a government that seeks to place emphasis first upon the recognition of the individual. The report handed down by the Prime Minister surely is a major step in that direction. It is the first step in the continuing operation of the Committee of Review and, with the full support of the members of the Liberal and Country parties, that step taken today will be seen to be massive in what it can do for Australia during the years and the decades ahead.
It is patently clear that the advocates of big government, of course, take a paternalistic attitude to their fellow Australians. We recall the devastation, the destruction, of business and community confidence during the Labor years-the increase in inflation, a massive upward movement in the number of those unemployed and the large number of businesses, large and small, that were forced to the wall. Our commitment to small government has been a consistent reflection of our liberal philosophy. The benefits of this commitment are now a matter of record. That record, I would have thought, would be very clear to the House indeed.
I am sure that both sides of this Parliament are very much aware of what steps have been sought by the Committee of Review. I might say that some of the recommendations which have been brought down will not bear a sense of enchantment into some areas of the business community. But the Prime Minister and senior Ministers of the Government, I am sure fully supported by the private members, are saying to the business community that no sector of this country at the present time can be quarantined from the reality of a review of this type. I will be perfectly happy

to put to the business community and the manufacturing sector, as my colleague the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) will be putting to the mining sector and my colleague, the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) will be putting to the primary industry sector, that all of these areas of business should properly be the subject of the application of the policies which are the subject of the statement brought down today by the Prime Minister.
These will open up very significant opportunities for private enterprise in Australia. That is what this debate is all about. Our responsibility as a government is to restore confidence and stability to the Australian community. This review is a significant and a very important step in that direction. It is a move away from the tyranny of big government, a move in favour of a restoration of individual initiative and endeavour. All members on this side of the House support the statement which has been made by the Prime Minister. It isa very significant step forward for Australia and, as such, it commends the attention, the support and the endorsement of all honourable gentlemen.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (9.16)-The Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Lynch) seems to think that it is his role in this House to denigrate the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). Let me say that the Leader of the Opposition would buy and sell the Minister before breakfast. The Minister started off by talking about a pathetic presentation; he certainly lived up to his own description because his speech was certainly a pathetic presentation, particularly from one who chaired the so-called razor gang and who presumably is more acquainted with its dealings and its supposed rationale than any other honourable member. Yet he gave us precious little idea of what really lay behind the statement other than the fact that it was based on absolute ideology, which of course it is. It was not a statement about economic rationality. It was a statement about Liberal Party and, presumably, National Country Party ideology. It was about ideology, not rationality.
The Minister for Industry and Commerce also talked about the tax impost and the burden under the Labor Government. Let me say again, as the Minister well knows, that this Government is the highest tax government in our history. Never before have taxes been as high a proportion of the gross domestic product as they are at the present time. It is not for the Minister to start casting aspersions on the Labor Government with regard to taxation because this Government is the highest tax government in our history. It has imposed the highest interest rates in our history. We have the

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1893

highest actual number of unemployed in our history under this Government. This Government has precious little to boast about in relation to the economic management of this country.
Let me firstly make a point clear before] deal with the statement in more detail. That point is that Labor does not support waste and inefficiency in the Public Service or in government enterprise generally, nor does it support the continuance of programs which have outlived their usefulness. We proved this in office. In 1973 one of the first acts of the Labor Government was to establish a review of the previous Government's program. Many members opposite did not like it when that review was completed and the Labor Government sought to implement various of those recommendations. But it was an effective review of the programs of the previous Government. It sought to cull out areas of inefficiency in government expenditure and in taxation. We also established the Royal Commission on Australian Government Administration-a very important decision indeed-which royal commission brought down very important findings which this Government has largely ignored. Those findings were very much about the efficient operation of the Australian Public Service.
We also supported the establishment of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure and we have co-operated fully with the Expenditure Committee in its activities. We believe that that is a worthwhile activity to be pursued. We also supported the introduction of efficiency audits. Efficiency audits are in a pilot stage but they are an important development, one which we applauded and one with which we would certainly continue in office. Indeed, we would take it past the efficiency audit stage, which is an audit not of the finances of government departments but of the efficiency with which they carry out their operations, to the next stage, which is a program evaluation review which ensures that programs which set out to achieve a certain purpose are, in fact, achieving that pur~ pose. So, our credentials in this area are clear.
We are certainly against waste and inefficiency in the Public Service and in the government sector in general. We have sought when in government and in Opposition to get rid of inefficiency and wastefulness. But we cannot support what is being done now by this Government because what has been brought down today by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is an exercise not in increasing the efficiency of the public sector but rather in dismembering the public sector.

The rationale for this dismemberment is based on several completely unsubstantiated and totally false assumptions. Those assumptions are: Firstly, that the public sector is too large and inefficient; secondly, that the market is the most efficient allocator of resources, so regulation is absolutely unwarranted; thirdly, that the private sector is more efficient than the public sector; and fourthly, that cutting the public sector is necessary to obtain tax reductions. Those are the four assumptions on which this enormously long statement made today by the Prime Minister was based.
Let me refer in some detail to those four assumptions. The first one is about the public sector being too large and inefficient. It is a fact that we have one of the smallest public sectors of any country in the Western developed world. The only countries that have public sectors of the same size as ours are those economic dynamos such as Spain and Greece-the poor men of Europe. The rich countries of Europe have much bigger public sectors than we do. in many cases they are wealthier countries, in terms of the income produced per head, than we are. Certainly having a larger public sector does not seem to destroy their ability to create a decent standard of living for their people. So it is absurd to suggest that the public sector in Australia is so large by comparison with other countries that it must be cut back so it will not inhibit the future growth of our economy. There is nothing in international comparisons to demonstrate that our public sector is too large. Certainly it cannot be argued that a large public sector is inhibiting Australia's economic growth.
There has never been big government in Australia. The Prime Minister said that we have had only a short taste of big government and that was when the Australian Labor Party was in office. That is an absolutely absurd statement. Taking public expenditure as a proportion of the gross domestic product, as a test of big government, we did not have big government because when Labor was in office we had virtually the smallest public sector of any economy in the Western world. So how can the Government say that under Labor we had big government? There must have been enormous government in the developed world if we had big government under Labor. We had one of the smallest public sectors of any of the developed countries in the Western world. To say that Labor gave us big government, is an absolute nonsense and an absolute falsehood.

1894 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

There is no evidence that the public sector is crowding out the private sector, as the Government claims. Time and again in the Prime Minister's statement we heard this talk about crowding out. The Government says that the public sector is too large and there is no room for the private sector to grow and really do its thing. What is the evidence for that? None is given in the Prime Minister's statement. The pathetic performance of the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) gave us no inkling of this. So far there is no evidence whatever. I challenge future speakers in this debate on the Government side to give us one skerrick of evidence that there is any crowding out of the private sector by the public sector in Australia at present, either physically or financially. The statement of the Prime Minister implies that it is both. How can one say that the private sector is being physically squeezed out by the public sector in Australia when we have half a million unemployed. The Government cannot tell us that we cannot get any workers. There might be some problem on the margin about skilled workers but that is because this Government did not do enough about making sure there was an adequate supply of skilled labour. It is absurd to use that as an excuse to start cutting back on the public sector.
Also there is still a large unused capacity in industry. How can the Government talk about the physical crowding out of the private sector by the public sector when there is a whole lot of unused capacity in our manufacturing and other industries. Where is the evidence of the financial crowding out? Where is the evidence that the public sector is financially crowding out the private sector by increasing interest rates? The fact is that public sector capital expenditure has fallen by 8 per cent in real terms since 1975-76. The real level of capital expenditure by Government is much less now than it was when Labor was in office, including all the infrastructure projects. The public sector borrowing requirement peaked in 1978-79 at 5.6 per cent. It is now down to around 3.5 per cent. If the public sector borrowing requirement is so important in causing high interest rates and increasing inflation, which the Government suggests, and crowdL 19 out the public sector, why did the highest public sector borrowing requirement on record correspond with the lowest interest rates and rate of inflation in recent years? Why is it that both are now rising while the public sector borrowing requirement is falling? This whole argument about crowding out is an absolute absurdity. There is just no justification for it whatsoever at present, nor indeed was

there any evidence in the past that crowding out took place when Labor was in office.
Perhaps some argument about this might have been developed for a short time in 1973, but the statement by the Prime Minister that the growth of unemployment in Australia in 1974-75 was because of the crowding out of the private sector by the public sector, is absolute absurd nonsense. There was unemployment in Australia at that time because, as everyone knows, there was a world-wide recession from which every country, including Australia, suffered. Our performance in respect of the level of economic activity and unemployment, compared with that of other countries, was very good. If the public sector was the problem, it seems not to have been as much of a problem as it was in other countries.
There is no evidence, either, of an inefficient public sector warranting staff reductions. On the contrary, the Auditor-General's report shows that inefficiency in the Public Service is being created not because there are too many staff but because there is a lack of staff. The Auditor-General's report shows that in department after department inefficiency is created by the staff ceilings which have been imposed by this Government. Those departments are unable to carry out their tasks because of the shortage of labour with which to carry them out. To argue that the Government needs to reduce staff ceilings because there is inefficiency and waste in the Public Service does not square with the facts.
The second assumption was that the market is the most efficient allocator of resources, so regulation is unwarranted and would interfere with consumers' choice. Again, that is an absurd assumption. The Government assumes that the market is virtually perfect,that is, that consumers have an enormous say in what is produced, that there is a multiplicity of producers, and that there is no monopoly or oligopoly in our economy. That is absolute nonsense. We have monopoly or oligopoly in almost every industry in this country. The consumers do not decide what happens. We have a situation in which big business, in the absence of government regulation in particular, is able to get prices, to indulge in restrictive practices, and to create wants through advertising; in other words, to manipulate the market in various ways to its own benefit, not to the benefit of consumers. To argue that we have some sort of perfect market, the regulation of which only adds to its costs and creates inefficiency, is an absolute absurdity. These people are not living in the real world. They are living in some fantasy world. The real world in Australia is one of monopoly and oligopoly in industry after industry. If we have that

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1895

system then we have to have effective price regufinance those responsibilities in some way. Therelation through such bodies as the Price~ Justificafore, this Government is putting the States in a

tion Tribunal and the Trade PractIces Comsituation where they will increasingly be faced

mission. We should have interest rate controls. If with the reality of having to introduce their own

we abolish them, as the Treasurer (Mr Howard) income tax. The Government wants that to hap-

wants to do, we will have higher interest rates. He pen; we all know that. It passed legislation for

knows that and supports that principle.

that to happen. These measures today must be

The Opposition is totally opposed to what the Government is doing in this whole area of regulation because it is based on a totally false assumption. Of course, selling government enterprises will reduce competition. If we sell Trans-Australia Airlines and it is taken over by Ansett

seen as a further step towards this Government's determination to ensure that the States impose their own income tax.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones) -Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Airlines of Australia, as it most likely would be Mr HOWARD (Bennelong Treasurer)

eventually, then we will have a monopoly. Does (9.31 )-If ever I entertained any doubts about

the Government think that will produce a better the philosophical sharpness and clarity of the

result for travellers than we would get by having statement by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm

two competing airlines? If we sell the Housing Fraser) to the House this afternoon, they have

Loans Insurance Corporation it most likely will been totally swept away and disabused by the re-

be bought up by the second biggest housing loan sponse of the Opposition to this statement. This

body, a privately owned company, which would statement and the response of the Opposition

then control about 90 per cent of the market and have demonstrated what a sharp philosophical

therefore have a virtual monopoly.

difference there is between we on this side of the

The third assumption is that the private sector is more efficient than the public sector. Again, there is not a skerrick of evidence of that. We have a multiplicity of efficient public sector enterprises. The Commonwealth Banking Corporation, just to name one, is one of the most profitable enterprises in this country. To say, without any proof, that the private sector is more efficient than the public sector is to do nothing other than express an ideological belief. The reality is that public sector enterprise can be just as efficient as private enterprise and may be more efficient in some cases.

House and the Opposition about the size and role of government in Australia. It has opened up for the Australian community a fundamental debate about priorities and a fundamental debate about where we all stand on the capacity and the wisdom of individuals to make decisions about their own future and where we all stand on the wisdom and capacity of governments to make decisions about the future of individuals.
The statement delivered by the Prime Minister this afternoon brought to this Parliament the report of a committee established immediately after the last election. It gave very eloquent expression to the basic philosophy of the government parties

The fourth assumption is that cutting the pubin Australia about the size and role of government

lie sector is necessary to obtain tax reductions. In in this country. It gives expression to that philos-

our view, slashing the public sector is not necessophy which has been so strongly endorsed on

ary to produce tax cuts. The Government clearly three occasions by the Australian people. It gives

is embarrassed at the rise in the tax burden that expression to the view enunciated so clearly by

has occurred in its period of office, so cuts in the the Prime Minister both before and during the

public sector are seen as the way in which to proelection campaign in 1975. This report is not only

vide tax cuts. This is highly unlikely to occur, bea report about the economic views of this Govern-

cause, firstly, the Government announced just ment, it is not only a report about the economic

yesterday that it was abolishing tax indexation. directions in which this Government believes

However, it does not look like a tax cutting Australia should be headed but also it is a report

government if it is also abolishing tax indexation about the basic philosophy of this Government as

which guarantees some form of tax cuts to taxto the role and functions of government. It over-

payers in the future. Secondly, with the handing whelmingly endorses the belief of members on this

over of a whole variety of functions to the States, side of the House in the innate capacity of individ-

there is the distinct prospect that the States will be uals to make better decisions about their future

forced to bring in stage 2 of this Government's than the capacity of government. It highlights-of

federalism policy and impose their own income course the response of the Opposition highlights

tax on the people in the States. If the States are just as sharply-that fundamental difference that

given more responsibilities obviously they have to does exist between us. It is a difference that

1896 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

honourable members do not have to take my word In the course of their remarks, both the Leader

about but a difference which was spelt out very of the Opposition and the honourable member for

eloquently by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Gellibrand questioned the belief that this Govern-

Hayden) in that now famous address of his made ment has in the basic efficiency of the market

on 2 March 1979, the F. E. Chamberlain Memmechanism. We make no apology for believing

orial Lecture, when he said:

that markets are infinitely better able to make

The challenge to traditional democratic socialism has been economic decisions than government. No market

expressed in a number of deeply dispiriting doctrines.

is perfect and no person on this side of the House

One example, is the rapid spread of philosophies based on has ever argued to that effect. But there is a long lower taxes and smaller government. Fraserism was one of the catalogue of failure so far as government inter-

earliest expressions of these philosophies . . .

vention in economic affairs of nations is con-

Those were the words of the Leader of the Opposition on 2 March 1979. He continued:
This sort of approach strikes directly at conventional democratic socialist notion that equality and equity can only be assured by a stronger public sector.

cerned. If the honourable member for Gellibrand wants some examples of inefficient government intervention in business undertakings, I invite him to look at some of the state-owned and subsidised business undertakings of Western Europe. I invite

That is the basic philosophical difference put in a nutshell by the Leader of the Opposition as recently as March 1979. It was endorsed in the same year by my opponent, the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis), who is the shadow Treasurer, when he said in addressing a meeting of Labor economists in Queensland that one of the first tasks of a Labor government, if elected in 1983, would be to persuade the Australian people to pay the higher taxes that would be needed to

him to look at enterprises such as British Steel. I invite him to look at some of the other stateowned enterprises of Western Europe which are prize examples of the utter failure of the sort of economic dogma that was espoused only a few moments ago by the honourable member for Gellibrand, who made it plain beyond any doubt that his party does stand for a high degree of regulation, a high degree of state intervention and a high degree of state ownership.

build a larger public sector. Those are the philoIt has been a fundamental working rule of the

sophical roots of the Opposition in this ParliaCommittee of Review of Commonwealth Func-

ment. Those are the words out of the mouths of tions, whose report was presented this afternoon,

the Leader of the Opposition and the shadow that those things which might be more efficiently

Treasurer as to where the Australian Labor Party done by private enterprise ought to be done by

stands in terms of economic philosophy and in private enterprise, that it is not the business or the

terms of its philosophy about the size of role of government to be involved in private

government.

enterprise activities, that it is the role and func-

What I welcome most about this debate on the Prime Minister's statement about this review of Commonwealth functions is that it provides to the Australian people one of the all too rare opportunities to recognise that there are fundamental differences between this side of the House and the other side of the House, that basically we have a different view of how the lives of Australians

tion of government to provide an economic climate in which private enterprise can function efficiently and then leave it to the enterprise, initiative and skill of individual businessmen to make business decisions properly inspired by the profit motive which is at the very basis of the capitalist system which I, certainly, have no bones at all about supporting.

should operate, that basically we believe that AusThis report not only demonstrates our commit-

tralian individuals are far better able to conduct ment to a free enterprise system, but also demon-

their lives and to make decisions. I believe that the strates our fundamental commitment to a federal-

philosophical difference that this particular stateist system of government. Unlike our opponents,

ment has opened up is of profound significance. we do not believe that all wisdom resides either in

Every response of the Opposition since the stategovernments generally or in a central government

ment was delivered this afternoon is testimony to located in Canberra. This report recognises the

the extent to which the Opposition rejects the proper role of State governments so far as the dis-

economic and political philosophies for which the tribution of power in our federation is concerned.

Government stands. This statement is a very This report demonstrates a commitment to the

significant statement, although it is one of a series cause of decentralised government which en-

of statements which have demonstrated the dorses the approach of this Government over a

commitment of this Government to the cause of period of 5-!- years to relations between the Fed-

smaller government and greater individual eral and State governments. The real significance

decision-making.

of this report and the statement delivered by the

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1897

Prime Minister this afternoon is the way in which ago. Nobody can deny the fact that the Australian

it very clearly and unambiguously spells out the economy at present is performing in a way which

philosophical position of parties on this side of the is the envy of the industrialised world. Business-

House so far as the size of government is conman after businessman who visits this country

cerned, so far as issues of regulation of business from other parts of the world knows just how well

are concerned, and so far as the attitude of this the Australian economy is performing in compari-

Government to the innate capacity of individuals son with many of the other economies of the

to make decisions about their own future is industrialised world. This country has a non-farm

concerned.

growth rate of over 4 per cent in today's con-

Many other very significant decisions will need to be taken by this Government in this general area over the next two or three years. As the Prime Minister observed, this Parliament will be receiving later this year a report from the Commission of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System-a commission established over two years ago with the widest possible terms of reference to ask fundamental questions about the shape and direction of our financial system. I believe that that inquiry and that report will be of major and long term significance to the financial future of Australia. The same deregulatory approach which has been spelt out so clearly in the Prime Minister's statement tonight will also be adopted by the Government in responding to that report.
I believe that the most significant thing that must be said about the report delivered by the Prime Minister this afternoon is that, notwithstanding our concern to achieve the greatest de-

ditions of subdued world trade and almost recession in large parts of the industrialised world. Is that the performance of an economy in recession or in slump? Is that the performance of an economy which is managed by a government whose economic policies are failing? Of course it is not. This country's inflation rate is significantly below the average of the industrialised world. Is that the performance of a country whose economic policies are not appropriate? The truth of the matter is that the economic policies and practices of this Government over the past 5t years have yielded results-results which are beyond the expectations that many of us on this side of the House entertained only 12 months ago. The fact is that the great majority of the economic indicators now in April 1981 are running very much ahead of what we thought they would be in August 1980 when the last Budget was brought down.

gree of efficiency and the greatest maximisation of The statement delivered by the Prime Minister

the benefits of small government, we have been this afternoon clearly and starkly identifies for the

particularly careful to protect those programs Australian people the philosophical position of which are of assistance to those in the community this Government on great matters of economic

least able to support themselves. No program of and political principle. It opens up very clearly

income support to any Australian has been the basic differences between us on the Govern-

affected by the decisions of this review committee. ment side of the House and those who sit op-

Despite all the blustering of the Opposition, deposite. The response of the Labor Opposition to-

spite all of the attempts by the Opposition to catnight shows precisely where the Australian Labor

egorise this report as paying service to big business Party stands 011 the question of the size of govern-

in the Australian community, the truth is that this ment once a debate is put on a philosophical basis.

report has been particular even-handed and we Members of the Opposition have demonstrated by have taken very great care to protect those their response tonight that they have not changed

programs which are of lasting significance to their attitudes, that they are still at heart the

people more vulnerable and less able to support people who between 1972 and 1975 believed that

themselves than the great majority of the Ausgovernments and not individuals could solve all

tralian community. That is very much in line with problems. They believe, as their leader said in

the approach of this Government over the past 5f 1979, that principles of small government are

years. Despite its determination to pursue policies deeply dispiriting doctrines. I believe that over

of economic responsibility it has been possible coming months we on this side of the House will

within the framework of following those policies have ample opportunity to demonstrate to the

to preserve maximum support for those programs Labor Opposition that the great majority of the

which look after individuals who need assistance. Australian people, far from believing that prin-

Perhaps the most surprising of the responses of the Opposition was the claim that in some way the

ciples of small government are deeply dispiriting, wlll embrace and support those principles.

policies of this Government, of which this report Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (9.46)-The most

is the latest demonstration, have not produced the charitable thing that I can say about the contri-

results that we set out to achieve some Sf years bution of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) 1 think

1898 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

that I am a charitable man, even if nobody else thinks so--is that it was a load of old codswallop. He talked about philosophy. Let me tell him, the House and the people of this country that we on the Labor side of this Parliament also have a philosophy. That philosophy, which we are proud of emphasises a partnership between the public and the private sectors. It has no part whatsoever for the mutilation of the public sector which is the me~sage of this document which we are debating tomght. We also have a philosophy which means th~t the market has a part in the government of this country. That. m~rket is on tap, not on top. We are not worshlppmg at the altar of this market, as these people are, in handing over everything to the private sector. We do not deny the value of the market. The maiket will not run us. We believe that this Parliament and the Government of this nation should make the decisions in the int~rests of the Australian people and not leave It to that false philosophy which the Treasurer has talked about.
So let us not be misled by this rhetoric. This Review of Commonwealth Functions has one main objective and that, of course, is to reduce government spending, whatever the purpose of that government spending. The Government is hell bent on reducing that government spending so that something is left over to fill the pockets of those who put the Government in power. There has never been a more cynical group of people in the history of any government of any country than this group which governs us now. The Government a~lows us to believe that it has a philosophy when Its so-called philosophy is nothing more or less t.han to ~ut money into the pockets of those who will contrIbute to the sinews of policitical war when the time comes.
Wher.eas politicall?urpose and that of my colleagues m the Australian Labor Party is to reduce, I am proud to say, inequalities in our community, the purp9se of our political opponents is to increase thos~ in~qualities. That is precisely what they are domg m so many of the decisions which have been announced in this disgraceful document which we are debating now. We want to assist those who have less at the expense of those who have more; whereas the Government has set out time and again to assist those who have more at the expense of those who have less. We are confident that the vast majority of our fellow Australia~s, given a fair choice, will opt for helping those m need so that we can all live in a fairer soci~ty. Our support comes not only from those who Will benefit from this fairer society, but also from those good people with a social conscience who want to live in a fairer society. They are certainly

not getting anything from the decisions announced in this document which will suit their social conscience.
So many of the Government functions which have been cut or abolished in this announcement today assisted ordinary people in need. Let us look at some of them. The Prices Justification Tribunal has been eliminated. What was the purpose of the PIT other than to be a watchdog on prices for ordinary people in this community? It is to go. I would like say more about it now, but I will have to leave that until later. Rent control in the Australian Capital Territory will be abolished. That is another example. Why was that control in existence other than to help ordinary people, those who have less in this community? That control will be abolished as a result of the announcement in this document which we are debating. I repeat: It was there to protect the needy.
There are the health changes that we learnt about yesterday. As a result of those changes, the more wealth people have the better health coverage they will be able to afford and the better tax rebate they will receive. What are being squeezed? Of course, it is the public hospitals. What is the purpose of public hospitals? It is to help those people in greatest need. Yet the announcements will lead to a reduction in the standards that will be provided by the public hospitals. That is another example of increasing inequalities, which will increase divisiveness and confrontation in this community, which seems to be the main and only purpose of so many of the decisions of this Fraser Government.
Let us look at the education cuts we learnt about today. What about the $80,000 deficit of a Dominican convent in the city of Adelaide, which I am proud to represent? Where will it get $80,000 from? The parents of the children at that school are the most needy, the most deserving of help in our community. Because the education system employed in that school is innovative in order to cater for the special needs of deprived children, education at that school is more expensive than it is at so many other schools. It caters for the needs .of the chi~dren of Vietnamese refugees, recent migrants, smgle parent families-good people with special needs requiring special attention.
In this calendar year the Mother Superior of that convent has to wrestle with the enormous problem of funding a deficit of $80,000 and she has nowhere to turn to. Where did she hope to turn to? Of course, it was to the Australian Government, to the Schools Commission. What will she learn from tomorrow morning's

Review o/Commonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1899

newspaper, if she is not listening to the news tonight? She will read that the Schools Commission's functions are being obliterated. She will read that she cannot hope to be helped by the Commonwealth Government. That is what this Fraser Government is doing. It is adding to her burdens. That is what this review has done. It is adding insult to past injuries.
The State offices of the Schools Commission are to be eliminated. The Commission no longer will be involved in program administration and information collection. Even the buildings unit of that Schools Commission will be eliminated. That is a perfect example of increasing inequalities in the community in which we live. It is a perfect example, under the heading 'Education', of public expenditure which is applied to those people who have the greatest need being reduced or eliminated. For what purpose is that being done? It is being done so that there will be more money for a cynical government to put into the pockets of its supporters when it comes to election time so that it will be re-elected for its cynical purposes of increasing the inequalities in the Australian community. The Government wonders why there are strikes, why there is divisiveness. It wonders why we are not a cohesive nation as is Japan, getting on with increasing the rate of growth in the community. The Government wonders why that is so, yet it is its policies which are creating that great divisiveness.
That is only the first point I want to make. The second point relates to the economic justification for this document, because that too is gravely false. In other words, the ideological basis for this fiscal impoverishment which this Government is favouring, which is the subject of this document, has absolutely no economic or social justification. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) asserted in his speech:
. . . more limited government is now encouraging massive job creation.
What rot! He repeated his opinion that a reduction in government programs and jobs leads to increased economic growth and employment. That is equally rot. It is totally absurd. It contradicts the views he expressed in 1974 when he was looking for a political future, when he described the fundamental views of Keynes as providing some hope for the world. It contradicts the policy now being pursued in such economically successful countries as Japan where monetary policy is being relaxed right now, where public spending on construction projects is being brought forward-it is being increased-and greater incentives are being offered to the smaller and medium sized businesses right now.

The return of the Treasurer to this chamber has reminded me that I wanted to emphasise the hardship the measures announced today will cause to the small business people in this community who rely on government enterprise, government programs. They will be devastated as so many people in social need will be devastated by these measures. Let me come back to the false economic background to this document. The manic concern of the Fraser gang to cut the deficit is not shared in other countries. I have mentioned Japan. It has run larger deficits than Australia throughout the past decade. It is not just larger deficits in total. It is larger deficits per capita. There is nothing wrong with large deficits provided the money is being used to help unemployed people and to aid the development of resources. Yet we have this false doctrine being perpetrated for a false purpose and that is reducing the size of the public sector. Why? The reason is that the public sector helps those in greatest need and the money that will be left over will be handed out to the supporters of this political party as that is the cynical way in which it operates.
Perhaps the greatest significance of all is the return to fiscal stringency in 1981 which contradicts the Government's own policies of the past 18 months and it is the very opposite of that stance which led to the modest employment growth of 1980. The year 1980 was an election year and in terms of economic management it was characterised by an uncharacteristic leniency on the part of this Government. They are the words I would use had I forgotten about this Government's cynicism. But of course in an election year this Government is a lot more lenient. It is doing these things now so that it can be lenient in the next election year. Hang all those who will suffer because of what the Government is doing now, as long as it gets some credit when it is more lenient in an election year.
Throughout 1979-80 and the first half of 1980-81 monetary growth was significantly in excess of the Government's stated target and allowed for growth in economic activity of at least 3 per cent a year. At the same time, the Government increased its spending in real terms. The increase in outlays in real terms was more than 5 per cent over the second half oflast year. At that time the Government ran a deficit of no less than $4,183m. It was this relatively expansionary fiscal and monetary policy more than any other factor which led to the economic growth and job creation of 1980 and which the Treasurer trumpets to us as being the result of his fiscal stringency. I repeat, that the Government briefly adopted a macroeconomic stance similar to that long

1900 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

advocated by the Labor Party and accordingly the economy responded in a brief spring of recovery. But despite the fact that this recent experience stands in direct contradiction to the unyielding ignorance and rhetoric, such as that we have heard from the Treasurer and from the Fraser Administration generally, we are now witnessing a reassertion of that restrictionist approach.
.Money supply, although still growing outside the Government's target, is being reined in. Moreover, the massive tax take now under way, coupled with the new spending cuts that we have learned about, will mean that the Government will take in much more revenue than it will outlay in the current period. A credit squeeze is under way. I would love to say a lot more about that but my time in this debate is running out.
I want to move on to the next point that I need to make and that is that in this destructive way much is being done which will hurt so many separate factors, not only the one I have mentioned. My third point relates to the specific policies which the Government announced today. Some of these policies have the effect of stepping back from Australia's long standing process of nation building and instead embracing fragmentation and destructive rivalry between the States. National responsibilities are being abdicated. For example, the regional centres of Australia are no longer to be assisted through the regional development program. The Government now has no regional policy. The concept of national cohesion through economic equality, an essential tenet of policy in most other countries, has no place in the Fraser ideology.
The fourth point I would like to make relates to my specific area of responsibility, industry and commerce. This country requires 1t million new jobs. Resources expansion will provide only about one-third of those jobs. We need special help for industry. Yet this document that we are debating tonight announces policies which mean a destruction of a lot of those policies for commerce and industry-policies which would have made us more competitive, would have got us into the world markets and made sure that more jobs were created, a major objective of the Australian Labor Party.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
MI' CARLTON (Mackellar) (l0.I)-The honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) complained because the Government will no longer expect the taxpayers-many of whom are not wel~ off-to pay for free hospital out-patient

and in-patient care for those who are well off and who have not bothered to insure themselves. That is what the honourable member for Adelaide was getting into a lather about. The honourable member for Adelaide got into a lather about a number of vested interests in this community being clipped-in the course of this statement made by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on the Review of Commonwealth Functions. The statement was the result of an examination over some months. The Review of Commonwealth Functions was chaired by the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch). If anybody in the Opposition had cared to listen to the statement or to read it he would have found that at every point in it-this applies also to the statement delivered yesterday by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar)-there is great care not to attack any of the basic social security provisions and there is great care to ensure that pensioners and the disadvantaged are catered for. The underlying philosophy of the statement is that the taxpayers' funds will be taken only when there is a clearly demonstrated need for their use.
What the honourable member for Adelaide is trying to defend in this House are the vested interests of those who might wish to extend their own work in providing services and deciding for people the kind of services that they ought to have. I have to confess that after reading for some months in the Press that a review of great proportion was being undertaken by the Government and after reading that this had been turned by the Press into a 'razor gang', I expected some form of expenditure cutting. That would be a fairly simple operation, I suppose. I expected something that might have caused perhaps even more pain than that which has been squealed about by the Opposition. I must confess that somewhat to my surprise we have not just a razor gang operation, not just a cutting operation, but a statement of direction and philosophy which I think takes Australia into the next decade.
I welcome this statement as the clearest statement of direction of the Government since it came to office in 1975. It clarified all the Government's principles in practical terms and gave a commitment to further action in a way which will create economic growth, which is really the only way to help the disadvantaged in the Australian community in the longer term. The actions of the Wilson Government in the United Kingdom between 1964 and 1970 were analysed by the Fabian Society which reported that it achieved absolutely nothing for the most disadvantaged in the United Kingdom. In fact the Fabian Society concluded that those who were least well off when Mr

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1901

Wilson came into office were worse off when he of departments, corporations, commissions,

went out of office despite an enormous number of boards, committees and agencies for which we

additional social programs introduced by that nominally are responsible? How much can we do

Labour Government. The honourable member about a complaint we get about the service of the

for Adelaide has espoused exactly the same prinGovernment monopoly in telecommunications?

ciples as were espoused by Mr Wilson. I would not We can do a bit but we cannot do much. When it

accuse him, as he has accused us, of bad intenis suggested that the Government will introduce a

tions. I would not accuse him of the cynicism of new service, do we have any real confidence that

which he has accused us. I would credit him with the creaking mechanism of delivery will operate

good intentions. But those good intentions lead at least half as efficiently and to the customers'

him, with his socialist philosophy, to believe that satisfaction as a new business anxious to please its

an expanded Public Service helps those in greatest customers?

need. That philosophy is challenged conclusively by this ministerial statement.

Our public sector employment fundamentally is not appropriate for operating areas. The public

,What we are talking about fundamentally is inservice was set up over the centuries for policy

dividual choice, which in fact is widest in a free advice and for certain regulatory functions. In

market situation. The difference between a marorder to avoid corruption through political ma-

ket choice and a bureaucratic choice is that in a nipulation, principles of permanency and in the market the customer can go to various suppliers, case of our own Public Service, adequate retire-

can bargain, can expect innovation, can expect ment allowances appropriate for policy advisers,

people to go out of business if they do not provide were set in place. Those people must be indepen-

what he or she wants, and can expect advertising dent of politics, and those arrangements are quite

and all other aspects of a market to inform him or satisfactory for that type of employment. But per-

her of what is available.

manency and these other considerations are

Mr Milton-What do they bargain with if they are underprivileged?

wrong, surely, for operations such as Trans-Australia Airlines, Telecom Australia, for traffic controllers and the like. They are expensive, they

Mr CARLTON-Markets do not always work, are inflexible, and certainly they are more subject

I am glad to inform the honourable member, and to union monopoly control. For example, the

that is fully acknowledged by the Government. traffic controllers had complaints about their pay

Markets do not work in a couple of ways. Firstly, which, because of Public Service relativities,

they do not work if there are no suitable regulatcould not be adjusted as it might have been in the

ory controls to ensure competition. Private private sector, and they went on strike.

enterprise does not equal competitive enterprise, Extending the public sector also creates a self-

but regulation has to be in the direction of compeserving delivery mechanism which arrogates the

tition and not in the direction of featherbedding decision as to what the consumer ought to want. It and protection. The whole thrust of this paper, I seeks to replace not only the independent choice

am pleased to say, is in the direction of removing of the consumer in a competitive market but it

the kind of regulation which featherbeds and proalso challenges ultimately the right of the Parlia-

tects. The second way in which the market does ment to redress the balance on behalf of the

not always work is when some consumers do not, people. This expanding non-democratic bureauc-

as my honourable friend says, have the whereracy is represented in this chamber by the Aus-

withal to make a market choice. It is in those tralian Labor Party. The public servant who seeks

cases, and not in the cases of those who are better to serve in an honourable way is represented-I

off, and who under existing schemes are able to go hope-by every member of this Parliament.

to hospitals and get free treatment when they can well pay for it, who have to be looked after by Public Service systems and by government intervention. The Government fully supports that kind of intervention when it is necessary.

Let me turn to some of the specific provisions in the ministerial statement. I welcome absolutely
the commitment by the Government to reexamine the monopoly positions of Australia Post and Telecom Australia. As we go into the com-

We have a public sector which is severely munications age when the biggest expansion in

overloaded. I accept what the honourable business, activity, learning and the transmission of

member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) said. Our knowledge will be in the area of communications,

public sector in this country is still not as large as surely it is extraordinarily dangerous to have all

it is in some other countries. That is quite true, but the decisions as to where we will go in relation to

it is still overloaded. How much control do we that area in the hands of one set of engineers and

members of this Parliament have over the myriad one set of managers. Surely that is dangerous, as it

1902 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

is dangerous to have our livelihood for the future, the whole of our communications system, in the hands of one public sector union. I suggest that this is one of the far-sighted decisions in this statement.
The field of airlines was one in which, during the earlier stages of our development, it was appropriate to have certain arrangements to ensure that we did not have a government monopoly. There were certain arrangements in the early days of aviation overseas where it was a good idea to have strict controls over our overseas airline, but I am glad to see that now the Government has agreed that Qantas Airways Ltd should be able to set its own minimum fares in a competitive situation. I also see that the Government has committed itself once again to an inquiry into the deregulation of the airline industry. It has committed itself to consider selling off the domestic airline terminals. I hope that these terminals would not be sold necessarily to airlines but to independent business operators who would be able to receive an aircraft of any company as a prelude to deregulation. Deregulation of the airline industry in Australia will not be possible without terminals which are open to any carrier.
The fundamental question is, who will buy them? Frankly, we in this Parliament do not have the capacity or the facilities to decide in what sort of aircraft people should travel, at what times they should go and what fares they should pay any more than we should decide what should be stocked on supermarket shelves. That is the direction in which the Government is committing itself; that is a direction which I certainly shall be working to achieve, both in the domestic and international airline areas. I also see that there is a commitment to deregulate the Australian National Line and the Australian National Railways and to end the extraordinary featherbedding that has occurred in -the area of transport in a country which relies for its very livelihood on cheap transport.
The Prices Justification Tribunal is to go, and I link this in with airlines, railways and so on. A justified price is a price which finishes up too high. The only real justification for a price is when it can be obtained in a market where buyers are looking for the best price. Any form of justification where people come forward with their books and justify the price, and the prices are looked at by a bureaucratic mechanism, can never determine whether that is the best price. In the long run, it is never the best price. The controlled price of bread in New South Wales is higher than the uncontrolled price of bread in Queensland. I note

with some caution changes to the Industries Assistance Commission and the Trade Practices Tribunal. It is very important that any changes in these two bodies should not detract from their capacity to monitor the competitiveness of i~dustry. Competitiveness can be brought about eIther by the removal of domestic monopoly or the removal of a monopoly created by tariff walls. It will be desperately important as we review the functions of these two bodies that we do not remove those regulatory and advisory functions which move in the direction of competition. The whole thrust of this superb document is to move away from the regulation which featherbeds, inhibits and shackles Australians, but to maintain the necessary government regulations which will promote competition, consumer choice, lower prices, and ultimately a freer society.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (lO.lS)-Today the people of Canberra have been sold out. I stress the word 'people' and I mean the public servants, the business people, the prospective home owners and the ordinary people in the streets. This is probably the cruelest example of ad hockery which has been so far hurled at the people of the Australian Capital Territory. Today Canberra has been sold out and both its public sector and its private sector will be reeling when they absorb the impact of this ideological battering.
The razor gang's targets have been ad hoc and without consistent rationale. It is the nation's biggest garage sale, with the articles for sale being determined by ministerial whim. When we examine the functions sold out to the private sector in Canberra, they appear to have no co-ordinated pattern and do not fit into any long term plan for the Territory. For example, the sale of land is to be given to the private sector alone. It alone will have control over the sale of residential and commercialland, including over-the-counter sales. No explanation is given as to what this means for the long term future of Canberra. Is there still a plan for Canberra's expansion and growth? Does the National Capital Development Commission's master plan still apply? Does this mean wholesale speculation in land for Canberra, after the style of Melbourne and Sydney? How are prices to be determined? Will any controls or regulations on the sale of land apply? What will this mean to new home buyers and families? Will they now face spiralling land prices?
All these questions remain unanswered. Recreational and cultural facilities are to be sold or leased to the private sector. No explanation has been given as to what this means for the various sports facilities, theatres and other cultural facilities in Canberra. Which are to be sold? Which will

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1903

remain under public control? This is an absolute Leaving aside this aspect, the Government's as-

farce. Who is going to buy a sports oval? No sertion that significant savings will be made by

answers have been given by the Government on cuts in the Public Service is patently false. Let us

these vital questions for Canberra residents. Well look at the figures. If the number of government

known public enterprises such as the Belconnen employees is cut across the board by, say, 2 per

Mall, run by the Canberra Commercial Developcent this will not achieve major savings in govern-

ment Authority, and the Canberra Retail Market ment expenditure. If we recall that expenditure

Trust are to be sold. To be sold also is the Mugga on public servants' salaries represents only 9.35

quarry and the hotmix plant. The Government's per cent of total public sector outlay, we can see

real motivation appears to be its ideological obthat a cut of 2 per cent represents a saving of only

session with private sector involvement in the 0.175 per cent. In other words, for every $100 of

economy. It fails to comprehend that in the total budgetary expenditure, cutbacks in staff rep-

Australian Capital Territory the public and priresent a saving of 25c. This is an infinitesimal

vate sectors are interdependent. To squeeze the amount of savings and it will be achieved at enor-

one hurts the other. Many major capital works mous cost. Firstly, there is the cost of the Lynch

projects in the Australian Capital Territory which review itself. I hope that the Government will

have been promised for years now are to be canmake public the number of hours spent on this re-

celled. These projects include the Canberra Conview and the total cost of this exercise to the tax-

vention Centre, the Museum of Australia, the payers. Secondly, there is the cost to the Aus-

Canberra Law Courts, the National Library tralian public. This Government has reduced

extension, the Australian Federal Police headservices to the public. The Commonwealth Em-

quarters, the headquarters of the Australian Seployment Service, the public housing sector, aged

curity Intelligence Organisation and the National and disabled people, Aborigines, low income fam-

Biological Standards Laboratory.

ilies and many others will be affected. The list

goes on and on. This across-the-board cut in

Let me make a prediction tonight. Despite the numbers provides a clear indication that the

transfer of government enterprises in the AusGovernment has no long term plan for govern-

tralian Capital Territory to the private sector, in ment administration in this country and is merely

six months, probably three months, maybe even concerned to conduct a cynical political exercise

three days, the private sector will be cursing the of blaming the economic ills of Australia on the

so-called razor gang. The cutback in the public Public Service. The public will not be hoodwinked

sector will further depress the Canberra economy, in this way.

lower demand, increase unemployment, diminish investment and reduce profits. There is clearly no overall plan for Canberra in these latest developments. The latest cuts make a farce of any commitment to Canberra by the Federal Government. The private sector in Canberra can now have no confidence in the Fraser Government. This Government keeps no promises and is guided only by obsession with Canberra bashing.

When this ministerial committee was set up last year it was asked to review Commonwealth functions as a way of generating savings. The principle is clear. If functions are eliminated staff numbers are automatically diminished. This is an honest way to proceed but the razor gang was unable to do this. Besides eliminating functions it has insisted on a general across-the-board slash on Public Service numbers. In other words, it wants

Let me now turn to the real failure of this review. The razor gang review is the latest of a series of major investigations of government administration over the last eight years. It is also the most cursory and the most ill-conceived, and it will do nothing to promote efficiency or reform in the

fewer people to do relatively more work. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) stated in corrrespondence with the Administrative and Clerical Officers Association last year that the Public Service had reached its lowest level. He said:

Australian Public Service. The argument that The Government sees the initial process of streamlining the savings in public sector expenditure somehow or Public Service as now being substantially completed.

other magically lead to increased prosperity for all The Auditor-General in his 1981 report to the

Australians is in itself a subject of many objecParliament highlighted the inefficiencies of the

tions. We should also recall that the March 1981 current staff ceilings. Yet the razor gang report

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and establishes at least 22 reviews to be undertaken-I

Development Observer shows that of 24 OECD repeat 22 reviews-including the major reviews of

countries Australia is ranked near the bottom in the Department of Defence, the National Capital

current government expenditure as a proportion Development Commission, the Government lab-

of gross domestic product.

oratory facilities, a joint parliamentary committee

1904 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

on statutory bodies and a continuing ministerial review. Who will service all of these reviews? Will they be farmed out to the private sector also?
If the Government were really concerned with the duplication of functions it might have taken notice of the speech made by the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) in this House last Tuesday. Every function of the Public Service is now duplicated within the Prime Minister's own Department for no other purpose than to increase the Prime Minister's power and control.
If we refer to the details of the ministerial statement we see that the only change for the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet is to increase a function-an increase in the staff interchange program. Typical of the basically dishonest nature of this exercise is the treatment of the Industries Assistance Commission, the Trade Practices Commission, the Prices Justification Tribunal and other agencies which are intended to protect the public against the Government's friends. The Government does not have the honesty actually to reduce the legislative responsibilities of those bodies. However, it will effectively make it impossible to enforce the legislation by denying the bodies with statutory responsibi lity the staff to carry out their functions. What a contrast to the treatment of the Prime Minister's own Department.
The third cost is to the quality of the Public Service itself and to the morale of its employees. Since 1975, 11,000 staff have been cut. The morale of the Public Service is at an all time low. Not only have public servants been required to fulfil more tasks with ever decreasing numbers, but at the same time they have been subjected by this Government to a cheap and nasty publicity campaign against the value of their work and, in some cases, against their personal integrity. The chairman of the committee is well known for his view that public servants have their snouts in the public taxation trough. Those ill-founded criticisms were rejected totally by Sir William Cole, Chairman of the Public Service Board, in his address last week to the Canberra chapter of the Institute of Internal Auditors, when he said:
Criticisms of the Public Service receiving publicity have become increasingly outrageous with little apparent concern for truth, balance or fairness.
Most public servants-including me-are fed up to the back teeth with these unfair, cowardly and counterproductive attacks.
They could have not come at a more inappropriate time. For a decade now, the Public Service has faced challenge, change and turbulence almost unprecedented in its history.
Particularly in recent years, work loads have grown markedly while the resources necessary for that work have been reduced-we have been doing more with less.

At the same time, the accountability requirements upon Public Service decision making have grown dramatically . . .
By and large the Public Service has coped with these challenges with effectiveness, professionalism, dedication and loyalty.
Public Service bashing by this Government has reached an all time high during the past five months. The inevitable outcome of such short sighted attitudes will be a loss of morale amongst employees, and the Service will fail to attract the best applicants. The big loser in this process, of course, is the Australian public once again.
I turn now to the specific provisions of the Review of Commonwealth Functions. The Committee of Review was purported to be analysing Public Service functions. But over the past five months we have witnessed an intense lobbying campaign in which rumours and speculation on the likely future of many departmental sections have appeared to playa major part in the final outcome. It could have been termed a bun fight based on the rules of survival of the strongest and the most politically aligned to the Fraser Government. This report provides no justification for the destruction of so many services to the community. The Fraser Government is abrogating its responsibility to the people of Australia and transferring its responsibilities to the highest bidder. This is a government which has continually chopped and changed its mind and its policies. The basic argument against it is not only that its policies are wrong-though I believe they are-but also that it does not really care about the people that it is supposed to serve. I know that is a perception that people have of this Government. I have no doubt that that perception will spread to most sections of the Australian community when the implications of this horror document seep through.
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Sydney Fire Disaster-Garbage from Ships in Newcastle Harbour-Member for Macarthur-School Dental Scheme-Community Health
Services-Women's Refuges-Nuclear Power Station: Jervis Bay-Public Access to Garden
Island, Western Australia-Parliamentary Press Gallery
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr DOBIE (Cook) (1O.30)-Today I was granted leave to return to my electorate to visit many of the survivors from the horror of last night's fire at the Pacific Heights Nursing Home,

Adjournment

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1905

Sylvania Heights. I took with me the sympathy people this afternoon the degree of effort, involve-

and personal concern of the Prime Minister (Mr ment, and the total lack of self-comfort and self-

Malcolm Fraser) to the relatives of those who had concern certainly was an inspiration to me. Grati-

lost aged relatives in Sylvania last night and tude must go to those who did so much last night.

comfort and encouragement to those many aged Our prayers must be for all those who today are

and disabled men and women who have survived surviving their condition of shock. For 16 families

this disaster. I know that all honourable members there is a tragic sense ofloss.

wiII support these sentiments. It was Sydney's worst fire disaster. I stand here tonight moved by the horrifying fact that 16 aged people in the twilight of their years were so gruesomely killed. I stand here moved by the resilience of those grand old and not so old folk who have survived an event which has shocked my district. Only five months ago five brave young bushfire volunteers were incinerated in a bush fire at Waterfall only a few miles from Sylvania.

Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie) (10.34)-Last night in this House the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume), sometimes known and remembered as the member for Patrick Partners, made a great show of taking up the cudgel--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member will address an honourable member in this House in the proper manner.

Mr CAMPBELL -Mr Deputy Speaker, do

In the midst of the state of shock that confronted everyone last night there were acts of heroism and bravery as members of the staff of

you want me to withdraw my reference to the honourable member for Macarthur as the member for Patrick Partners?

the Pacific Heights Nursing Home, young relaMr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable

tives of inmates, members of the fire brigade, and member may proceed but he must take greater

the New South Wales Police Force all worked care.

with untiring and intrepid effort to rescue such a large number of inmates. To the relatives of those who perished will go the sympathy of all. Our prayers are for those souls who perished so gruesomely. Last night and today was a time also for concern for the survivors. This afternoon, as I visited quietly many of them in the St George Hospital and the Sutherland Hospital my heart was full to see so many of these folk still in a state of shock and wonder as to what had happened to them. Some may never recover fully from the state of shock in which they are now.

Mr CAMPBELL-The honourable member made a great show of taking up the cudgel on behalf of the journalists and particularly those journalists working in the Press Gallery. I would have thought that any journalists hearing praise from this source would have fled for the nonmembers' bar as soon as possible. But the member for Macarthur, being on the side of journalists, is rather like a bishop being praised by the devil himself-a very odd spectacle. Praise from the member for Macarthur is being damned in the eyes of anyone who knows anything about this

refugee from the sewer of the Sydney Stock

Following my visit to the St George Hospital I Exchange.

would like to pay tribute to Miss Norma Shore, the Director of Nursing, Dr Falconer, Mr Lockwood, Mr Griffith, and to all the staff for what they have done. I pay tribute also to Sister Campbell and to the social workers who have worked untiringly and without sleep since the events of last night. At the Sutherland Hospital I pay tribute to Dr Macdessi, Miss Judy Gibson, Dr Alan Wood and to the countless number of nursing

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will be required to withdraw that remark and I warn him that if he persists in that tenor I shall have to deal with him. The honourable member for Kalgoorlie will withdraw that remark.
Mr CAMPBELL-With all respect, how can the--

staff, nursing aides, wardsmen and everybody Mr DEPUTY SPEAKEROrder! If the

connected with the hospital who worked honourable member addresses himself to the

untiringly to help these people.

Standing Orders he will be very much aware, I

would hope, that he is not allowed to make a per-

Miss Judy Gibson, the Director of Nursing, perhaps summed up these events when she said: 'Sometimes there is criticism levelled that people

sonal reflection on any member of this House. The honourable member will withdraw the statement.

cannot meet with crises'. Last night we saw two Mr CAMPBELL-I point out that the reflec-

major hospitals in Sydney meet with what was a tion was on the Sydney Stock Exchange and not

crisis in national terms. As I went among these on the particular refugee.

1906 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Adjournment

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member will withdraw..

Mr CAMPBELL-All right, all right I

withdraw.

'

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member is well advised to do so.

Mr Hodgman-Insolence.

Mr CAMPBELL-If honourable members look at the journalistic record of the member for Macarthur before he unsuccessfully went into the dodgy business of share dealing they will see what I mean.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Kalgoorlie will resume his seat. The Minister for the Capital Territory displays a sensitivity that is not altogether called for. The Chair is in possession of the situation. The honourable member for Kalgoorlie, for reasons best known to himself, ignored the caution I gave him about the nature of his remarks. I will afford him one further opportunity to address the House in parliamentary terms. If he does not do that he will be required to resume his seat.

Mr CAMPELL-Mr Deputy Speaker, I thank you for your indulgence. I might say that I have spent a long time reading the Standing Orders and I would like to take up the point with you some day. There is no doubt that as a former member of the Australian Journalists' Association, which he claimed to be-I hope that is parliamentarywhat he did not tell us was that he was employed by the Fairfax organisation. In the performance of that service he earned a rare accolade. I am informed on very good authority that when he left that organisation his file was marked 'Never to be re-employed'. Maybe the member can tell us why such a drastic prohibition was put on him.

~r Hodgman-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a

pomt of order. Taken in context with the preced-

ing remarks, that remark is clearly a reflection on

the honourable member for Macarthur. I would

like you, sir, to require that remark to be

withdrawn.

.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-On the fairly confident premise that it was the intention of the honourable member for Kalgoorlie to reflect on the honourable member for Macarthur, I invite the honourable member for Kalgoorlie to withdraw that remark.

Mr CAMPBELL-Mr Deputy Speaker, could you say that again?

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Kalgoorlie is required to withdraw the latest reflection on the honourable member for Macarthur.

Mr CAMPBELL-I am getting very confused. Mr Deputy Speaker, do you want me to withdraw the remark that the file of the honourable member for Macarthur was marked 'Never to be re-employed'? Is that the remark you want me to withdraw?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Yes.
Mr CAMPBELL-Very well, I withdraw it. That does not alter the fact.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Kalgoorlie will resume his seat. The Chair is not prepared to hear him further.
Mr COWAN (Lyne) (10.38)-1 would like to raise a matter of grave concern to me, certainly to the electorate of Lyne and, 1 believe, to Australia. The matter concerns the disposal of garbage from the numerous ships anchored off Newcastle harbour. Over the week the fact has been raised with me that at times anything from a dozen to 40 ships-I have counted them myself-are anchored off the harbour. Of course, they have to dispose of the garbage. There are no means available to them other than bagging the garbage and throwing it over the side of the ship. Where it goes depends upon the winds and the tides. I believe that there is grave concern today within the Port Stephens Shire that a lot of the garbage is being washed up on the beaches somewhere in the vicinity of the Stockton Beach area. I do not think that I need stress the point that all of us should be very gravely concerned because of the possibility of disease that may happen to come in the garbage from the ships. Many of those ships, of course, are from Eastern countries. It is known, of course, that those countries have not only foot and mouth disease present but also other diseases that are of grave concern to Australia.
I understand that this afternoon an inspector from the Port Stephens Shire went to inspect the beach. Over three kilometres of beach are strewn with a large amount of garbage and other goods. This is offensive to the people who use the beach. It is well known in that area that wild dogs, pigs and other animals feed upon the garbage. Naturally, we have always suspected that foot and mouth disease and other diseases could be brought here in garbage from these ships. Not only the Port Stephens area but also the Newcastle City Council area and other council areas along the New South Wales coastline might be affected. It is imperative, I believe, that the responsible Minister and department are fully aware of our responsibilities so far as the problem is concerned.
We have a great responsibility to .protect our herds within Australia because of our exports and

Adjournment

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1907

our economy. Even at present there is a Bill beWhat will happen to the community health

fore the Parliament that expresses the importance centres? 1 have spoken about them in this House

of strengthening the quarantine legislation within on several occasions. They were set up by the

Australia. We do not want to see a situation in Labor governments of 1972 and 1975. They have

which these ships are allowed to anchor in the proved their worth over and over again. If this

area. I know that this matter has not been raised Government is so concerned at the rising costs of

by the honourable member from the Newcastle health care, why is it initiating a new scheme that

area who should be concerned. If a disease is could well spell the death of community health

brought into Australia the unions of the Newcentres? Prevention, early detection and treat-

castle area stand condemned forever. This is a ment of illness and rehabilitation provided by

darned important issue so far as we are concerned. community-based services such as those funded

The people of my electorate have suggested that I bring this matter before the Parliament. At this stage I do not know who is responsible but I believe that the matter should be looked into immediately. If the council is responsible it has a major job ahead because someone will have to go to sea in boats every day or every second day to collect the garbage. There is a quarantine station

under the community health scheme can contain demands for admission to hospitals and other institutions. Admissions to the psychiatric and mental health sections of a hospital in a Victorian provincial city declined by 149 during six months of 1979 and by another 98 during the following six months. This was largely attributed to the operations of a community-based service.

within the Newcastle area. I believe that it could It is ludicrous for a government to keep prating

be its responsibility to look into the matter. If it is about its care and concern for the Australian

the responsibility of the councils concerned well people when every piece of legislation introduced

naturally they ought to be financially assisted by into this House provides for those with the ability

either the Commonwealth or the State governto pay at the expense of those who cannot. Com-

ment. The fact of the matter is that garbage is munity health projects in Western Australia are

there. It is a danger to all Australians. It is a responsible for the maintenance of over 1,000 cli-

danger to our stock. It is a danger to our economy. ents in the community. During 1979-80 the cost of

It is a nuisance to all the people concerned. I beproviding these services under the community

lieve that somebody has to accept responsibility. health program was $1.2m. Had it been necessary

Mrs CHILD (Henty) (10.43)-1 draw the attention of the House to part of the Governor General's Speech given on 25 November 1980. It states:
My Government scts . . . out to establish that it cares deeply about the quality of life lived in Australia . . .

for all these clients to be maintained in institutions during the same period, the cost would have been an estimated $21.3m. 1remind honourable members of the words of the Bishop of Armidale in 1931 when he was asked to define the difference between the conservative parties and the Labor Party. He put it very simply: 'The con-

The statement brought into this House yesterday by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) directly contradicts this. Despite the fine words in which he wrapped his bitter pill the quality of life

servatives are interested in profit, the Labor Party is interested in people'. Every piece of legislation that the Government brings into this House proves that statement.

in Australia was under direct attack by the I wish to comment on the women's refuges.

Government when he set out new arrangements They also are about to disappear. There are 96

for health care and for health funding. The School women's refuges widely scattered throughout

Dental Scheme has already suffered at the hands Australia. They provide essential services to

of this Government and, as usual, when these serwomen and their dependent children in crisis situ-

vices are cut even further it will be the children of ations caused by physical and mental abuse, desti-

the low income earners and the pensioners who tution, homelessness, and other factors. I point

suffer. It always is the children of the low income out that there is a significant voluntary contri-

earners, the unemployed, the disadvantaged and bution to women's refuges, both in donations and

the pensioners who suffer. Those with the ability in voluntary work, and that such services were

to pay can send their children to the dentist; those used during six months of last year by 6,300

without the ability to pay will be relying on a women and 7,900 children. The Commonwealth

school dentist, who will disappear. The dental used to meet 75 per cent of the operating costs

hospital in Victoria cannot cope with the enorand 50 per cent of the recurrent costs, with the

mous waiting list it has now. With the demise of States making up the balance. What will happen

the School Dental Scheme the burden on this to the funding under this new arrangement? What

overloaded hospital will be even greater.

will happen to all the hopeless and helpless

1908 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Adjournment

women and children who are forced out of their homes and have nowhere to go? I have had quite a lot to do with these women's refuges. We furnish them, we put in the beds and the blankets and the pots and the pans. We put in voluntarily the sUjJ . port services which give the women and children some hope for the future. With one stroke of the pen the Government has probably taken all that away. It is not a health scheme the Government set up yesterday. The Government is going to create absolute despair throughout a section of the community that is unable to care for itself. The Government was elected to care for the people of Australia. It has failed miserably in that job.

the island, is expected to be completed by October of this year and that the nature and location of the cottages would make them susceptible to severe damage should an accidental explosion occur. As I recall, there are residences as close to the armament depot on the mainland as the cottages are to the new depot on Garden Island. Additionally, accidental explosions, at this type of depot are so rare that I know of many Garden Island holiday residents who would be happy to sign away rights to claim against the Commonwealth should any such explosion occur and damage or injury result. Further, as I have mentioned, public access will be permitted only during daylight hours.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SHACK (Tangney) (10.48)-Tonight J wish to raise the question of future public access to Garden Island in Cockburn Sound, just south of the Western Australian port of Fremantle. Garden Island is the site of HMAS Stirling, the naval support facility. My complaint is not with the establishment of the facility or its continued existence. On the contrary, HMAS Stirling is a welcome and most necessary naval presence on the west coast. In fact, my hope is that the operation of the facility will be properly fulfilled and, over time, expanded. However, my concern is that the existence of HMAS Stirling is being used by the authorities to restrict severely public access to Garpen Island. Such restrictions, in my view, are unnecessary for the operation of HMAS Stirling in peacetime and are excessive with respect to the free movement of the public.

Given this fact one can ask whether the Navy is confident that accidental explosions will occur only during the night. Restricted access to Garden Island has also been justified on the basis of security. To my knowledge, fences and signs have been or are being erected to seal off the restricted area around the armament depot. This provision is more than adequate, with respect to the long standing holiday residents who have no interest in, or inquisitiveness to interfere with, Navy property. In fact, the eviction of the holiday residents could will lessen security. It is likely that any vandalism and/or criminal theft will originate from day trippers. Holiday residents already exercise an influence over day trippers who may disturb the environment of the island. Equally, such a restraining influence could extend to encouraging respect for Navy property. The disciplinary presence of the residents, will, of course, be lost after their eviction. Such presence would certainly need to be replaced by more than the single ranger who is currently on the island.

For many years Garden Island has been an extremely popular recreational and holiday spot. With the advent of HMAS Stirling, the little permanent settlement of cottages and shops at the southern end of the island was demolished. This was necessary and readily understood by all who welcomed the construction of the naval facility. Equally understood was the fencing off of the facility perimeter and the restriction of access to the enclosed property. Effectively, the island was divided in half. The southern end became the preserve of the Navy, but the northern end remained the unspoilt recreational environment of the holiday residents of the 65 cottages left on the island and countless other day trippers.
Now, however, all cottage owners have received notices to quit. Public access to the island is to be restricted to daylight hours. It has been stated that these notices to quit are being given in the interests of safety due to the fact that an armament depot, located towards the northern end of

r think it is completely understandable that
access to HMAS Stirling should be restricted, but 1 fail to appreciate why such restricted access should be extended to the entire island, involving the eviction of the remaining holiday residents and the limiting of access to the general pUblic. I have invited the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) to visit the island. I am certain that if he does so he will come to the same conclusion to which I have come, that is that the extra restriction on public access to Garden Island is presently both unnecessary and unjustified.
Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie) (10.53)-As I said earlier, a former journalist with such a unique record is hardly the sort of person to be lecturing this House about journalism or journalists. I return to the substance of the speech of the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) last night. Senator Button did not impugn the integrity of working journalists, as the honol,lrable member for Macarthur claims. He was merely

Adjournment

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1909

pointing to the fact that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has been manipulating journalists. The Prime Minister wields great power. He can manipulate even the most senior journalists. He finds it easier to manipulate their editors. The Prime Minister is putting journalists under pressure. He has not given a full Press conference since 1976. In 1980 the only Press conference he gave was on Afghanistan. The Prime Minister avoids fully fledged Press conferences because he does not have the answers. By distancing himself from the Press and thus from the people, he puts intolerable pressure on journalists. If they can get a private briefing they will grab it. I would like to see the heavies in the Press Gallery get up early in the morning and door-stop the Prime Minister outside Parliament instead of leaving it to the afternoon papers and the radio and television journalists who have space or time in their pages and programs only for brief simplistic comments which the Prime Minister is good at.
Senator Button made a very good point. It is about time the Parliament and members of the Press Gallery themselves owned up to the extent of this deliberate manipulation of the Press. Certainly they do not need a lecture from this exjournalist who is marked down by the Sydney Morning Herald as 'never to be employed again'. Indeed, there has always been some doubt about his right to sit in this House and lecture anybody about anything.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-- Order! The honourable member for Kalgoorlie is pressing the matter. His remarks in the immediate context might escape the notice of the Chair at another time but, in the light of the most recent experience this evening, the Chair can do no more than to see them as a continuation of the personal reflections on the honourable member for Macarthur, and I call on the honourable member for Kalgoorlie to withdraw.
Mr CAMPBELL-I withdraw.

Mr CAMPBELL-Only last night the honourable member for Macarthur was speaking-I believe with a forked tongue-on Nationwide, berating one of the leading television journalists, Richard Carleton. It seems rather ironic to me that he was accusing Carleton of 'passive proselytising'. That is a posh way of saying that he did not like the questions. Carleton was bluntly questioning a bunch of identikit backbenchers. I say identikit, although there was one exceptionthe honourable member for Canning (Mr Bungey), who, I thought, answered Carleton's questions rather candidly. The rest ofthose obedient Liberals sat there quietly while the honourable member for Macarthur bucketed Carleton.
Journalists are used to being bucketed. I would suggest that it is probably better to he bucketed by the honourable member than to be praised by him, because with friends like the honourable member one really does not need enemies. Sadly, the honourable member has all the qualitiesI must pay tribute to him here-necessary to be on the front bench of the morally bankrupt and decadent Fraser Government, this collection of private sector failures. These are the qualities of the honourable member who had the insolence to attack so wrongly an honourable senator in this House last night.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (10.57)-1 do not want to deal with the curious speech of the honourable member for Kalgoorlie (Mr Campbell), except to say that I am disappointed that he was the best that the Opposition could drag up to raise this matter. I hope that it manages to do better next time. The matter I want to raise is an article written, curiously enough, by a journalist in a local paper, the Shoalhaven and Nowra News, in my electorate. The article is headed: 'Confidential report'. The sub-heading reads: 'Nuclear station at Jervis Bay?' The article states:
A nuclear power station may still be constructed at Murray's Beach on the shores of Jervis Bay.

Mr Baume-I raise a point of order. I would seek the specific withdrawal of any suggestion that there was any doubt over my right to sit in this House. Apart from anything else, it is disgraceful to raise that matter, but there is no doubt and it cannot be sustained that there is any doubt.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member has made his point. The Chair's requirement of the honourable member for Kalgoorlie to withdraw related to both comments, and the record, I take it, will convey that impression.

This is based on a report leaked by the Federal Opposition claiming that a nuclear power indus-
try was to be established in Australia and that uranium enrichment would proceed. I simply want to say that there is no truth whatsoever in this report that Murray's Beach may still have a nuclear power station. There is no intention whatsoever to proceed with the Jervis Bay project, which was abandoned about 10 years ago. This is a mischievous article. When I deal with journalists, I deal with specific matters that they raise
specifically and I say specifically that this is a mischievous article because there is not a scintilla of

1910 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Adjournment

truth and there is no basis or backing to the allegation contained in the headline. In fact it was clearly stated, J think, by the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Carrick) that this would not bean.
The article was based on an interdepartmental committee report which stated:
If Australia were to proceed with the establishment of conversion/enrichment or nuclear power generation facilities, it would be necessary to provide a legal basis for regulating the siting, construction, operation and decommissioning of those facilities.
In other words, it was based on an interdepartmental committee report to the Government regarding the concern of a State government about the far-reaching powers of the Atomic Energy Act as amended last year. That is the reason why the interdepartmental committee met. It has nothing to do with any proposition that there should be a nuclear power station at Jervis Bay. That is arrant nonsense.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! It being 11 p.m., the debate is interrupted. Before adjourning the House, I remind honourable members of the Joint Sitting to be held in the Senate chamber at 2.15 p.m. next Tuesday. The House stands adjourned until Tuesday, 5 May

1981, at 2.45 p.m., or such time thereafter as Mr Speaker may take the chair.
House adjourned at 11 p.m.
NOTICES
The following Notice was given:
Mr Fisher to move-
That this House(1) is of the opinion that Australia's most valuable water
resource and successful decentralisation example, the River Murray Basin, is being caused deplorable harm by inter and intra State parochialism, and political and financial restrictions, and
(2) requires the Federal and State Governments to strengthen the River Murray Commission, or another appropriate body, as part of the Federal Government's $200 million national program of financial assistance to the States for projects and activities of national significance, to preserve the Basin's ecology and to provide dependent communities with an assured supply of quality water.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 30 April 1981, pursuant to statute:
Lands Acquisition Act-Land acquired forDevelopment of Canberra and its environs-A.C.T. Overseas Telecommunications Commission purposes-
Norfolk Island. Telecommunications purposes-North Star, N.S.W.

Answers to Questions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1911 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions r"';:re circulated:

Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 1873)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London Metropolitan Police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000, or about 20 per cent, by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and subscriber trunk dialling cans, made by staff of his department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone cans in his department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The implications of the report were not considered relevant to my portfolio at the time in view of various steps taken by my department to minimise the illicit use .of departmental telephones.
(2) A departmental standing instruction serves to proscribe the use of departmental telephones for private purposes except in circumstances of extreme urgency. Further:
official overseas calls must first be approved by a Second Division officer;
official trunk cans (within Australia) must be approved by a Section Head of Class 8 level or above; and
private trunk calls must be approved in writing by the Executive Officer, General Services of the Management Services Branch of the department. These instructions are reproduced in the departmental telephone directory.
STD bars have been applied to those telephones where officers do not have regular and valid justification for the use of STD facilities or where an officer's supervisor feels that a potential for abuse of those facilities exists.
(3) No detailed consideration has been given to the introduction of monitoring devices since:
there is no evidence that the degree of misuse of departmental telephone facilities is such that the installation of a device such as Telecom's PETRA, coupled with the devotion of the considerable resources necessary for the meaningful analyses of monitored data would contribute a cost-effective exercise;

the other steps taken to minimise misuse of departmental telephones as detailed in myresponse to the second part of the honourable member's question appears largely to be effective.
Public Broadcasting Stations
(Question No. 127)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) What public broadcasting radio stations were broadcasting on 30 August 1980, where are these stations located, for how many hours per week does each station broadcast and when did each station commence broadcasting.
(2) Which of these stations use the (a) AM and (b) FM modes.
(3) Have any of these stations (a) applied for and (b) received Federal funding; if so, was the funding for (i) establishment of (ii) running expenses.
(4) If any station has received Federal funds, (a) to which stations were the grants paid, (b) when were they paid and (c) what sum was paid in each case.
(5) Which Federal Department or agency is responsible for the payment of Federal funding to public broadcasters.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Details of the public broadcasting stations in operation on 30 August 1980 are listed below in Table A.
(3), (4) and (5) There is no direct Federal funding available for public broadcasting. However, limited funds are provided to public broadcasting groups through the Creative Development Branch of the Australian Film Commission (AFC) , and from the Special Broadcasting Services (SBS).
SBS funds are available as subsidies to public broadcasting stations providing ethnic programs, while AFC funds are available as 'seeding' or establishment grants for the purchase of studio or transmitter equipment.
Funds have been made available to assist public broadcasters since 1975 when grants were made by the Film, Radio and Television Board of the Australia Council. The Board was abolished in 1976 and its activities, including that of funding public broadcasting, transferred to the AFC.
Details of funds made available by the AFC and the SBS are set out below in Tables Band C respectively.
The Department of Communications is currently giving consideration to issues concerning the funding of the public broadcasting sector.

Table A PUBLIC BROADCASTING STATIONS IN OPERATION ON 30.8.80

LQcation

Date of

commence-

Call

Frequency

ment Licensee and

sign

(MHz) of operation registered office

Weekly Licence hours of category* service

New South Wales Sydney

2CBA

Frequency Modulation (FM) Stations

103.2

5.3.79

Christian Broadcasting Associ-
ation Ltd, 420 Lyons Road, Five Dock, NSW 2046

S

168

1912 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Location Sydney
Sydney Armidale
Bathurst Lismore Newcastle Albury/Wodonga
Victoria Melbourne Melbourne Melbourne Churchill
Queensland Brisbane
Brisbane Toowoomba
South Australia Adelaide Adelaide

Call sign 2MBSt
2SER 2ARMt
2MCEt 2MCRt 2NURt 2REM

Frequency (MHz)

Date of
commencement
of operation

Licensee and registered office

Licence category*

Weekly hours of
service

Frequency Modulation (FM) Stations

102.5

9.11.78

Music Broadcasting Society of New South Wales Co-operative Ltd, 76 Chandos Street, St
Leonards, NSW 2065

107.5

1.10.79

Sydney Educational Broadcasting
Ltd, NSW Institute of Technology Broadway, Sydney, NSW 2007

92.3

1.9.78 Armidale Community Radio

Co-op. Ltd, Milton Building, Uni-

versity of New England, Armidale

NSW2350

92.3

1.9.78 Mitchell College of Advanced

Education, Bathurst, NSW 2759

92.5

1.9.78 Northern Rivers College of Ad-

vanced Education, Lismore, NSW

2480

103.9

1.9.78 The University of Newcastle, Newcastle, NSW 2308

107.9

4.4.80

Com m u nit y R a d i 0 Albury/Wodonga Co-op. Society Ltd, C/o Lang, Stanton, Simpson & Co., 2nd Floor, Council Chamber, 533 Kiewa Stree,
Albury, NSW 2640

S

168

EI06

C

121

C

138

C

114

C

119

C

136t

2MBSt 2PBS 3RRRt 3GCRt

93.7 107.7 102.7 103.5

9.11.78 22.12.79 .
1.9.78 1.9.78

Music Broadcasting Society of Victoria, 146 Cotham Road, Kew, Victoria 3101
~rogressive Broadcasting Service Co-op., 29 Fitzroy Street, St Kilda, Victoria 3182
Triple R Broadcasters Ltd, 124A La Trobe Street, Melbourne, Victoria 3000
Gippsland Community Radio Society Co-op. Ltd, Gippsland Institute of Advanced Education, Switchback Road, Churchill, Victoria 3842

S

84

S

95t

E

168

C

66t

4MBS
4ZZZt 4DDB

103.3
102.1 102.7

1.3.79
2.9.78 6.4.79

Music Broadcasting Society of Queensland Ltd, Kelvin Grove College of Advanced Education, Victoria Park Road, Kelvin Grove, Queensland 4059
Creative Broadcasting Ltd, Union Building, Circular. Drive, University of St Lucia, Queensland 4068
Darling Downs Broadcasting Society, Darling Downs Institute of Advanced Education, Baker Street, Toowoomba, Queensland 4350

S

128

S

156

C

71t

5EBI 5MMM

92.9

6.1.80 Ethnic Broadcasters Inc., 24

Parker Street, Mile End,SA 5031

93.7

22.12.79 Progressive Music Broadcasting

Assoc. Inc., 56 Magill Road, Nor-

wood, SA 5067

S

12Jt

S

118

Answers to Questions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1913

Location

Date of

commence-

Call

Frequency

ment Licensee and

sign

(MHz) of operation registered office

Weekly Licence hours of category' service

Western Australia Perth

6UVSt

Newman
Tasmania Hobart

6NEW 7CAEt

Hobart

7HFC

Canberra
Bourke Brisbane
Adeliade Perth

2XXt
2WEB 4EB
'5UVt 6NRt

Frequency Modulation (FM) Stations

92.1

1.9.78 Universities Radio Ltd, The Uni-

versity of Western Australia,

Mounts Bay Road, Nedlands, WA

6009

92.9

31.3.79 Newman Community Radio,

Keedi Road, Newman, WA 6753

92.1 103.3

1.9.78 30.3.80

Council of Advanced Education, Tasmanian Council of Advanced Education, Plumer Street,
Newnham, Tasmania 7250 Hope Foundation Communicators Inc., 47 Cross Street New Town, Tasmania 7008

Medium Frequency (AM) Stations

1008
576 1485
531 927

1.9.78
13.11.79 1.12.79
8.11.78 1.9.78

Campus Community Broadcasting
Association Incorporated, Kingsley Street Hall, Kingsley Street, Acton, ACT 2601 WREB Co-op. Ltd, Bourke High
School, Tarcoon Street, Bourke, NSW2840 Ethnic Broadcasting Association
of Queensland Ltd, 167 Boundary Street, West End, Brisbane, Queensland 4001
The University of Adelaide, North Terrace, Adelaipe, SA 5000 Western Australia Institute of Technology, Hayman Road, Bentley, WA6102

S

101

C

168

S

771

S

55

C

130t

E

70

S

123t

E

107t

S

90t

'Licence categories are: Special (S), Educational (E) and Community (C), ,
t Previously licensed as experimental stations under the Wireless Telegraphy Act 1905.

TableB
GRANTS FOR PUBLIC BROADCASTERS BY THE AUSTRALIAN FILM COMMISSION
(Australia Council Film, Radio and Television Board before 1977)

$

1974-1975 Public Broadcasting Association of Australia
1975-1976 Adelaide University Radio VL5UV (SA) Brisbane Women's Media Group (Qld) Community Radio Federation (Vic) Manly-Warringah Media Co-op (NSW) Media Facilities Ltd 4ZZZFM (Qld) Orange Community Broadcasting Society (NSW) Student Radio 5UV (Adelaide University) (SA) Tasmanian College of Advanced Education (Tas) 2MBS-FM Music Broadcasting Society of NSW
Co-op Ltd , . . . . . . . Women's Wireless (NSW)
1976-1977 Campbelltown Community Radio (NSW) Radio UNE Co-operative (NSW) Radio Station 2MBS-FM (NSW)

15,500
10,000 1,184
20,000 545
10,000 1,600 5,000
10,000
15,000 1,000
10,000 10,000 10,000

Northern Rivers College of Advanced Education (NSW) . , . . . . , . . .
Liverpool-Green Valley Community Radio (NSW) , . . . . . . . . . .
Albury Wodonga Community Radio (NSW) Community Access Radio Bathurst (NSW) Community Radio Federation (Vic) Gippsland Community Radio (Vic) Ethnic Broadcasters Inc. (SA) Radio 4ZZZ FM (Qld) WA Institute ofTechnology 6NR (WA)
Community Education Centre Fremantle (WA) Radio Station ANU-2XX (ACT)
1977-1978 3CS Stereo (Vic) Music Broadcasting Society of Vic 3MBS-FM
(Vic) . . . . . , . . . . . Student Radio-University of Adelaide (SA) Centre for Oral Tradition (ACT) Radio 2XX (ACT) , , . . . . .
WA. Institute of Technology 6NR (WA) Darwin Community College (NT) Harbour City Broadcasters (NSW) Inner City Radio Coalition (NSW)

$
5,700
1,188 2,000 1,500 5,000 10,000 3,400 5,000 8,600 2,000 10,000
2,500
5,000 4,000
870 7,500 7,756 4,000 1,500
750

1914 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Liverpool-Green Valley Radio (NSW) Manly-Warringah Media Co-operative Ltd
(NSW) . . . . . . . . . . . . . Northern Rivers College ofAdvanced Education Public Broadcasting Assoc. of Australia Radio Eastern Sydney Assoc. (NSW) RydeRegionalRadioLtd (NSW) . . . . . Radio UNE Co-operative Ltd (NSW) Music Broadcasting Society of NSW Co-operative
Ltd 2MBS-FM (NSW) . . . . 2RDJ-FM Community Radio (NSW)
1978-1979 Kirk Gallery Society (NSW) . . . 2WEB WcstcrnEducation (NSW) . 2NUR-FM (NSW) . . . . . . Music Broadcasting Society (Qld) Northern Rivers CAE 2NCR (NSW) Castlemaine Education Centre (Vic) Community Radio Bellingen (NSW) Radio Eastern Sydney (NSW) Gippsland Community Radio (Vic) WA Institute ofTechnology6NR "PM" TASCAE 7CAE-FM (Tas) Darling Downs Broadcasting (Qld) Manly Warringah Media Co-op (NSW) Townsville FM Broadcasting Society (Qld) Public Broadcasting Association of Australia . Radio RDJ-FM Community Radio Concord
(NSW) . . . . . . . . . . . . Community Radio Albury-Wodonga (NSW) Ethnic Broadcasters Inc (NSW) 2MBS-FM Music Broadcasting Society ofNSW 4ZZZ-FM Brisbane . . . . . . . . Progressive Music Broadcasting Assoc. (SA) Ethnic BroadcastingAssoc. ofQueensland Armidale Community Radio (NSW)
1979-1980 F.M. Community Radio Wagga Wagga (NSW) 2ARM-FM Armidale Community Radio (NSW) Para Broadcasters (SA) . . . . . . . . Liverpool-Green Valley Community Radio
(NSW) . . . . . . . - . . . . . Music Broadcasting Society of Queensland 4MBS
(Qld) . . . . . . . . . . . . . Community Radio Federation Ltd (Vic) Northern Rivers College of Advanced Education
(NSW) . . . . . . . . . . . . Armidale Community Radio-2ARM (NSW) Public BroadcastingAssociation of Australia Tamworth Broadcasting Society (NSW) Station 2NUR-FM Uni. of Newcastle (NSW) Progressive Broadcasting Service Co-op (Vic) Music Broadcasting Society ofNSW Ethnic Broadcasters Inc. (SA) Community Radio Albury-Wodonga (NSW) Ethnic Broadcasting Assoc. of Qld (Qld) Sydney Public Affairs Radio (NSW) HobartFM-7CAE-FM (Tas) Townsville FM Broadcasting Society (Qld) . . Public Broadcasting Association of Australia
(NSW) . . . . . . . . . . . . . Central Australian Aboriginal Media Assoc. (NT) Community Broadcasters Radio Portland (Vic)
1980-81 Blue Lake Community Broadcasters (SA) Community Radio Bellingen (NSW) . Community Radio Wagga Wagga (NSW) Gippsland Community Radio Society (Vic)

$ 3,000 2,015 6,000 20,600 4,000 2,000 5,000 7,500
743
2,000 4,000 3,000 5,000 5,000 3,280 3,000 1,550 3,500
921 7,000 10,000 3,700
220 33,100 4,250 4,000 10,000 15,522 11,750 10,000 10,000 9,240
4,500 500
3,000 2,900 8,200 10,000 10,000 6,320 37,500 3,500 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 7,500 5,000 5,000 4,960
500 1,230 4,500 4,000
3,000 3,000 10,830 7,500

Music Broadcasting Society ofQld Ltd (Qld) Townsville FM Broadcasting Society (Qld) Northern Rivers C.A.E.-2NCR (NSW) Triple-RBroadcastersLtd (Vic) ' " Public Broadcasting Association of Australia Radio Ettamogah (Albury-Wodonga) (NSW) Radi06NR (WA) . . . . . . . . Radio Lord Howe Island (NSW) Goldfields Community Radio 3CCC (Vic) FM Launceston Community Group (Tas) Darling Downs Broadcasting Society (Qld) . . 2NBC-FM Northside Broadcasting Co-operative
(NSW) . . . . . . . . . . . . Public Broadcasting Association of Australia

$ 7,000 10,820 6,000 8,000 50,000 5,000 6,656 3,000 9,410 3,000 10,000 4,000 5,500

TableC SUBSIDIES FOR ETHNIC PUBLIC BROADCASTING

Armidale Bathurst Campbelltown Canberra Hobart Lismore Newcastle Perth Adelaide Brisbane Perth Canberra Lismore Bathurst Hobart Newcastle Armidale Campbelltown

1978-79 1979-80

2ARM 2MCE 2CT 2XX 7CAE 2NCR 2NUR 6NR
5EBI 4EB 6NR 2XX 2NCR 2MCE 7CAE 2NUR 2ARM 2CT

1,325 2,070 4,640 13,580 1,710 4,030 2,680 23,852 61,900 51,802 26,265 20;540 11,280 8,160 6,890 4,320 2,987 16,040

Nomad Aircraft
(Question No. 573)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
On what date was each Nomad aircraft for use by the Bureau of Customs on coastal surveillance (a) ordered, (b) delivered and (c) first operational.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) The Department of Business and Consumer Affairs did not actually 'order' aircraft from the Government Aircraft Factory; instead, an appropriate tender document was released which required the aircraft to be owned and operated by the successful tenderer. On 28 March 1979, Executive Airlines, a wholly owned subsidiary of HC Sleigh Ltd, was advised that their operational tender for the first two aircraft had been accepted; and, on 11 June 1980, HC Sleigh Aviation Ltd was advised that their tender for the third aircraft had been accepted.
(b) and (c) The Customs Nomads were delivered and became operational on the following dates:
(i) The Townsville based aircraft-I8 February 1980 (ii) The Darwin based aircraft-4 July 1980

Answers to Questions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1915

(iii) The Port Hedland based aircraft-12 February 1981".
Apprenticeship Training
(Question No. 602)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(1) What was the total cost of the advertisements used in the advertising campaign for apprenticeship training late in 1980, which featured the slogan 'Jobs for the Boys'.
(2) With respect to the (a) CRAFT Scheme, (b) Group I Apprenticeship Scheme, and (c) Aboriginal Apprenticeship Training Scheme, (i) what sum has been allocated, (ii) what sum has been applied to the training of males and females and (iii) in what trades are females being trained.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The total cost of the national campaign, of which this advertisement was one part, was $411,000.
(2) (i) The allocations in 1980-81 for CRAFT and the Group-One-Year Apprenticeship Scheme (GOYAS) are $65m and $1.45m respectively. Part of the $11.8m available under the National Employment and Training System (NEAT) to train Aboriginals relates to apprenticeship training.
(ii) The Commonwealth does not discriminate between males and females in its support of apprenticeship and does not keep record of expenditure by sex.
(iii) Information on those trades in which females are being trained can be obtained from State and Territory apprenticeship authorities who have administrative responsibility for apprenticeships.
National Companies and Securities Commission Act
(Question No. 672)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
(1) Did his predecessor, in answer to my question No. 6316 (Hansard, 17 September 1980, page 1458) relating to the urgent need to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act to make it mandatory that corporations give advance public notice of their intention to relocate, and that such incorporation in the national Act will have the same binding effect upon companies and corporations whether national or international, state that the matter would be brought to the attention of the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities when considering submissions on the Companies Bill.
(2) If so, were these provisions considered and are they to be incorporated in the proposed legislation.
(3) If they are not to be incorporated in the proposed legislation, what is the reason.
(4) If this provision has been rejected by the Ministerial Council, will he give urgent consideration to alternative legislation which will have the same binding effect on companies and corporations whether national or international.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) to (4) The Ministerial Council directed that no new issues be included in the Companies Bill. The honourable

member's proposal came within this category and was not included. However along with a number of other proposals which raise general principles or practical problems not capable of speedy resolution, the honourable member's proposals will be considered further and if then accepted by the Ministerial Council will be included in amendments to the legislation at some appropriate time.
Apprentices
(Question No. 716)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 5 March 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that the $1000 tax free rebate for employers who employ 1st year apprentices, is not available in Victoria for apprentices in (a) panel beating, (b) motor body building, (c) vehicle spray painting and (d) vehicle trimming.
(2) If so, what are the reasons for this, and does the exclusion apply to other States as well.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) The Government announced on 26 October 1980 that the rebate would be repeated in respect of the metal, electrical and building trades where it is judged shortages will be most acute given the requirements of development projects. The restriction of the scheme to the metal, electrical and building trades applies throughout Australia.
Community Youth Support Scheme
(Question No. 718)
Mr Mildren asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 4 March 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that a recent decision was taken by his Department to reduce the funding allocation to the Community Youth Support Scheme (CYSS) project being managed by the Ballarat YMCA.
(2) If so, will this reduction result in the dismissal of one project officer.
(3) How many CYSS projects have been discontinued as a result of budgetary constraints in real terms imposed upon the CYSS program in (a) 1979-80 and (b) 1980-81.
(4) Did the Government receive evidence of reduced need for the CYSS program; if so, what evidence influenced the Government to reduce funding in real terms for 1980-81.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) A recommendation to reduce the funding allocation to the project was made by the Victorian State CYSS Committee. The recommendation was accepted by my predecessor.
(2) Yes.
(3) None.
(4) $11.6m was allocated for CYSS in 1980-81. Additional funds have been sought to cover cost increases and the full year costs of projects funded in the latter part of 1979-80. It is estimated that final expenditure on CYSS in 1980-81 will be $13.8m, 19% higher than the previous financial year.

19t6 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Stockbrokers: Trade Practices Investigation
(Question No. 726)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 5 March 1981:
(1) Did the Government propose more than 12 months ago that trade practices matters relating to stockbrokers should be administered by the National Companies and Securities Commission (N.C.S.C.) and not by the Trade Practices Commission; if so, did a recent meeting of the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities consider the proposal.
(2) If the proposal was not considered at this meeting why not.
(3) Was the subject originally listed for discussion; if so, which particular provisions of the Trade Practices Act is it contemplated will be placed within the ambit of the N.C.S.C.
(4) Will he give an assurance that if this change is made the N.C.S.C. will have the expertise and resources to deal properly with trade practices investigations.
(5) What are the reasons for treating the stockbroking industry differently from other sections of the community with respect to trade practices law.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1), (2) and (3) The Government indicated in June 1980 that the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs would pursue through the Ministerial Council on Companies and Securities whether the States would agree to the competition provisions of the Trade Practices Act, as they apply to stock exchanges, being administered hy the National Companies and Securities Commission. The matter is under continuing consideration.
(4) The question of resources and expertise will be fully considered and appropriate arrangements settled before any such changes are implemented.
(5) As indicated above the proposal is still under consideration. A statement concerning the reasons for such a change would be appropriate at the time any decision was announced.
Development Projects in Queensland
(Question No. 743)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:
(I) Had his attention been drawn to a report in the Courier Mail of 2 March 1981 which states that there may be some slippage in planned multi-million dollar development projects in the Gladstone area, Queensland due to the inability of the local government to provide necessary sewerage and other services.
(2) If so, (a) what account was taken in his Department's publication Major Manufacturing and Mining Investment Projects, dated December 1980, of such residual factors and of their capacity to distort the estimate of resource projects committed or in the final feasibility stage and (b) what is the precise nature of the allowance made by his Department for such a factor as opposed to its attempts to consider the magnitude of the impending resources boom.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as foHows:
(1) Yes.
The Government has maintained policies to set appropriate conditions for resource development in Australia. We have been responsible for developing special mechanisms to allow

the States to fund infrastructure projects vital to State economies including meeting the needs of concentrated development in a geographic area such as Gladstone.
The Queensland Government of course has responsibilities for the allocation of infrastructure funds on a geographic basis within the State. The broad conclusion of a recent study concluded by my Department is that national benefits of proposed inveStments in the resources area will only be fully realised if adequate infrastructure is in place. It is relevant however that in many cases individual developers entered into agreements with the Queensland Government to provide infrastructure at their own expense or to jointly finance with local and State authorities the necessary infrastructure developments.
Gladstone has some $350 million of infrastructure of various types planned apart from electricity generation and this level of development is on lop of the several billion dollars of private investment to be undertaken in and around Gladstone. A comparison of the last two schedules of Major Mining and Manufacturing Investment Projects prepared by my Department shows that no developers of private projects reported delays in the timing of projects for the Gladstone area due to infrastructure constraints.
(2) (a) The honourable member's attention is drawn to the statement. contained in the introduction to the Industry and Commerce Department publication to which he has referred. This explains that the Schedule provides a tabulated list of major investment projects which are currently proceeding or which may proceed in the future. As such the Schedule is an initial collection of development information derived from company and government sources. The Schedule does not, and is not intended to provide precise forecasts of capital expenditure by category of investment over any time period but it does offer at a point in time a, snapshot of the direction and magnitude investment is taking in Australia.
(b) See (a) above. My Department in conjunction with other departments is continuing to evaluate the varying data obtained through the surveys with a view to analysing and
adjusting the information to take account of such factors as
world market conditions, overlapping of projects, etc. and other factors which are known or likely to occur. In this way assessments can be made of the magnitude impact and timing of major project investment to assist in policy formulation and decision making by the Commonwealth Government.
Apprentices: Rebate for Farmers
(Question No. 808)
Mr Mildren asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that the $1,000 special rebate for farmers taking on extra apprentices has been discontinued for 1981.
(2) If so, will this lead to a reduction in the number of young persons able to learn appropriate farming skills.
(3) Will this decision discriminate unfairly against the farming community. If so, what were the reasons for the decision.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Ye~.
(2) The introduction of the $1,000 bonus in 1979-80 was designed as a once only exercise to stimulate the number of apprenticeship opportunities open to young people.
It was successful in achieving that objective and preliminary figures suggest that the range of other forms of assistance

Answers to Questions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1917

available under CRAFT is ensuring increased opportunities for apprenticeships, including farming apprenticeships.
(3) No.

Public Awareness Campaigns: School Leaver and Apprenticeship Training Programs
(Question No. 848)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
What sums have been set aside for funding public relations and public awareness campaigns in relation to the (a) Break the Vicious Circle schoolleaver and apprenticeship training programs, and (b) National Open Employment Strategy for the disabled coinciding with the International Year of Disabled Persons.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) $400,000 has been set aside in 1980-81 for the Break the Vicious Circle campaign. $411,000 has been set aside in 1980-81 for the National Trade Training campaign.
(b) $300,000 has been set aside for the National Employment Strategy for the Disabled.

Public Service Board Advertisements

(Question No. 862)

Mr Morris asked the Minister assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:

(1) What was the cost in each State and Territory of advertisements appearing over the name of Mr J. C. Taylor, Acting Chairman, Public Service Board, entitled The Public Service Board can be Proud, an example of which appeared in the Newcastle Herald of 24 February 1981.

(2) Were similar advertisements placed with other forms of
media at about the same time; if so, what were the (a) forms of media in which the advertisements were placed and (b) cost of these advertisements (i) in total and (ii) in each State
and Territory.

(3) Have communications between public servants and the Board deteriorated to such an extent that the advertisements became necessary; if not, why was it deemed necessary to publish the advertisements.

(4) What specific legislation authorises expenditure on the advertisements referred to in parts (1) and (2).

Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1)-
Australian Capital Territory New South Wales Victoria . . . Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory National

$ 328
3,651 2,110
751
638 679 315 239
983

9,694

(2) No.
(3) No; in the light of the threatened picket lines the advertisements were placed to communicate publicly to staff the Board's confidence in their professionalism and integrity and

to remind them of their responsibilities under the Public Service Act to carry out their normal duties during the industrial stoppage called by the Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association and Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers) for 24 and 25 February 1981.
(4) The advertisements arose from the Board's responsibilities under the Public Service Act 1922 and was placed in accordance with the provisions of the Audit Act 1901.
Diaman Pty Ltd: Purchase of Land at Strathpine
(Question No. 864)
Mr Humphreys asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a recent report in the Singapore Business Times concerning the proposed purchase of 121 hectares of land at Strathpine, via Brisbane, Queensland, by Diaman Pty Ltd, a company owned by a Singaporean named Kai Hong.
(2) Is there any substance to the report; if so, (a) what is the extent of Australian equity participation in the proposal and (b) has the Foreign Investment Review Board imposed as a condition of the proposed acquisition that any resale of land must be to Australians.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I have not seen the publication to which the honourable member refers, but he has provided me with a reference to it which appeared in the Brisbane Courier-Mail.
(2) I am informed that Diaman Pty Ltd does not have any proposal in hand to acquire land at Strathpine, Queensland. As the honourable member would be aware, such a proposed acquisition by a foreign person would require examination by the Foreign Investment Review Board in terms of the Government's policy on foreign investment in Australian real estate.
Public Service: Retirements on Grounds of III Health
(Question No. 877)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister,.upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
How many (a) male and (b) female employees of the Australian Public Service aged (i) under 40 years and (ii) 40 years and over were retired on a pension from the Service on the grounds of ill-health during each year from 1978 to 1980.
Mr Viner-The information sought by the honourable member is set out in the table below:
INVALIDITY RETIREMENTS FROM THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE (a) 1978-1980 BY
AGE

1978

1979

1980 (b)

Men Women Men Women Men Women

Under 40 years

74

49 88

54 48

37

40yearsandover 1,495 207 1,169 185 904 123 ----------------------

Total .1,569 256 1,257 239 952 160

(a) Permanent staff employed under the Public Service Act.
(b) Preliminary figures.

1918 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Safety: Butane Cigarette Lighters
(Question No. 912)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(l) Further to his answer to my question No. 5858 (Hansard, 22 May 1980, page 3152), (see folio 8) in relation to safety aspects of butane cigarette lighters, has his attention been drawn to the results of further studies carried out by the United Kingdom based Health and Safety Executive which indicates that there could be a risk to workers who take disposable butane gas cigarette lighters into areas where welding or other equipment capable of releasing very hot particles is used.
(2) If not, will ~e investigate these reports and, if necessary, take steps to advise the public of the hazards associated with these lighters.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) I have issued a media release concerning the advice of the British authorities on the potential risk of burns to consumers if disposable butane gas cigarette lighters are taken into areas where welding or other equipment capable of releasing very hot particles is nsed.
Department of Treasury: Television Advertising
(Question No. 939)
Mr Mountford asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(I) What sum was spent on television advertising by his Department and Instrumentalities under his control in 1979-80. (2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Treasury expenditure on advertising Commonwealth securities through television in 1979-80 was $942,033.03. The Commonwealth Banking Corporation also incurred significant expenditure on television advertising. However, for competitive commercial reasons it would not be appropriate to 'provide details of the Corportation's expenditure, as the pnvate banks are not required to disclose their expenditure on advertising. No other instrumentality for which I am responsible spent any sum on television advertising in that year.
(2) (a) $78,712.56. (b) $90,897.07, are the proportions of Treasury's expenditure for December 1979 and January 1980 respectively.
Taxation: Charitable Foundations
(Question No. 1027)
Mr Morrison asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
(l) What taxation arrangements apply to foundations established for public charitable purposes within Australia.
(2) Are contributions to these foundations regarded as tax deductible.
(3) Under existing taxation provisions applying to public companies what would be the amount of tax forgone by the

Commonwealth Government for donations to an approved foundation of (a) $500,000 and (b) $750,000.
(4) When an approved foundation makes a contribution to an approved charitable organisation, what are the tax arrangements in respect of the donor foundation.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Income derived by foundations established for public charitable purposes within Australia are generally exempt from income tax in terms of specific exemptions provided by the income tax law. There are no sales tax exemptions for public charitable institutions as such but goods purchased by certain specified organisations, e.g. public benevolent institutions and public hospitals, for their own use and not for sale are exempt from sales tax.
(2) Contributions to the foundations are deductible if the foundations are of the type specified in the gift provisions of the income tax law. In other cases, contributions are deductible only where the donor can establish a sufficient connection between the outgoing and the production of assessable income.
(3) The amounts of revenue forgone would be $230,000 and $345,000 respectively.
(4) There would be no taxation implications in this situation.
Postal Voting
(Question No. 1054)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
Further to his answer to my question No. 152 (Hansard, 24 February 1981, page 68) will he confirm that a fresh ballot paper is forwarded in reply to each request received by Electoral Officers, either Divisional or State Electoral Officers, from postal voters for replacement of spoilt ballot papers.
Mr Newman--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
As I indicated in response to the honourable member's earlier question, a voter who spoils a ballot paper may obtain another by returning the spoilt ballot paper to a Polling Official or a Divisional Returning Officer as the case requires. Replacement ballot papers may be issued personally to an elector at any time up to the close of the poll but would not be despatched by post where the request was received after 6 p.m. on the day preceding polling day since the ballot paper could not in those circumstances reach the elector in time for completion before the close ofpolling.
As far as the Chief Australian Electoral Officer is aware these procedures are followed in respect of all requests for the issue of replacement ballot papers.
I cannot, of course, comment on the procedures for State elections.
Utah Mining Company: Payment to Contract Labour
(Question No.nI8)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 7 Apri11981:
(I) Is he able to say whether the Utah Mining Company is in the practice of negotiating an arrangement with respect to the payment of wages to contract labour, whereby part of that company's wages payments do not appear in the company's financial records.

Answers to Questions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1919

(2) Is the Australian Taxation Office investigating any aspect of the Utah Company's financial statements.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No.
(2) The secrecy provisions of the income tax law prcvent the Commissioner of Taxation from supplying information about the tax affairs of any person.
Installation of Flood Lights at Stadium Site of the 1982 Commonwealth Games
(Question No. 1124)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the benefits that would result from the installation of floodlights at the Queensland Elizabeth II Athletics Stadium at Nathan, the site of the 1982 Commonwealth Games.
(2) Has his attention also been drawn to the fact that the Brisbane City Council has recently rejected the proposal to install floodlights because of the prohibitive cost.
(3) Can he say whether the estimated cost of installing the lights is approximately $1.7m.
(4) Will the Government consider supplying the full cost of installation or a part of the cost in view of the benefits of installation.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) Yes.
(4) The Commonwealth Government has already made a substantial contribution towards the development of Games facilities through the provision of a once and for all $10.0 million interest free non-repayable grant to the Queensland Government for the purpose of constructing sporling facilities and athletes/officials accommodation. This grant is payablc on the basis of $2.5 million per year from [978-79 to 1981-82 inclusive.
Given the terms of the $10.0 million grant, the provision of additional Commonwealth Government funding for additional Games facilities has, until recently, not been possible. However, the Government has announced recently the introduction of an International Standard Sports Facilities (ISSF) Program to provide $25 million over 3 years on a dollar for dollar funding basis with the States. The Commonwealth Government has offered the Queensland Government $260,000 for the upgrading of one Games' facility, the Belmont Rifle Range, under this Program.
I understand that the Queensland Government is presently considering the installation of lighting at a number of venues (including the QEII Stadium) to be used for the Games. Should the Queensland Government wish to raise the matter in the context of the International Standard Sports Facilities Program, it would be given close consideration by the Commonwealth.
Environmental Impact Statements
(Question No. 1171)
Mr West asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:

On what matters, and on which dates, have environmental impact statements been ordered to be prepared under the Environmental Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act since 5 April 1978.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Since 5 April 1978, seventeen (17) environmental impact statements on the matters and dates listed below have been directed.
Alwest Pty Ltd and Dampier Mining Co., in association with Reynolds Aust. Ltd, concerning the establishment of an alumina refinery at Worsley, WA-J7 August 1978
Redevelopment of Brisbane International Airport, Qld---18 December 1978
Southern Lateral Natural Gas Pipeline, Young-Wagga Wagga, NSW--28 September 1979
National Botanic Gardens Extension, ACT-18 October 1979
Boggabri Coal Project, NSW824 October 1979
Aluminium Smelter, Portland, Victoria (Alcoa of Australia Ltd)-18 December 1979
Aluminium Smelter, Tomago, Hunter Valley, NSW (Tomago Aluminium Co. Pty Ltd)-25 January 1980
Project Stormfury-Australia-30 January 1980
Aluminium Smelter, Lochinvar, Hunter Valley, NSW (Alumax of Australia Pty Ltd) -6 March 1980
Rundle Oil Shale Project, near Gladstone, North Qld (Southern Pacific Petroleum N.L. and Central Pacific Minerals N.L.)-19 March 1980
Development of uranium deposit at Honeymoon, SA (Mines Administration Pty Ltd)-20 March 1980
MereenieOil Gas Project, NT (Oilmin/Magellan)-16 April 1980
TV Translator Facility, North Head, Sydney Harbour, NSW-9 June 1980
Proposed Aerial Gondola, Black Mountain, ACT -17 July 1980
Aluminium Smelter, Goodwood, Qld (Alcan Queensland Smelter Ltd)-15 August 1980
Ben Lomond uranium project, Townsville, Qld (Minatome Australia Pty Ltd)-25 November 1980
Lake Way uranium project, WA (Delhi International Oil Corporation)- '-2 April 1981
Head Office, Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. ISIS)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) A re any sections of the Head Office of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Mr Viner---The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) No.
(2) See (l).

1920 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Recycling of Paper: Department ofAboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 1593)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Has any action been taken by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs to recycle paper; if so, what action.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

No.
Cheese Exports
(Question No. 1625)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
What quantity of each variety of cheese was (a) exported from Australia and (b) consigned to each importing country in 1979-80.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

AUSTRALIA Cheese Exports 1979-80
(kilograms)

Country

Processed nonProcessed
refrigerated refrigerated

Cheddar Parmesan

Gouda

Cheese nei

Total
all cheese

Total Afghanistan
Bahrain
Barbados Bangladesh Belize
Brunei BurmaSr
China,P.R. Cyprus
Canada Christmas Is.
Denmark Djibouti Egypt
France
Fiji Gabon Gambia GermanF.D.
Ghana Gibraltar
Guam Guyana
Hong Kong India
Indonesia Iran
Iraq Italy
Japan Jamaica Jordan Kiribati
R.O.Korea Kuwait Liberia Malaysia
Mauritius
Malta NauruR. Nepal
Netherlands New Caledonia New Hebrides New Zealand
Norfolk Is.
Oman

14,974,185 924
314,855 13,766 1,175 816 11,482 4,896 114 26,180
1,632 6,278 10.923
32.908 1.371 1.31l 3,325 1,061 816 2,055
139,223 97,303 516,268 13,814 1,856,242
.. 131,660
115,165 1,234 5,998
288,314 8,697
137,380 422,878
11,420 17,025 24,755
169
.. 6,250
122,804

5,868,656 25,204,124

407,037

21,367 188,557

32

32

772

..

41,568

30~

779

30 11.297

..
17.257

34,580

900
317,700 1,170 1,479
60,784

3,649 1,423,842
3,900
290
3,521 360

79,657 18,641,444 18

1,35.8.
666,060

2,520 19,130

126,695 64
1,449
..
42,774 872
15,648 240
121,501

4,020
255,360 998
64,697 1,020 10,605
8,120

100,475 1,125
15 18
30
264 159 427
45,043
90 41,109
963 75
1. 2 . 26.3.
2,977

6,139,568
36
6,118,928 8
1,800 13,015
.. 45.6.
3,390

8,846,813 4,864
16,663 959
51.795
..
11,140 48,350
309 4,110 123,400
4 3,749,474
14 520 8,580 147,460 282,707 2,026
32,710 -2,778 129,189
1,233 2,700

6,133,821 924
749.248 202,323
1,175 816
11,561
4.914 886
26,180 58,231 2,045
1,632
6.278 10,923
30
113,323
1.371 1.311 37.905 1,061
816
17,744 1,423,842
509,437 99,231
525,805 198,358 1,856,242
4
28,766,206 40
115,165
5,632
6,088
1,024,993 8,697
416,518
436,032 538,067
4,473 11,432 17,025 165,655
4,839 168,059
,1,4'(3 255,125

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1921

Country

Processed
nonProcessed refrigerated refrigetated

Cheddar Parmesan

Gouda

Cheese nei

Total all
cheese

Panama Pakistan
Papua New Guinea Peru Philippines Polynesia Qatar
Saudi Arabia Seychelles
Singapore Sierra Leone Solomon Is.
Spain South Africa Sri Lanka Sweden Tanzania Thailand
Tonga Trinidad Taiwan
Tuvalu TTPac.1.
U.A. Emirates
UK USA Wallis Island
Western Samoa Yemen
USPI

7,093 71,920
7,056
2,016 72,883 8,513,521 59,789 185,801 16,991
1,885
121,554 652
5,248 64,113
18,816
150 1,434,828
854 587
35,941

859 59,422
519,080 3,682
49,677 2,023,948
218,286
921 266,361
242
20,790
16,230 42,219
1,019 333,626
453,152 250
1,066

301,416
69,416
100,548 2,702 365 225
5,273
127
900 60
228,600 2,400 1,296
2,235 615,506 3,125,421

132 504
360 30 24 180
1,950
1,650 45
1,170
1,860

1,863 6 6
60

9,975 328
103,617 1,503,319
7,663 70
12,840 272,045
1,841
244
15,566
5,543
1,116 2,276,773
7,000 7,888

311,391 8,412
306,742
7,056 2,122,947
16,423 123,025 10,550,558
59,969 683,361
16,991 4,647
266,361 1,650
122,208
652 5,248
102,539 60
263,646
50,162 1,296 1,169
1,773,725 616,360
5,855,933 250
7,000 43,829
1,066

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics.

Cheese Imports
(Question No. 1626)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

What quantity of each variety of cheese (a) was imported into Australia and (b) came from each exporting country in 1979-80.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

AUSTRALIA Cheese Imports 1979-80
(Kilograms)

Country of origin

Processed cheese (including pastes and spreads) Cheddar Gruyere Emmenthaler

Other

Blue Veined cheese

Cheddar and
Epicure cheddar

Edam Gouda Jarlsburg Parmesan

Total Imports Austria

529,146 161,344 14,413

249,802 2,104,537 433,910 715,762 872,931 888,888 962,086 36,621 10,691

87,817

Belgium-Luxembourg Bulgaria Denmark
Finland France GermanyF.R.
Greece
Iceland Ireland Israel Italy Japan
Netherlands New Zealand Norway Romania

475
26,793 498,664

14,394 612 349
20,702
3,252 25,400

38,806 13,936 8,065 117,739

20,480 64,200 64,630 269,822

347,240
1,186 16,884

56,717 177,938 54 24,771

18,998
1,046 2,584

8,454 40,363
2,789 37,641
.. 1,566,197
843

6,806
232 18,286 6,520

9,734
678,804 597

376,945 233,754
2,706

359,977 501,060
3,088

962,086

87,817

1922 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Country of origin

Processed <;heese (including pastes and spreads)
Cheddar Gruyere Emmenthaler

Other

Blue Veined cheese

Cheddar and
Epicure cheddar

Edam Gouda Jarlsburg Parmesan

South Africa Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom USA.

1,956

80,085

2,153

1,061

181

23,392

1,000 672
5,893 10,685 11,420

865 35,891

26,573

100

2,135

Source: Australian Bureau ofStatistics.

AUSTRALIA Cheese Imports 1979-80
(kilograms)

Country of origin

Emmenthaler non-
Provolone Camembert processed

Cheese

Feta Kasseri Pecorino

n.e.i.

Total

Total Imports . Austria . . . Belgium-Luxembourg Bulgaria Denmark . Finland . . France Germany F.R. Greece Iceland Ireland Israel Italy . Japan Netherlands New Zealand Norway Romania South Africa Sweden . .
Switzerland United Kingdom USA.

288,930 440,977 291,089 59,374 89,912
288,930 422
180

148,413 1,032,927 27,278

9,623 65,097
1,461 10,442

502,806 46,060
505 4,800 141,397

270,198 204,958

17,110

2,883

13,432 591
20,489

320,222 27

62,357

34,773
12,258 22,515

2,758,775 11,981,216

20,529 109,532

34,035 34,035

4,580 507,386

659,019 1,502,426

44,257 366,040

169,803 306,948

100,532 658,188

170,023 516,378

3,013

3,013

12,258

19,993

230,662 722,074

42

42

108,771 903,461

707,555 4,229,720

92,673 1,069,104

87,522 470,IOl

1,000

162,039 165,739

18,749 148,608

139,570 214,872

5,401 20,298

Source: Australian Bureau dStatistics.

Taxation: Travel Concessions
(Question No. 1652)
Mr Bungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
Are travel concessions received by airline staff included as income for taxation assessment purposes; if not, why not.

Palm Island, Queensland, Oyster Farming Venture
(Question No. 1841)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
What income has been received from the Palm Island. Queensland, oyster farming venture.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Section 26 (e) of the Income Tax Assessment Act includes in assessable income of a taxpayer the value to the taxpayer of all allowances, gratuities, compensations, benefits, bonuses and premiums allowed, given or granted to him in respect of, or for in relation directly or indirectly to, any employment of
or services rendered by him whether so allowed, given or
granted in money, goods, land, meals, sustenance, the use of premises or quarters or otherwise. Travel concessions received by airline staff would fall within the operation of the section.

Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
My Department has not provided funds to the oyster farming project since 1979-80, and thP,. farming license was given to Palm Island Council on 1 July 1980, from which time trading was to c{)mmence.
Information about the income of the venture should be sought direct from the Council or from the Queensland Department of Aboriginal and Islanders Advancement.

Answers to Questions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1923

Applied Ecology Pty Ltd
(Question No. 1842)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What has happened to the plant nursery p;6ject commenced on Yorke Island by Applied Ecology Pty Ltd, and handed over to the Yorke Island Council in mid 1978.
(2) Has any income been received from sale of avocadoes or other fruit or plants since the handover.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable rriember's question:
(1) The Yorke Island nursery ceased operations in January 1979, as a lack of community and Council interest in the project resulted in inadequate tending of plants.
(2) The Yorke Island Council received no income from sales until the project was closed and the remaining plants were sold for a total ofless than $200.
Government Paint Committee
(Question No. 1850)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What is the composition and purpose of the Government Paint Committee.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Government Paint Committee comprises representatives from:-
Department of Science and Technology-Chairman and Secretary, Department of Administrative Services, Department of Defence (Air) (Army) (Navy), Department of Housing and Construction, Defence Service Homes Corporation, Department of Transport, N.S.W. State Paint Group, Queensland State Paint Group, S.A. Government Paint Committee, Tasmanian State Paint Group, WA. State Paint Group, Victorian State Paint Group, Northern Territory, Telecom Australia.
The terms of reference of the Committee are as follows:
With the object of ensuring that paints and related materials of satisfactory performance can be obtained for use by both Commonwealth and State Governments and their Instrumentalities, the Committee will
(a) operate an approvals scheme and be the government authority for paints and related materials, for
(i) the preparation of specifications (specification writing authority),
(ii) the approval of manufacturing units (registration authority),
(iii) the approval of products shown to comply with GPC specifications (qualification authority) and
(iv) the audit of the manufacturers' quality control (quality assurance authority),
(b) advise participating government departments and authorities on the specification, standardisation, coordination, procurement, quality assurance, testing and use of paints and related materials.

(c) put forward the views of participating bodies and provide technical advice to the Standards Association of Australia and the National Association of Testing Authorities, Australia in the paints area.
(d) collect and disseminate information on paints and painting processes to participating bodies.
Local Government Industry Training Committee
(Question No. 1893)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What delayed the formation of a Local Government Industry Training Committee and what is the present position in regard to this committee.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Industry Training Committees are autonomous tripartite bodies formed under the aegis of the National Training Council. The formation of Industry Training Committees in any industry is entirely a matter for the industry concerned. My function in this area is to respond to requests to recognise Committees when they are formed so that they can become eligible to receive financial assistance under the Training in Industry and Commerce programme.
To date I have given formal recognition to Local Government Industry Training Committees in New South Wales and in South Australia. No approaches have been made to me to recognise Local Government Industry Training Committees in any other State or nationally.
Accounting Standards Review Board
(Question No. 418)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Did his predecessor state in a letter dated 23 November 1979, that the proposal to establish an Accounting Standards Review Board would be referred to the Companies and Securities Law Review Committee.
(2) If so, what views did the Government put to the Committee on this proposal.
(3) If this proposal should fail to find acceptance by the Ministerial Council will he direct the officers of the National Companies and Securities Commission to formulate and codify national accounting standards and for these standards to be embodied in the proposed National Companies and Securities legislation.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (3) On 23 November 1979 the then Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, the Honourable Wal Fife, M.P., stated in a letter to you that:
'At a meeting of Commonwealth and State Ministers responsible for companies and securities industry matters in May 1978, it was decided to refer the proposal to establish an Accounting Standards Review Board to the Companies and Securities Law Review Committee . . .'
Subsequently, as indicated by my predecessor, the Bonourable R. V. Garland, in answer to House of Representatives Question No. 6248 (Hansard 1273 of 11 September 1980) the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities decided to refer to the National Companies and Securities Commission for consideration and report:

1924 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Answers to Questions

(a) the question of the establishment of the Companies and Securities Law Review Committee; and
(b) the question of the establishment of the Accounting Standards Review Board and the South Australian 'Report on the Committee of Inquiry into the Registration and Conduct of Accountants'.
The Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities has received and is still considering a preliminary paper that was prepared for it by the National Companies and Securities Commission of the Accounting Standards Review Board.
Recombinant DNA
(Question No. 762)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(I) Is his Department developing any policy concerning the controlled commercialisation of the new technology of recombinant DNA which is presently under extensive research.
(2) Is the CSIRO informed of developments in the United States of America in recombinant DNA technology.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Department of Science and Technology is developing policies in relation to the use of new industrial techniques arising from recombinant DNA research.
In July 1980 the Minister for Science and the Environment announced the Government's intention to appoint a committee to monitor the research with, and applications of, the recombinant DNA technique. One of the committee's main tasks will be to advise on the need or otherwise for industrial guidelines. This committee will have no legislative or regulatory power and will primarily operate by consultation with relevant interests and where necessary by liaison with existing regulatory agencies (e.g. quarantine authorities).
(2) Yes. CSIRO is being kept informed about developments in the United States of America in a number of ways. CSIRO scientists have visited the United States, worked in US laboratories and attended scientific meetings when reports on US research have been presented. CSIRO also receives copies of all the working papers of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee and other Committees of the Office of Recombinant DNA Activities, National Institute of Health, and the US Department of Health, Education and Welfare. CSIRO recently received a visit from the Vice President, Cetus Corporation, the first research company set up to utilize recombinant DNA techniques for the development of commercial processes with genetically manipulated micro-organisms. Last year, Professor Paul Berg, Wilson Professor of Biochemistry at Stanford University Medical Centre, and Nobel Prize winner for his work in genetic engineering, presented the Ninth David Rivett Memorial Lecture in Melbourne. The title of the Lecture was 'Molecular Cloning of Genetic Elements: Implication for Basic and Medical Research'. Professor Berg also visited a number of CSIRO Divisions and other research establishments in Australia.
Cameron Offices
(Question No. 80S)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
Has the Cameron offices building in the Australian Capital Territory leaked since being occupied, if so, (a) how many leaks have been recorded and (b) what action has been taken to remedy the leaks, at what cost, and by whom.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
An appeal before the High Court against the judgment and costs awarded to the architectural company in the matter of these offices is still pending. I am advised that answers to these questions could prejudice a fair trial of the appeal.
Homes Savings Grant
(Question No. 874)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to an article headed 'The Home Savings Grant Scheme does not increase home ownership' in the 'Building Comment', No.9, 16 March 1981, attributed to the Master Builders' Association of Victoria.
(2) Is it a fact, as alleged in that article, that eligible first home buyers are experiencing an average delay of 9 months between application and the actual payment of the grant.
(3) Is he able to say whether the building industry commonly refers to the Homes Savings Grant as the home decorators grant.
(4) What is the Government's attitude to the delay in the payment of the Homes Savings Grant, and also to (a) the issue of a Government-guaranteed certificate or voucher to successful grant applicants and (b) indexation of the grant, as recommended by the Master Builder's Association of Victoria.
Mr MeVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes,
(2) Yes. See answer to Question No. 896 published in Hansard of2 April 1981, page 1340.
(3) No.
(4) The waiting period for payment of Homes Savings Grants will be reviewed as the budgetary situation permits.
(a) See answer to question without notice by the honourable member for Bendigo, published in Hansard of 2 April 1981, page 1237. Successful applicants are notified in every case of the grant that will be paid to them.
The grant is intended to assist eligible people who have contracted to buy or build their first home and obtained the necessary finance to complete. As the grant varies according to accrued savings in each case, and is related to eligibility at the contract date including approved finance, no entitlement can lawfully arise or be calculated in advance of an approved application. (b) The Government recently increased the grant payable by introduction of a Family Bonus of up to $1000. The Family Bonus reflects the Government's recognition of the difficulties faced by families with dependent children-particularly single income families---in saving for a home. Eligible people can now receive Commonwealth assistance of up to $3,000 towards their first home.
The maximum amount of grant payable will be reviewed from time to time as appropriate.

Answers to Questions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1925

Department of Finance: Television Advertising
(Question No. 942)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(l) What sum was spent on television advertising by the Department of Finance and Instrumentalities under the Minister's controlin 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
No television advertising was undertaken by my Department or any of the instrumentalities under my control in 1979-80.

Appointments to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Finance
(Question No. 1014)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
What are the (a) names, (b) dates and terms of appointment and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

1. Superannuation Fund Investment Trust

Chairman and fullMr R. A. Hammond Appointed on 3 April 1978

time member

for 7 years

Part-time member

Mr J. R. Smith

Appointed on I July 1976

for 3 years

Reappointed on I July

1979 for a further 3

years

Part-time member

MrM.G.King

Appointed on I July 1980 for 3 years

2. Commissioner for Superannuation

Commissioner

Mr R. C. Davey

Appointed on I December 1976 for 7 years

(a) As determined by the Remuneration Tribunal.

Current salary $41,286 p.a. with expense of office allowance of $1,400 p.a. (a)
Mr Smith holds the position of Deputy Chief General Manager of the Australian Telecommunications Commission and, in accordance with the provisions of section 7 (II) of the Remuneration Tribunals Act 1973, does not receive additional remuneration for his part-time membership of the Trust
Current remuneration $5,725 p.a. (a)
Current salary $41,286 p.a. (a)

Upgrading of Airports: Karratha and Port Hedland
(Question No. 1037)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Housing and Construction upon notice, on 2 April 1981:

Second Homes
(Question No. 1172)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:

(1) What are the relevant cost estimates for upgrading Karratha and Port Hedland airports, WA, to take Boeing 727 or equivalent aircraft.
(2) Are there any plans to upgrade either of these airports; if so, which one.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The costs for upgrading either Karratha or Port Hedland aerodromes for Boeing 727 aircraft could be approximately $1 Om but a more precise figure would depend on the extent of works required at each aerodrome.
(2) Karratha airport is owned by the Shire of Roebourne and any upgrading would depend on agreement between the Shire and the Department of Transport as to the extent of work required.
There are no proposals for upgrading of either Karratha or Port Hedland airports to cater for Boeing 727 or equivalent aircraft.

How many Australian households own second homes (Le. homes for recreational and holiday purposes, not including additional dwellings held specifically for investment, c.g. for renting), expressed (a) in absolute figures and (b) as a percentage of households and (c) indicating the figures for each State.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Precise statistics of second homes arc not available. However, the 1976 Census provided information on the number of dwellings which were unoccupied on Census night and which in the opinion of Census collectors, were primarily used for holiday purposes.
The following table shows for each State the number and proportion of holiday homes as recorded in the 1976 Census. The figures do not include second homes which were occupied on Census night.

1926 REPRESENTATIVES 30 April 1981

Answers to Questions

UNOCCUPIED HOLIDAY HMS IN EACH STATE, 30JUNE 1976

Proportion of total
Number dwellings

New South Wales , Victoria
Queensland South Australia Western Australia
Tasmania Australia

%

31,416

1.9

32,062

2.6

12,142

1.8

11,624

2,7

7,286

2.0

6,614

4.8

101,164

2.2

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics, 1976 Census.
Overseas Travel: Department of Finance
(Question No. 1450)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of the Department of Finance travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, et cetera.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Five.
(2) $23,984.
Head Office: Department of Finance
(Question No. 1502)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Are any sections of the Head Office of the Department of Finance not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many stal! are in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) There are no sections of the Head Office of the Department ofFinance located outside Canberra.
(2) Not applicable.
Tea Services: Department of Communications
(Question No. 1599)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many (a) full-time and (b) part-time stal! are employed on teamaking and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his Department in 1979-80.

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Department employs only one person on a part-time basis for the provision of tea services. The employee concerned is located in the Sydney Office and is engaged in the duties concerned for approximately one half of the 30 hours per week for which she is employed.
(2) The only cost to the Department has been in the nature of salary and the expenditure in 1979-80 in relation to the tea making duties amounted to approximately $4,000.
Telecasts ofTest Cricket
(Question No. 1629)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Has action been taken to permit people in country areas serviced only by ABC television to view telecasts of Test cricket; if not, will he initiate action.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Under an agreement reached on 27 March 1981, following Federal Court action taken by the ABC against the Australian Cricket Board, World Series Cricket Pty Ltd, Publishing and Broadcasting Pty Ltd and PBL Marketing Pty Ltd in respect of exclusive rights, the ABC will be resuming coverage of major cricket matches played in Australia next summer.
Australian Fire Protection Association
(Question No. 1754)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What grants have been made to the Australian Fire Protection Association in each of the last 5 years.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Since 1976 the Australian Fire Protection Association has received a Commonwealth Grant of $30,000 per annum.
Department of Housing and Construction: Fees charged for Projects Undertaken
(Question No. 1849)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing-and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Does his Department charge a supervision or over-riding administrative fee for projects undertaken for the National Capital Development Commission; if so, what sum, and are similar fees charged to otherdepartrnents and authorities for which projects are being undertaken.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Department of Housing and Construction does not charge the National Capital Development Commission.
The Department of Housing and Construction charges a service fee for all works carried out on behalf of clients who are revenue producing or operate on a commercial basis, or who are not fully financed from the Commonwealth Budget.
Fees charged are based on scales issued by appropriate prefessional bodies. A fiat charge cost recovery system is used where individual charging of large statutory bodies would necessitate extensive calculations and invoicing.

Answers to Questions

30 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1927

Government Housing: Solar Water Heating
(Question No. I8S1)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many houses are now under construction for the Commonwealth Government in each Stat~ and Territory.
(2) Do any of these hflve solar water heating; jf so, how many.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) Houses now under construction for the Commonwealth Government by the Department of Housing and Construction:

Queensland

23

Western Australia

8

Australian Capital Territory

3

Northern Territory

93

Total

127

(2) All of these houses (127) are to have solar water heating.


