House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 122, 1981 Thursday, 9 April 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1509

Thursday, 9 April 1981

by Mr Bradfield. Petition received.

Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10.30 a.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the N.H.S. and that insulin prescriptions revert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley, Mr Campbell, Dr Cass, Mr Cunningham, Mr Dawkins, Mr Duffy, Mr Hawke, Mr Howe, Mr Jacobi, Dr Jenkins, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mildren and Mr Milton.
Petitions received.
National Women's Advisory Council
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled: The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the National Women's Advisory Council has not been democratically elected by the women of Australia;
That the National Women's Advisory Council is not representative of the women of Australia;
That the National Women's Advisory Council is a discriminatory and sexist imposition on Australian women as Australian men do not have a National Men's Advisory Council imposed on them.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the National Women's Advisory Council be abolished to ensure that Australian women have equal opportunity with Australian men of having issues of concern to them considered, debated and voted on by their Parliamentary representatives without intervention and interference by an unrepresentative "Advisory Council".
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Donald Cameron and Mr Millar.
Petitions received.
National Day of Prayer and Fasting
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives, in Parliament Assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that: In view of the Spiritual, and Moral decline of our Nation we your Petitioners therefore. humbly pray that Parliament will call a day of National Prayer and Fasting in 1981.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Medical Records: Confidentiality
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we are gravely concerned by the invasion of privacy caused by Government agents seizing patients' medical records.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, should:
Legislate to protect the private and confidential nature of medical records from scrutiny except on the express and informed consent of the patient or an order from a presiding judge.
And-your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cadman.
Petition received.
Metric System
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan to obliterate the traditional weights and measures of this country does not have the support of the people;
That the change is causing and will continue to cause, widespread, serious and costly problems;
That the compulsory tactics being used to force the change are a violation of all democratic principles.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Metric Conversion Act be repealed to ensure that the people are free to utilize whichever system they prefer and so enable the return to imperial weights and measures wherever the people so desire;
That weather reporting be as it was prior to the passing of the Metric Conversion Act;
That the Australian Government take urgent steps to cause the traditional mile units to be restored to our highways;
That the Australian Government request the State Governments to procure that the imperial and metric systems be taught together in schools.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Chapman.
Petition received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats of women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(1) Tampoons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-classified under Therapeutic Agents (not under "Cosmetics" as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.

1510 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Petitions

(2) After re-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.

Service Pensions

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of
Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That the Ex-Servicemens' & Womens' Pension Association is a body formed for the express purpose of obtaining a Service Pension for all Ex-Service Personnel at sixty years of age for
men and fifty-five years of age for women regardless of where they served during the 1939-45 war.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled -should give urgent
consideration to a favourable decision to the granting of the Service Pension to all Ex-Service Personnel who served their country in time of need and who did not serve overseas through no fault of their own. The Service Pension is
presently only granted to Returned Ex-Service Personnel.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mrs Child.

Petition received.

Funding of Children's Services

To the Honourable the Speaker and Member of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The
petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:

That funding in the area of children's services, which has
been reduced by almost 40% in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 budget. And further, that annual budget allocations in the area of children's services
should be spent in full for the purposes designated.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Free.

\

Petition received.

L~~eIling of Cosmetics To the Honourable til~ Speaker and Members of the House of
Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of I\ustralia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any

regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetc Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were SUbjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(1) whether a product contains any animal df.lrivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(1) That merchant seamen have in the past served in - theatres of war; they have been decorated for valour following
war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen during World War 2.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or-environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the interim list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed a further mining lease against the advice of conservationists.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Petitions

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 151l

Trade Unions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that we are gravely disturbed by the actions of militant unions and the ACTU, the failure of the President of the ACTU to assist positively in settling the dispute which has caused massive losses to Qantas our National Airline, and we applaud the action of the Government in using RAAF planes to rescue Australians stranded abroad.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament and the Government should be of firm resolve not to permit such unions to hold the country to ransom and cOntinue to take a forceful and resolute stand against such union militancy.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
Australian Broadcasting Commission: Melbourne Showband
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the Australian Parliament in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth that:
As regular viewers and listeners of the ABC Melbourne Showband we were disappointed to learn of the dismissal of seventeen members of this outstanding orchestra.
We have had a great deal of pleasure over the past eight years viewing and listening to this barid's fine music. It is the only full-time light orchestra in Australia and we are disgusted to think that such talented musicians should be dismissed in this manner.
We therefore call on the Federal Government to rescind this decision and make more money available for the continuance of the full Showband.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hawke and Mr Hodgman.
Petitions received.
Telephone Services
To the Honourable the Speaker of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Macquarie respectfully showeth:
That we consider. the lack of service provided by Telecom Australia in Sydney's 047 telephone zone is not only inconvenient but is affecting families, business concerns and employment in the area.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government direct Telecom Australia to provide an adequate service to subscribers and users in the 047 telephone zone.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrFree.
Petition received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth:

That, as concerned citizen we wish to lodge the strongest possible objection to the Governments intention to cease paying unemployment benefits to people under the age of 18 years.

We believe that this decision if carried out will:

(a) cause extreme hardship to the living standards of

people under 18 years of age, especially those who do not live at home.

(b) create severe hardship on parents and families who

will be forced to support people placed in this situ-

ation, and also add a further burden on community

~d.

.

(c) Will' not force the majority of young people back to

school, due to lack of finance and confidence in the

Education System.

(d) Cause young people to morally deteriorate by entering

a life of crime, prostitution, drug abuse etc.

We therefore call on the Federal Government not to go ahead with this policy.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Holding.

Petition received.

Airlines Policy
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the present two airline domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.
That this policy has resulted in expensive airfares and poor service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visiting WA and vice versa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition and formulate an Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will everpray.
by Mr McLean.
Petition received.

LEBANON
Notice of Motion
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(1) Urgently requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations to initiate immediate action by the United Nations Security Council to bring about a peaceful settlement of the conflict in Lebanon and
(2) is of the opinion that such settlement should embrace:
(A) Strict respect by all members of the United Nations for the territorial integrity of Lebanon within its internationally recognised boundaries;
(B) Extending the responsibilities of the United Nations Interim Force to apply to the internationally recognised boundaries of Lebanon;
(C) The transfer of responsibilities currently exercised by the Arab League peacekeeping forces to the United Nations Peacekeeping Forces,

1512 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Notices ofMotions

and the subsequent withdrawal of the Arab League forces;
(D) Disarming of factional and communal militias; and
(E) Concurrent steps towards a settlement of the Palestinian question which will provide Palestinians with a national homeland.

any way prevent any other honourable member
from giving a similar, indeed identical, notice. In fact, the notice is different, but even if it had not
been it would have not have prevented the honourable member for Isaacs from giving it anyway.

COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE
Notice of Motion
.Mrs KELLY (Canberra)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That section 34 of the Public Service Act be amended to remove the British subject requirement for entry into the Commonwealth Public Service.
SERVICE PENSIONS: MERCHANT SEAMEN
Notice of Motion
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House is of the opinion that allied merchant seamen who served in a theatre of war in World War II and have the necessary residential qualifications should qualify for a Service pension.
INSURANCE BROKERS: AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF FRESHWATER STUDIES
Mr JACOBI (Hawker)-Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence. As you know, I have on the Notice Paper two motions dealing with insurance brokers and one dealing with an Australian Institute of Freshwater Studies. I note that Western Australia is now bringing in legislation in relation to brokers. I might say that I have almost completed both proposed Bills--
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable member is seeking my indulgence he had better tell me quickly what it is that he wants.
Mr JACOBI-Both Bills have been almost prepared and I would appreciate it if Icould have the facilities of Parliamentary Counsel to enable them to be completed.
Mr SPEAKER-It is a matter which should be taken uP with the Attorney-General or the Leader of the House. If the honourable gentleman, having done that, wishes to approach me he may do so directly.
Mr Good luck-I raise a point of order. I draw the attention of the Speaker to Notice of Motion No 50 as recorded at page 1312 of the Notice Paper.
Mr SPEAKER-I take it that the honourable gentleman's point of order is that there is already a Notice of Motion by him concerning Service pensions. The fact that the honourable member has already given notice of a motion does not in

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
RUNDLE SHALE OIL PROJECT
Mr KEATING-I ask the Prime Minister whether, to support claims by the Government that it knew of the present state of the Rundle investigation on 18 February of this year, he will table the letter that Senator Carrick said he had addressed to the Prime Minister expressing disquiet at the progress of Rundle. Will he also table the advice of the Attorney-General's Department, which Senator Carrick claims urged the Government not to take the initiative and publicise the current status of the Rundle venture? If the Prime Minister is not prepared to table the letters, can he tell the House precisely why?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There were discussions involving Senator Carrick, myself, the Treasurer and I think one or two other Ministers, in relation to this particular matter and also in relation to the appropriate course that the Government should take in these circumstances-where obviously there are circumstances of interest to the stock exchange and to the wider public community. It was at a time when the Rundle partners themselves were still seeking to sort out the facts to see to what extent they had a common view of the circumstance, and the changed circumstance, of the Rundle operation. Mr Speaker, could I take the slightly unusual course of asking the Treasurer to add to this answer, because he had, more directly, conversations with the persons involved than I did and also wrote communications which are more directly relevant. I know that the Treasurer is willing to table those particular letters, which would express' quite clearly the Government's concerns and interests.
Mr SPEAKER-I call the Treasurer.
Mr HOWARD-It is true, as Senator Carrick has already indicated, that arising out of a visit that he paid to Gladstone in, I think, about the third week of February, there was a discussion between Esso Australia Ltd and the Prime Minister and senior Ministers. Arising out of that discussion, I addressed a letter dated 27 February to Mr McFarlane, the chairman and managing director of Southern Pacific Petroleum.

Questions Without Notice

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1513

I seek leave to have the letter incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
TREASURER
PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA 2600
27 Feb. 1981
Mr I. McFarlane Chairman and Managing Director Southern Pacific Petroleum NL 143 Macquarie Street, SYDNEY, NSW 2000
Dear Mr McFarlane
It has been brought to the notice of the Government that ongoing investigatory work in relation to the Rundle shale oil project has thrown up certain problems.
It is understood that those problems extend to both the mining and processing sides of the proposed venture and that they have implications for the timetable and scale of operations of the project-and, perhaps, for its overall economic viability. I believe that your technical people are currently examining the additionai information.
The Government is naturally concerned that any significant new information bearing upon the future of the Rundle project be brought immediately to the attention of the relevant stock exchanges in accordance with normal listing requirements. Without in any way inferring that you would act differently, I should like you to be aware of the Government's continuing interest in Rundle and of its concern that investors on the stock exchanges have access to all relevant information on the project as it becomes available.
Yours sincerely,
JOHN HOWARD
Copy to:
The Rt Hon. J. M. Fraser, C.H., M.P. The Prime Minister Parliament House CANBERRA, ACT 2600
The Rt Hon. J. D; Anthony, M.P. Senator the Hon. J. L. Carrick
Mr HOWARD-The thrust of that letter was that the Government had been made aware of the views of one of the partners that the prospects for the project were significantly different from what was then the general public conception. It was our view that, whatever disclosure should be made, should be made promptly, in the interests of keeping the investing public fully informed. I quote from that letter; it states:
The Government is naturally concerned that any significant new information bearing upon the future of the Rundle project be brought immediately to the attention of the relevant stock exchanges in accordance with normal listing requirements.
That is the letter I addressed to the Southern Pacific Petroleu;m company on 27 February. I set out very much the desire of the Government, immediately on being made aware of concerns felt by one of the Rundle partners, for the public to be kept fully informed. Subsequent to that, there was

a response to that letter and a discussion between myself and an officer of my Department and the Minister for National Development and Energy and an officer of his Department. Arising from that, at my request, advice from the Crown Solicitor's Office was obtained. Subsequent to that, I had a personal discussion with the Solicitor General and oral advice was conveyed to me by him. The effect of that advice-if I report it incorrectly I will so advise the House-was that there was no legal obligation upon the Government at that stage to convey unilaterally to the stock exchanges what it had been told by Esso Australia Ltd, and that the proper course of action was to urge the parties to resolve their differences as quickly as possible with a view to making a full and complete disclosure. As a consequence of that discussion and further advice that I obtained, I wrote again to Southern Pacific Petroleum and also to Mr Kirk, the managing director of Esso, on 20 March. I seek leave to have those two letters incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The documents read as follows-
TREASURER PARLIAMENT HOUSE
CANBERRA 2600
20 March, 1981
Dear Mr McFarlane,
In the light of recent separate meetings between Commonwealth Ministers and the Joint Venturers in the Rundle Oil Project, it is clear that there are considerable differences between the Joint Venturers both. on estimates of capital costs and on certain technical aspects of the operation.
I understand that arrangements have been made for the respective parties' engineers and other technical experts to consult and sort out the facts and their implications. I wish to reiterate the Government's concern to ensure that the disagreements on costs and technical aspects are resolved at the earliest opportunity so that investors on the stock exchanges can be informed of all relevant information..
In the intervening period, however, I suggest that the stock exchanges be informed of the differences between the Joint Venturers and also that these matters are being examined with a view to making a public announcement on their resolution.
In view of the obvious importance attached by the Government to this matter, I should appreciate your letting me know as soon as possible what you propose to do in response to the suggestions made in this letter.
I have written in similar terms to Mr Kirk.
Yours sincerely,
JOHN HOWARD
Mr I. McFarlane, Chairman and Managing Director, Southern Pacific Petroleum NL, GPO Box 4024, SYDNEY, NSW 2000

1514 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

TREASURER PARLIAMENT HOUSE
CANBERRA 2600
20March,1981
Dear Mr Kirk, In the light of recent separate meetings between Common-
wealth Ministers and the Joint Venturers in the Rundle Oil Project, it is clear that there are considerable differences between the Joint Venturers both on estimates of capital costs and on certain technical aspects of the operation.
I understand that arrangements have been made for the respective parties' engineers and other technical experts to consult and sort out the facts and their implications. I wish to reiterate the Government's concern to ensure that the disagreements on costs and technical aspects "are resolved at the earliest opportunity so that investors on the stock exchanges can be informed of all relevant information.
In the intervening period, however, I suggest that the stock exchanges be informed of the differences between the Joint Venturers and also that these matters are being examined with a view to making a public announcement on their resolution.
In view of the obvious importance attached by the Government to this matter, I should appreciate your letting me know as soon as possible what you propose to do in response to the suggestions made in this letter.
I have written in similar terms to Mr McFarlane.
Yours sincerely,

believed about the project might not be the case, took every reasonable step to get the parties to resolve those differences and to make a public announcement. As a consequence of the discussions , between the parties, the joint announcement was made by Esso and by the other Rundle partners last week. There can be absolutely no doubt that, at every stage of this matter, the Government and in particular my colleague the Minister for National Development and Energy have behaved particularly and properly.
Mr Keating-Mr Speaker, during the question I asked the--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! Does the honourable gentleman wish to raise a point of order?
Mr Keating-lam not clear about a point. The Prime Minister intimated that he would table Senator Carrick's letter and the Attorney General's advice. Does the Treasurer intend to table Senator Carrick's letter and the Attorney General's advice? Why did the Government feel compelled to respond to these companies anyway?

JOHN HOWARD Mr Howard-Mr Speaker--

MrJ.Kirk, Managing Director, Esso Australia Limited, EssoHouse, 127 Kent Street, SYDNEY, NSW 2000

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Treasurer will resume his seat. I granted indulgence to the honourable member for Blaxland but there is no need for any reply to be given in a specific sense. A question can be asked but the questioner is not entitled to demand an answer to the question.

Mr HOWARD-In those letters I said, inter alia:
I understand that arrangements have been made for the respective parties' engineers and other technical experts to consult and sort out the facts and their implications. I wish to reiterate the Government's concern to ensure that the disagreements on costs and technica1 aspects are resolved at the earliest opportunity so that investors on the stock

MrHayden-MrSpeaker--
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman wish to raise a point of order?
Mr Hayden-Yes, I do.
Mr SPEAKER-I would like the hOMurable gentleman to state that he wishes to raise a point

exchanges can be informed of all relevant information.

of order if that is the case.

In the intervening period, however, I suggest that the stock exchanges be informed of the differences between the Joint Venturers and also that these matters are being examined with a view to making a public announcement on their resolution.

Mr Hayden-The Treasurer indulged in a great deal of provocation towards the end of his answer but he did not attend to the issue, namely,

In view of the obvious importance attached by the Governthat he has to table a letter from Senator Carrick ment to this matter, I should appreciate your letting me know to the Prime Minister and the Attorney-General's

as soon as possible what you propose to do in response to the suggestions made in this letter.

advising to the Prime Minister on this matter. It is a very important matter and there are some

Surely that is indication enough of the continuing smelly aspects associated with it.

concern of the Government that the differences between the parties be resolved as soon as possible and that the public be fully informed. In the face of that action by the Government, the disgraceful

Mr SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.
Mr Charles Jones-Mr Speaker, I wish to raise

allegations made in another place about the actions of the Minister for National Development and Energy in this matter are absolutely rep-

a point of order. The Daily Program refers to "Questions without notice'. Mr Speaker, may I take it that your interpretation of the Standing

rehensible. At all stages this Government, being aware of differences between the partners and of

Orders is that it should now read 'Questions without answers'?

concern by the partners that what was originally Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.

Questions Without Notice

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1515

UNION DEMARCATION DISPUTES Mr BOURCHIER-Can the Minister for Housing and Construction advise the House whether major Commonwealth projects are being affected by the current high incidence of union demarcation disputes? If so, will he provide the House with details of these disputes?
Mr McVEIGH-The short answer to the honourable member's question is yes. I would like to take a few minutes of the time of the House to indicate to honourable members some of the problems that have occurred through the raising of senseless demarcation issues. They are denying jobs to Australian workers. They are also denying services to Australian consumers as well as adding significantly to the costs associated with building. My Department has in progress at present jobs costing in excess of $500m. Four of those projects-namely, a $34m project at the Exhibition telephone exchange in Melbourne, a $9m project at the telephone exchange in North Sydney, a $6.8m service information centre at North Sydney and a $4.5m stores complex at Kingswood, Sydney-are being held up by demarcation issues. That is to be deplored.
Additionally, I would remind the House that a dispute at Bonegilla held up defence installation works costing $34m. It is pleasing for me to advise the House that, following solid and determined leadership by the Minister for Industrial Relations, work at the Omega site was resumed. This project is to cost $9.7m. I am delighted to be able to advise interested people that at 9 o'clock this morning the height of the tower at Omega was 190 metres and that at 10 o'clock it was 199.56 metres, indicating that Australian workers can do the job even at those heights. I am hopeful that the complete tower of 427 metres will be finished in time to allow that navigational aid to be functional by next year. Finally, I make the point that it is about time those who sit opposite supported the efforts of the Minister for Industrial Relations to give more jobs to Australian people and to allow costs to be contained. Why do they deny jobsto their fellow workers?
RUNDLE SHALE OIL PROJECT Mr KEATING-I ask the Treasurer to supply us with another answer in relation to the Rundle project. Why was it that the Government felt compelled to be so involved in commercial arrangements with two Australian companies and an international company in Rundle, that is Central Pacific Minerals and Southern Pacific Petroleum and Esso Australia Ltd, that it had the

Prime Minister, the Minister for National Development and Energy, the Treasurer, the Attorney General and the Solicitor-General involved in what was, after all, a feasibility study-one among a number of feasibilities studies currently proceeding-for the development of a resource? Is the Treasurer aware that there was enormous trading in Rundle shares on 19 February? Is he also aware that by his own statement he did not advise the companies until nine days after the advice from Senator Carrick? He might tell us also why Senator Carrick actually had to go to the site to get that advice. Finally, why will the Government not table Senator Carrick's letter to the Prime Minister or the advice to the Treasurer from the Attorney-General?
Mr HOWARD-I would not have thought that it was a matter of critical comment on this Government that a number of senior Ministers as well as the Prime. Minister should be concerned about a project of such potentially great significance to the energy future of this country. To suggest that there is something odd about the Prime Minister and my colleagues, the Minister for Trade and Resources, the Minister for National Development and Energy and myself being concerned about the project trivialises the whole issue. Our actions at every stage were the actions of a government having been made aware, through the visit of Senator Carrick to Queensland in February, of the possibility that the original projections and projections on which investment decisions were being based on Australian stock exchanges could in fact be different. We took every reasonable step, with proper ex- . pedition, to get the companies to resolve their differences and to advise the current situation which they did by the public statement last wee~.
Mr Keating-Is this normal practice?
Mr HOWARD-The honourable member for Blaxland asks me--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Blaxland will remain silent.
Mr Keating-Let him tell us where else he has done this.
Mr SPEAKER~The honourable member for Blaxland will remain silent.
Mr HOWARD-The honourable member for Blaxland asks me whether I will table an opinion of the Attorney-General or the Solicitor-General. I obtained oral advice from the Solicitor-General. I said that in my earlier answer. The sequence of events was that having written the initial letter that I tabled and having had a discussion with Southern Pacific Petroleum NLin response to

1516 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

that letter, I sought, through my own Department, the advice of the Crown Solicitor's Division or the Attorney-General's Department. I forget which of those two bodies it was but I will find out if the honourable gentleman is interested and let him know so that he cannot base some other question on my inability to answer that part of his question.
Mr Leo McLeay-What about Senator Carrick's letter?
Mr HOWARD-I will come to that in a moment. Having had that discussion we then obtained the advice, through my Department, of the Crown Solicitor as to whether any further action might be necessary on the part of the Government in the light of information that it had been given. That is not the action of a government trying to cover up something. It is the action of a government doing everything that it ought to do to make sure that the public is fully informed of the facts. As a consequence of that, at the request of the Attorney-General's Department the Solicitor-General contacted me by telephone in Sydney. His advice to me was that the action that I had taken was proper and that he did not believe that there was any legal obligation on me unilaterally to notify the stock exchanges of the position. Indeed, his advice was that in advance of the companies' being given a reasonable opportunity to resolve their differences it might well be a point of criticism of the Government if it had unilaterally conveyed that information to the stock exchanges.
It subsequently transpired that the concerns expressed by Esso to us were misplaced in certain material respects. We would then have been open to the very legitimate criticism that in fact we had over-reacted to the situation. I believe that in all the circumstances they were the proper actions and responses of a government not trying to cover something up but a government determined by its own actions to make the information available and to see that it was available promptly. So far as the letter from Senator Carrick to the Prime Minister is concerned, that letter contained a report from Senator Carrick in very technical terms of his discussions with the Esso people in Gladstone.
Mr Keating-Let us have it.
Mr HOWARD-As the honourable gentleman knows, it is the long-standing practice not to table communications between Ministers. That letter merely reported on the technical aspects of the matter. It was arising out of that letter that the discussion took place between Mr Kirk, the Prime Minister and other senior Ministers of the Government. The letters that I have already

tabled, which clearly indicate the position of the Government despite the attempts by the Opposition to indicate otherwise, also arose from that letter and that discussion. There can be absolutely no reflection on the actions of the Government.
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION ~CT AND REGULATIONS
Mr WHITE-My question is directed to the Minister for Industrial Relations. On 4 December the Minister informed this House that his Department would initiate an examination of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act and regulations with a view to simplifying them. Can the Minister inform the House of the progress of that review?
Mr PEACOCK-I did indicate on that occasion the need for such a review and the Department of Industrial Relations did commence a review of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act. I have also asked' Mr Richard Searby of the Victorian Bar and former Conciliation and Arbitration Commission Deputy President Taylor to act as consultants to the Department in the exercise. They will, I am sure, be of considerable assistance to the Department. I have asked the Department, and the consultants in particular, to try to complete their examination by approximately the end of July. That will be a difficult assignment because of the state of the Act at present.
I envisage that the review will encompass such questions as whether some provisions of the Act and regulations are any longer necessary, whether procedures can be streamlined and whether certain provisions can be better grouped. These are just examples of aspects to be covered by the review. Certainly, a simplified Act will assist in the conduct of industrial relations and, I hope, enhance, the public's understanding of the processes involved. Unquestionably the review is long overdue. Practitioners in the field have long complained about the state of the Act. Throughout the field of industrial relations I think this review will be welcomed. People have expressed their concern about the number of amendments over the years that have resulted in certainly a complicated and cumbersome Act. I once described it as an Act that is like a can of worms. One !Jewspaper said that I did not go far enough and that it should be described as a bag of snakes. I would hope that if the review is completed by the end of July, I can inform the House of the progress made in reporting appropriately to peak employer and union groups through the National Labour Consultative Council.

Questions Without Notice

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1517

RUNDLE SHALE OIL PROJECT

Mr HAYDEN-Has the attention of the Prime

Minister been drawn to the declaration made yes-

terday by Senator Carrick that in relation to the

Rundle oil shale partners, 'I hold no interest in

any shares and stocks, nor does my family nor

does any relative of mine'? Has the Prime Minis-

ter ascertained from all of his Ministers whether

any of them held or hold shares in either Central

Pacific Minerals NL or Southern Pacific Pet-

roleum NL? In view of the strong public advocacy

of the Rundle project by, in particular, himself

and the Minister for Employment and Youth

Affairs, will the Prime Minister give a public as-

surance that his Ministers or their families had no

private interest in the talking up of share prices in

these companies and none were involved in the

rather dramatic movement of shares in these two

companies on 19 February, the day after Senator

Carrick now acknowledges he became aware of

the

problem, s

affecting '

this

project?

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable

gentleman indicates in, that question how des-

picable he can be and how despicable he is.

Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I do not like being nominated as black by the pot. The Prime Minister has an obligation to give a full accounting on this matter without indulging in personal abuse.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.

Mr Hayden-On his record he is not the sort of person to reassure anyone in this Parliament that his word can be taken, and even less would the public be prepared to accept that word.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. There is no point of order. But I indicate. that the words used by the right honourable gentleman are not in their sense unparliamentary but they are words of disapprobation. I ask the right honourable gentleman not to use such words. I call the Prime Minister.

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The question that the honourable gentleman asked was a despicable one. It was despicable in its intent and in its purpose. If he asks a question of that kind, I will answer it in appropriate terms.

Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I raise another point of order. If despicable information is sought in this House, there is no better person to go to than the Prime Minister.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. I call the Prime Minister.

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Leader of the Opposition can ask a question but he cannot sit in his seat and take the answer that comes as a result of it. He knows quite well that guidelines have been tabled for the behaviour of Ministers in this Parliament, for the kind of assets that they can own, for the fact that they cannot trade on the stock exchanges and for the fact that they must declare their interests. That is perfectly plain. Those declarations are held in the Cabinet office. I have complete confidence that Ministers have not acted in the way implied in the honourable gentleman's thoroughly despicable question.
AIRCRAFT HIJACKINGS
Mr SPENDER-I refer the Minister for Administrative Services to the recent hijackings of a Pakistani and an Indonesian aircraft and to the deaths and suffering that occurred as a consequence. In view ofthose recent events and in view of the fact that hijacking by terrorists appears to have become established as an international criminal activity, can the Minister tell this House whether he is satisfied, first, that comprehensive contingency plans have been prepared and, secondly, that the manning, the skills and the state of preparedness of Australian counter-terrorist forces are adequate to meet any attempt to hijack planes within Australia's territorial boundaries.
Mr NEWMAN-The honourable gentleman has asked an obviously very important question. He is asking for details of our contingency planning and our operational ability to respond to terrorism. If I were to canvass the details asked for in the question, it may unnecessarily disclose operational details to would be terrorists or would be hijackers.
Mr Spender-I did not ask for details; just whether the Minister was satisfied.
Mr NEWMAN-I can assure the honourable member and the House that there is a national anti-terrorist plan which is regularly examined, up-dated and tested by regular exercises. The plan does encompass hijacking incidents and involves other Ministers responding in addition to the Minister for Transport.
Mr Innes-What do you do-make the tea?
Mr SPEAKER-The question asked of the Minister is relevant to a matter which could easily affect any member of this House. I ask honourable members to remain silent while the answer is given.
Mr NEWMAN-Mr Speaker, honourable members will be aware that a special response force has been created and is available at very

1518 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

short notice to assist State authorities in the resolution of an incident of terrorism which may arise in Australia. The honourable member asked particularly about the skills of the people involved in the plan. I can assure the honourable member that the skills of that response team are being honed to a very high degree. I think honourable members would also be interested to know that a joint exercise will take place later this month with the full co-operation of the Queensland Government. That exercise will involve--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr NEWMAN-Mr Speaker, I have not said anything before, but I think it is absolutely disgraceful that on a matter of such significance and importance to this nation-in fact, international importance-the Opposition cannot be bothered to listen to one single element of the answer.
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will proceed with his answer.
Mr NEWMAN-The other element which I think is of importance in reassuring the honourable members--
Mrs Child-Mr Speaker, I rise to a point of order. I do not believe that the Minister can make such a blanket statement.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
Mr NEWMAN-The important part of State co-operation lies in the organisation called the Standing Advisory Committee on Commonwealth State Co-operation for Protection against Violence, which is known as SAC-PAV. That committee has been in operation for over two years and involves both State and Commonwealth officials. It is through that committee that we have managed to produce such an effective plan, a plan which not only involves the training of various State and Commonwealth officials, but also provides a means by which we can provide the States with better and more appropriate equipment to make the plan work better if it is needed. I can assure the. honourable member that we have a well prepared anti-terrorist plan. If the occasion ever arises for it to be put into action, the Government will do so.
TAX DEDUCTIONS: ART DONATIONS
Mr WILLIS~I address a question to the Treasurer. The question refers to reports regarding tax deductions for art donations in which it is alleged that a syndicate of Melbourne businessmen and stockbrokers who donated a collection of pre-Colombian sculptures, ceramics and stoneware to the National Gallery of Victoria has obtained a tax deduction of $3.7m and a collective tax benefit of $2.2m for an outlay of only $1.2m. I

ask: In view of the fact that a world authority on pre-Colombian art has ridiculed the valuations on which the tax deduction was based, is the Treasurer satisfied with the system of valuation of art works for the purposes of section 78 of the Income Tax Assessment Act? In particular, does he consider it proper that in this case the person apparently charged with the sole responsibility ~o find and recommend valuers for the particular donation was a director of the Gallery which stood to benefit from the donation? Have the tax authorities investigated the valuation process in this case to see what commissions, if any, were payable to the valuers and, if not, will they do so? In view of the apparent complete misuse of the tax. incentives for the arts scheme, does the Treasurer intend to take action to rectify this situation?
Mr HOWARD-I was concerned, as I am sure the honourable member for Gellibrand was concerned, on learning of these reports. I have already discussed the matter with the Commissioner of Taxation. Naturally the secrecy provisions of the Act preclude my giving certain advice from Mr O'Reilly to me, but I can assure the House that I have asked the Taxation Office to examine what changesmight be necessary in terms of both the legislation and the way in which it is administered, in particular the way in which valuations are done, to prevent the type of situation described by the honourable member from occurring in the future. I make it plain that it is quite unacceptable that it should. I fully share the honourable member's concern on the matter. Action will be taken to stop this type of thing happening again.
AFGHANISTAN
Mr JARMAN-I ask the Minister for Foreign Affairs whether he is aware of today's report that the Soviet Union has increased its forces in Afghanistan by up to 20,000 additional troops. Is this report correct? If so, what implications has this for a peaceful settlement of the Afghan crisis?
Mr STREET-I am aware of reports that the Soviet Union may have substantially added to the 85,000 troops it already has in Afghanistan. I am advised also that the Soviet Union has an estimated 30,000 additional troops just across the border from Afghanistan. At this stage I cannot confirm those reports. Clearly, any further move~ ment of Soviet troops into Afghanistan would increase the level of fighting and the loss of life and lessen whatever opportunity there may be of reaching a peaceful settlement of this problem. We have consistently condemned the Soviet military invasion and occupation of Aghanistan. We

Questions Without Notice

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1519

have supported calls in the United Nations and other forums for the complete and unconditional withdrawal of those troops so that the Afghan people can determine their own future.
It is worth noting that groups of patriots within Afghanistan are resisting, by force of arms, the invasion of their country and their bravery and tenacity has aroused the admiration of the world. Australia has given consistent support to Pakistan which has had to bear the burden of some 1.7 million refugees in its territory. Concern about the possibility of Soviet intervention in Poland should not be allowed to obscure the reality of the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan by force. This must not be allowed to slip from the world's memory.
TAXATION
Mr JACOBI-My question, which is addressed to the Treasurer, refers to his statement two weeks ago regarding the $16.5m tax-free profit to the Bell group of companies for its sale of shares in Elder Smith Goldsbrough Mort Ltd when he said that he would consider whether this transaction revealed a weakness in section 26AAA of the taxation Act. Is he aware that in November 1979 the Bell group made a similar tax-free profit of $11m by selling a subsidiary company, Bell Air Charter, which had purchased shares in Ansett Transport Industries Ltd for the Bell group during a takeover attempt? Is he also aware that in August last year the Bond group used a similar device to make a tax free profit of $32m by selling a subsidiary, Narla prospecting company, which had shortly before purchased shares in the White industries organisation? Was the Treasurer made aware of these blatant manipulations of the taxation Act to avoid taxation? If so, why has he not acted sooner to stop such blatant tax avoidance and what action does he intend to take?
Mr HOWARD-As a result of the transaction to which the honourable member referred and which was the subject of a question asked by the honourable member for Chifley a couple of weeks ago, I sought the advice of the Commissioner of Taxation. For reasons which I know the House will understand, I cannot precisely affirm or deny a particular tax position of an individual tax payee. The circumstances of that matter have brought to light what in my view is a weakness in the operation of section 26AAA. I am in the process of putting together certain recommendations to the Government as to what ought to be done. It is not completely free from complexity and I hope to put those recommendations to the Government shortly.
Mr Armitage-Could you make it retrospective?

Mr HOWARD-I think the Government's position on that point is understood.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING COMMISSION: AUSTRALIAN LABOR
PARTY ELECTION CAMPAIGN
Mr IAN ROBINSON-I direct a question to the Minister for Communications. Is it a fact that a senior reporter with the Australian Broadcasting Commission maintained a virtual open line contact with a senior Australian Labor Party campaign official throughout the 1980 Federal election campaign and that the Australian Labor Party used this link to try to apply pressure on ABC producers? Is it further a fact that the Australian Labor Party was being given advance information about the content of ABC current affairs programs and that the Australian Labor Party through this contact attempted to influence the coverage given to the Government side? Were program producers threatened by the Australian Labor Party? Did they find it necessary to complain to the management? Finally, can the Minister inform the House whether at the end of the election campaign the reporter concerned was a guest at a 'thank you' party put on by the Australian Labor Party?
Mr SINCLAIR-There seems to be a fashion to reveal moles around the place. The honourable gentleman's question certainly suggests that some such person exists within the Australian Broadcasting Commission. I understand, as we all do, that within the Australian community there are opportunities for the expression of a political attitude within the polling box. That is the fit and proper place where a member of the Public Service or someone attached to one of the statutory authorities should express that point of view. I do not believe that those who work within the constraints of one of the public service areas or one of the statutory authorities has the right to exercise the licence that the honourable gentleman's question suggests has been exercised in this instance. I do not know of the illustration, nor do I know the individual. However, I will ask for a report from the general manager of the ABC. I shall respond to the honourable gentleman and to this House when I have received that report.
RUNDLE SHALE OIL PROJECT
Mr HOLDING-Is the Prime Minister aware that the Sydney Stock Exchange figures show that until 18 February the trading patterns for Central Pacific Minerals NL and Southern Pacific Petroleum NL were relatively normal and stable. Is he aware that in the two days after Senator Carrick was informed of the difficulties of the

1520 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

Rundle shale oil project there was a trading pattern above and beyond the previous figures and that in that period some 264,000 shares were sold in respect of Central Pacific Minerals and in respect of Southern Pacific Petroleum 345,000 shares were sold. Having regard to this Government's proven capacity to look after friends in high places--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is not entitled to make a comment of that kind while asking a question.
Mr HOLDING-Is the Prime Minister able to give this House an assurance that there was no leak of the information provided by Senator Carrick to the Government so that insider trading could take place on the Sydney Stock Exchange?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I am sure the information that the Government was involved in was kept very confidential indeed. The important point about it, of course, concerns the letters that the Treasurer wrote to the company and then to the companies indicating that in the view of the Government these matters should come to public light as soon as possible. There was a situation in which there were some differences of a technical kind between the companies. They were referred to. They had to be sorted out to the best possible extent. So far as the Government was concerned, the shorter the time that process took, the better. The Government believed and believed strongly that the information should be made available so that everyone would be aware of it. I assume that the matters contained in the honourable gentleman's question are correct. In accordance with guidelines and my own feeling of what is necessary in this office, I own no shares and do not follow the stock markets in the way that the honourable gentleman always does.

over recent months, in the absence of clear directions on the future form of the wage system, have created widespread uncertainty. Therefore, it is natural in that situation of uncertainty that businessmen will not employ so many people as they would otherwise. If one thing became abundantly clear during the period of the Whitlam Administration, it was that wage costs have a direct bearing on the number of people employed. That seems to be something that the honourable member for Wills does not appreciate, nor has he acknowledged it.
Certainly, the record of this Government during its period in office of restraining the level of wage rises and the cost of employing people has contributed directly to the employment growth that we are seeing today. As I said earlier, I believe that if the wage fixing principles are observed by the union movement they will strengthen the foundation upon which the economy is already growing and upon which the employment growth that we have seen over the last 12 months has been achieved. I remind the House that the economy has achieved an employment growth of 146,600 or 2.4 per cent over the year to February 1981. During that period unemployment has been reduced. I expect that with continuing economic growth and employment growth during this year we will continue to see unemployment decrease.
Dr Theopbanous-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. Two weeks ago statistics were released which showed that unemployment has increased to record levels. How can the Minister say it has been reduced?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is not making a point of order. He wishes to debate the issue. I will have to deal with him if he persists with that attitude.

EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES ARISING FROM WAGE FIXING PRINCIPLES
Mr CHAPMAN-I ask the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs: What are the implications for employment of the wage determination principles adopted by the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission?
Mr VINER-There are important implications for employment in the decision handed down by the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission on national wage fixing principles. I believe that if those principles are observed by the union movement they will strengthen the foundations on which employment is already growing in the community. Pressure for wage increases

Mr VINER-To conclude, fundamentally we require in Australia, while economic growth is occurring, the avoidance of costly industrial disputation. Above all, we cannot afford to see the introduction of a 35-hour week with the destructive effects it would have on the continuing growth in employment. Flowing from the wage determination decision of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission we ought to see a return to greater stability in the wage determination processes, giving the community an opportunity to build on the gains already made.
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTARY CHRISTIAN FELLOWSHIP
Mr CHAPMAN (Kingston)-by leave-On Tuesday, 24 February 1981, the Thirteenth

Australian Parliamentary Christian Fellowship 9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1521

Annual Service of Worship, arranged by the Australian Parliamentary Christian Fellowship to mark the opening of the 1981 parliamentary year, was held. The Parliamentary Reporting Staff has prepared a transcript of that service. I seek leave to have the transcript incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
THIRTEENTH ANNUAL SERVICE OF WORSHIP
TO MARK THE OPENING OF THE 1981 PARLIAMENTARY YEAR
Held on Tuesday, 24 February 1981,
at Wesley Uniting Church, Forrest,
at9a.m.
This service was arranged by the President and Executive of the Australian Parliamentary Christian Fellowship
The congregation stood as His Excellency the Governor General and the officiating clergy entered the church and remained standing for the first six bars of 'God. Save The Queen'. The congregation was then seated.
Senator DAVIDSON-On this the first sitting day of the 1981 parliamentary year, the Parliamentary Christian Fellowship takes pleasure in welcoming its members and guests to this annual service of worship. This is the thirteenth such occasion and we are mindful of the witness which this yearly observance has made. We are privileged to be identified in this way with the institution of Parliament and we are grateful for all the co-operation which has been extended.
We are especially pleased to have with us this morning His Excellency the Governor-General, the Prime Minister and Mrs Fraser, the Deputy Prime Minister and Mrs Anthony and the Leader of the Opposition representative, Mrs Kelly. The Presiding Officers, members of the Senate and members of the House of Representatives are joined this morning by members of the judiciary, Government representatives, High Commissioners and Ambassadors, Canberra citizens and others who one way or another share in the round of this nation's public affairs. We are encouraged by your presence. We are glad to be back in Wesley Church again. We offer our thanks for hospitality and for so many excellent arrangements that have been made. Similarly we record our gratitude to the group of clergy, known to us as the Canberra Committee, who so willingly and efficiently attend to the many details relating to this occasion.
The relationship between the worlds of Parliament and the worlds of religion are complex and not easily defined. But to people who are called to lead and who influence opinion in Australia it is a relationship which must be constantly examined and appropriately developed. It is here, in this hour, that we take time to look again at the spiritual values which give meaning to our public life. We do this so that this service does not become a meaningless annual custom; rather does it become a source of spiritual strength for the year ahead. So, conscious of our dependence upon divine grace, we are here meeting in quietness and confidence, finding strength in this fellowship and assurance from this association-therefore let us worship God.
Hymn 58 (Australian Hymn Book).

Praise the Lord, ye heavens adore him; praise him angels in the height; sun and moon, rejoice before him, praise him, all ye stars and light. Praise the Lord, for he has spoken, worlds his mighty voice obeyed; laws, which never shall be broken, for their guidance he has made.
Praise the Lord, for he is glorious; never shall his promise fail: God has made his saints victorious; sin and death shall not prevail. Praise the God of our salvation; hosts on high his power proclaim: heaven and earth, and all creation, laud and magnify his name!
Prayers of Invocation and Confession.
Bishop J. A. MORGAN-You are worthy, our Lord and our God, to receive glory and honour and power, for you created all things, and by your will they exist and were created. God is spirit, and those who worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth.
Open our lips, 0 Lord;
PEOPLE-And we will declare your praise.
ALL-Glory to God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: as in the beginning, so now, and forever. Praise the Lord! Amen.
. Bishop J. A. MORGAN-In penitence and faith let us confess our sins to Almighty God.
PEOPLE-Most holy and merciful Father, we acknowledge and confess the sinfulness of our nature and our shortcomings and offences against you. You alone know how often we have sinned, in wandering from your ways, in wasting your gifts and in forgetting your love.
We pray that you will forgive our sins. Teach us to understand our errors and cleanse us from our secret faults; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Bishop J. A. MORGAN-May Almighty God, who freely pardons all who repent and turn to Him, absolve us from all our sins and deliver us from all evil; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
GOVERNOR-GENERAL (Sir Zelman Cowen)-The first lesson is from the Book of Proverbs 3: 1-5 and 11-20. .
My son, forget not my law; but let thine heart keep my commandments:
For length of days, and long life, and peace, shall they add to the.
Let not mercy and truth forsake the: bind them about thy neck; write them upon the table of thine heart:
So shalt thou find favour and good understanding in the sight of God and man.
Trust in the LORD with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding.
In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.
My son, despise not the chastening of the LORD; neither be weary of his correction:
For whom the LORD loveth he correcteth; even as a father the son in whom he delighteth.
Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth understanding.
For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold.
She is more precious than rubies: And all the things thou canst desire are not to be compared unto her.
Length of days is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and honour.

1522 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981 Australian Parliamentary Christian Fellowship

Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.
She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her: and happy is everyone that retaineth her.
The LORD by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath he established the heavens.
By his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down the dew.
Here ends the Old Testament lesson.
Hymn 43 (Australian Hymn Book).
Give to our God immortal praise, mercy and truth are all his ways: wonders of grace to God belong, repeat his mercies in your song.
Give to the Lord of lords renown, the King of kings with glory crown: his mercies ever shall endure, when lords and kings are known no more.
He built the earth, he spread the sky, and fixed the starry lights on high: wonders of grace to God belong, repeat his mercies in your song.
He sent his Son with power to save from guilt and darkness and the grave: wonders of grace to God belong, repeat his mercies in your song.
Through this vain world he guides our feet, and leads us to his heavenly seat: his mercies ever shall endure, when this vain world shall be no more.
Mr HURFORD-The second lesson, to be read from the Living Bible, is from Romans 8 : 24-30:
We are saved by trusting. And trusting means looking forward to getting something we don't yet have-for a man who already has something doesn't need to hope and trust that he will get it. But if we must keep trusting God for something that hasn't happened yet, it teaches us to wait patiently and confidently.
And in the same way-by our faith-the Holy Spirit helps us with our daily problems and in our praying. For we don't even know what we should pray for, nor how to pray as we should; but the Holy Spirit prays for us with such feeling that it cannot be expressed in words. And the Father who knows all hearts knows, of course, what the Spirit is saying as he pleads for us in harmony with God's own will. And we know that all that happens to us is working for our good if we love God and are fitting into his plans.
For from the very beginning God decided that those who came to him-and all along he knew who would-should become like his Son, so that his Son would be the First with many brothers. And having chosen us, he called us to come to him; and when we came, he declared us 'not guilty', filled us with Christ's goodness, gave us right standing with himself, and promised us his glory.
So ends the second lesson.
Prayers of Thanksgiving and Intercession.
Rev. O. DOWLING-We thank you, Lord God, for the dignity you have conferred on all human life, making us in your image and giving us the help of your Son in our need.
PEOPLE-Accept our thanks, 0 Lord.
Rev. O. DOWLING-We thank you for all of the rights which are entrusted to us. We give thanks for the opportunity to protect these rights and to ensure their fruitful use.
PEOPLE-Accept our thanks, 0 Lord.

Rev. O. DOWLING-We thank you for the right to speak and think for ourselves; the right to be protected by law and to
take part in the government of our country.

PEOPLE-Accept our thanks, 0 Lord.

Rev. O. DOWLING-We praise you, Lord God, for your faithful servants in every age, especially those who have served in the government of our nation from the first days
until now. Give us grace, so to follow their example that with them we may be partakers of your heavenly kingdom; through Jesus Christ our Lord.

PEOPLE-Amen.

Rev. J. BAILLIE-Lord God Almighty, ruler of the nations of the earth, regard with favour our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, that in all things she may be led by your Spirit and protected by your power. Grant your blessings on those who represent her in the Commonwealth and States of Australia. Give wisdom to her Ministers, especially the Prime Minister, all Ministers of State, and all who hold respdnsible office among us. We pray for the institution of Parliament and for all who have the privilege of membership of the Parliament. Give them due sense of their responsibilities that they may discharge their duties with understanding and justice.

United as a family of your people, we pray for the whole family of man, asking for peace; peace in our minds and peace for the world.

We pray that yO\~r Church may be true to its vocation, leading us to a knowledge of you, preserving our nation in
righteousness and giving it true life and character.

As individuals and as a nation, deepen our concern for the hungry and homeless, the oppressed and persecuted, the despised and the rejected, that all may be enriched by the love and service of their fellow men.

CHOIR- .
God be in my head and in my understanding; God be in my eyes and in my looking; God be in my mouth and in my speaking; God be in my heart and in my thinking; God be at my end and at my departing.

PEOPLE-In the name of Jesus Christ, we commit our-

selves to make your purpose our purpose, your love our love

and your justice our resolve. In the words our Lord has taught

us;we pray:

.

Our father which art in heaven Hallowed be thy name Thy kingdom come Thy will be done In earth as it is in heaven Given us this day our daily bread And forgive us our trespasses As we forgive those who trespass against us A.nd lead us not into temptation But deliver us from evil For thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory For ever and ever. Amen.

Hymn 310 (Australian Hymn Book).

Come down, 0 Love divine, seek thou this soul of mine,
oanCd ovmisiftoirttweri,thdrtahwinneeoawr n ardour glowing;
within my heart appear and kindle it, thy hol~ flame bestowing.
o let it freely burn
till earthly passions turn to dust and ashes, in its heat consuming; and let thy glorious light shine ever on my sight and clothe me round, the while my path illuming.

Australian Parliamentary Christian Fellowship 9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1523

Let holy charity mine outward vesture be, and lowliness become mine inner clothing; true lowliness of heart, which takes the humbler part
and o'er its own shortcomings weeps with loathing.

And so the yearning strong

with which the soul will long

,

shall far outpass the power of human telling;

for none can guess its grace

till he become the place

wherein the Holy Spirit makes his dwelling.

The setmon was preached by Colonel William Cairns, A.M., Chief Secretary, Australian Eastern Territory, The Salvation Army.

Colonel CAIRNS-The pastor who asked the small boy did he say his prayers at night was rather pleased when the lad said 'Yes, sir, indeed I did'. The pastor had some fresh think-
ing to do when he asked the lad did he say his prayers in the
morning and the boy said 'No, sir, I do not. I am not scared in the morning'.

If we are looking for a theme for the sermon it could well be: 'A source of authority available to all of us'. The well informed members of this congregation hardly need me to say that there are many ingredients in prayer and the only time that we resort to prayer is not when we are anxious. However, having said that, I do suggest that the principle applied by the little boy is often the principle applied by many adults.

In a moment our attention will be focussed on a couple of
verses used by Saint Paul when he refers to prayer. But before doing so, let me say that some very awful things happen to people who say their prayers. It is one thing to think of prayer
as a means of comfort, but when we look into this Book of authority we find that some dreadful things happened to great
men who undergirded their lives with prayer. They finished up in strange places, indeed they finished up in the very places that were not of their design.

In this particular generation there has been a rediscovery in prayer. There are some very doubtful religions which proliferate rather profitably today and which offer prayer in various ways such as meditation, auto suggestion, chanting, recollection-just to name a few. People are convinced that there is a spiritual realm to be tapped as a serenity source. Prayer is being marketed as a kind of commodity thing, a conveyor of tranquility. It is one thing to talk of having faith and being led of the Holy Spirit or having peace. It is, yet quite another thing to walk in faith, to be led as was Jesus Christ by the Holy Spirit and to have a tranquil spirit in all kinds of disturbing situations. There is abroad a perverted kind of an idea that people can consume God's power. Anyone who wrestles with God in prayer, and that is a very good Old Testament phrase, may well put their life at stake. For instance in the New Testament after Mary's magnificant prayer at the annunciation, she did not become a heroine of the Nazareth society but rather a pariah. The well worn phrase that prayer changes things, meant for comfort, can be a tricky bit of jargonindeed.
If you look at the Old Testament character of Daniel, for instance, who spent three times a day in prayer, you find that he finished up very near to the jaws of lions. If you look, at another one, Jeremiah-of whom at last one expositor has said that he was the greatest, healthiest character of the Old Testament-you find that he finished up in a pit. If I might refer you to the fifth chapter of Jeremiah, you could almost be reading a daily paper as you read of carelessness of sacred things, the 'God is dead' idea, false statements by people who influence and mould public opinion, gregarious lawlessness and unfaithfulness in human behaviour with neighbours. It is all there in that fifth chapter and yet prayer undergirded this extraordinary prophet of God during 40 years of ministry

when his policy did not change at any time. But this man finished up in a pit. Yet another is the most powerful and the greatest authority of all time, who yet has not been superseded nor has his authority been surpassed, who arose early in the morning a great time before it was day to pray and he finished upon a cross.
So prayer is not just a comfort commodity. It can bring comfort. It can bring lasting comfort to people who know how to use prayer, but I see in this Book of authority that, wisely used, it is a mind changer, an attitude conditioner, a fortifier of obedience. I am talking of an authority that can come to people by the use of prayer.
Dr Robert Schuller, who is becoming increasingly popular in Australia through his Hour of Power broadcasts and television programs, has a great gift for a simple playing with words and he says that God answers prayer in a number of ways. He says to some 'No', when such a prayer is of no value to the pray-er or to people for whom he prays; or he may answer 'Go', when the prayer is of value to the petitioner and to others; or yet he may answer 'Slow', when the timing is bad; and yet he may answer 'Grow', when the supplicant needs to mature in faith and in an understanding of what his prayers are all about. Now each of these kinds of responses I can find in my Bible. There are simple illustrations of it. The basis of all my words this morning are taken from this Book.
I believe, with many people, that the world today detests authority and rather worships relevance. There are some Christians who claim that this Book has authority. There are many who fear that it has and wish that it did not have. There are some people who wish that this Book, the Bible, had relevance and fear that it does not. I say this morning that I believe it has both and both the authority and the relevance of which I speak are to be found in the person of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. Jesus Christ, of course, is timelesS.
It is a fashionable thing in sermons today to introduce personal testimony. I say the authority which I find in this Book and which I find in prayer is not an oppressive one but rather a liberating one. So here this morning, taking the authority of Saint Paul-his authority is Jesus Christ-I refer you to just two verses. One is found in the letter that he wrote to the Church at Rome. At the time he wrote it was but a small group of Christians. Taking the Living Bible which was read to us earlier, he states:
. . . the Holy Spirit helps us with our daily problems and in our praying. For we don't even know what we should pray for, or how we should pray . . .
We are talking about non-specific prayer now. Those of you who are familiar with your Authorised Version will remember that the reading is 'the Spirit helpeth us in our infirmities'. Some of the new translations, for instance, the Jerusalem Bible and the New International Bible, speak of the Holy Spirit helping us with our weaknesses. Let us take the plain approach to it in the paraphrase read to us this morning: The Holy Spirit helps us with our daily problems and in our praying, espeCially when we do not know how to pray.
Now there are many things that level people in a congregation of this kind and one of them is that from time to time we feel a sense of inadequacy within ourselves. I was at a students' dedication service the other evening and we sang a hymn that said: 'And when my faith and will are weak, sustain me to the end'. Now being in a Wesleyan church I would take the liberty of using a Wesleyan illustration. John Wesley was standing in a farmyard speaking to a farmer on one occasion and he saw a cow leaning up and holding her head over a stone wall. John Wesley asked the farmer the simple question: 'Why is the cow leaning on and looking over the wall like that?' The farmer, being a very simple man, gave a very simple answer: 'She is looking over the wall because she cannot see through the wall'.

1524 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981 Australian Parliamentary Christian Fellowship

With the problems and setbacks, the disenchantments, the
rejections, disappointments and discouragements, that we all have from time to time, we seem to ,be up against a stone wall experience, a God-forsaken experience.. To be explicit in prayer would be very difficult and it is good sense to apply what has now become the famous Wesleyan principle of the cow and the stone wall-you just wait. This is what the Bible
says. Paul writes to the Church at Rome arid says: 'You do not know how to pray; you do not know what to say. Then just hold on. The Holy Spirit will help you in your problems'. You
know that this is not just the teach.ing of Jesus Christ or of Saint Paul. It was also the teaching of'socrates who said to his
disciples: 'Do not engage in specific prayer, There is one who
knows the end from the beginning and knows that which we do not know. Do not engage in specific prayer'.

Let me speak about specific prayer. When Paul was writing
to a young church that had faced opposition and was formed and forged in the fires of persecution, he said:

Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and sup-

plication with thanksgiving let your requests .be made

known unto God.

'

IfI may quote from Canon J. B. Phillip's translation, he says:

Tell God every detail of your needs in earnest and thankful

prayer, and the peace of God, which transcends human

understanding, will keep constant guard over your hearts

and minds as they rest in Christ Jesus.

.

That seems to be a contradiction to the principle of nonspecific prayer. He is writing to two different sets of people in different circumstances. It is not a contradiction. There is a
time for all of us to be specific in prayer. There is the man here who knows the way that he must take. As the Bible says, he hears a voice in his mind that says: 'This is the way, walk ye in
it'. He has the authority of knowing where he is going, what he is doing. He has the compulsion within him to direct him. Now Paul says: 'Let that man seek also, the value of a higher authority and speak. to God the details of that particular plan so
that on the road that he is taking he will be at peace and without anxiety. As confident as any man is in the line that he
takes, let him always appeal to a greater authority to help him'.

Now Moses of all men was a leader of unique authority. The whole of his life was undergirded by prayer and those of us here who can recall seeing the film 'The Ten
Commandments'may recall the incident wheri Moses came down from the mountain after communion with God. The Bible says that his face shone. The script writer of 'The Ten
Commandments'-not all that come out of Hollywood is bad-wrote this beautiful statement and had Moses say: 'I do not fully know the power that drives me on, but I know the way that I must take'. This man who had been in communion
with God knew the way that he must take, having been in conversation with a greater authority.

There are those of us here who are responsible' for working for purer and juster laws; for peace between nations, for the
healing of disease, for the relief of poverty, for the rescuing of the fal1en and for the moulding of public opinion in our time. The hope of many people out there is that such privileged and
chosen people as we are will reinforce that authority by the authority that comes from. prayer, ,whether it be non-specific prayer on occasions when we just hold on, or when we talk to God the specific details of our plan. I see the apostle and I see Christ encouraging us from scriptures to do this.

Many of us have been in the Elephant and Castle area of
London and we have gone past Charles Spurgeon's church. He was contemporary with Gladstone and he wrote to Prime Minister Gladstone on one occasion and said:

I believe in no man's infallibility but it is restful to believe in one man's integrity, such integrity essentially coming from a man's character but kept pure and clean by prayer.

My prayer for this congregation is aptly described in a beautiful poem by Albert Osborne who wrote:
My life must be Christ's broken bread. My love his out poured wine, A cup o'er.filled, a table spread Beneath hj~ name and sign,
Here is the prayer:
That other souls refreshed and fed, May share his life through mine. Amen.
Hymn 480 (Australian Hymn Book).
Forth in thy name, 0 Lord I go, my daily labour to pursue; the, only the, resolved to know, in all I think, or speak or do.
The task thy wisdom hath assigned
o let me cheerfully fulfil;
in all my works thy presence find, and prove thy good and perfect will.
Thee may I set at my right hand, whose eyes my inmost substance see, and labour on at thy command, and offer all my works to the.
Give me to bear thy easy yoke, and every moment watch and pray, and still to things eternal look, and hasten to thy glorious day;
for the delightfully employ whate'er thy bounteous grace hath given, and run my course with even joy, and closely walk with the to heaven.
Rev. A. L. CHRISTIE-God the Father, who has created you, fulfil in you your great purposes for your life. God the Son, who has redeemed you, guide and support you by his presence in the work which he has called you to share with him. God the Spirit, who strengthens and renews you, fill your hearts and minds with courage, love, wisdom, patience, strength and perserverence that you may accomplish God's will. And the blessing of God Almighty, Father, Son and Holy Spirit be with you and remain with you for ever. Amen.
PROPOSED NEW SITTING HOURS
Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-by leave-I understand from published material that discussions are currently taking place about prospective changes to the hours of sitting of this House. I ask you, Mr Speaker, to discuss with the Lead~r of the House (Mr Sinclair) the possibility of such discussions involving all members of the House so that an amicable arrangement .can be made which is suitable to all sides. I do not believe this matter is the prerogative of any section of the Parliament.
Mr SPEAKER-I will convey the honourable member's feelings to the Leader of the House.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION'
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I seek leave to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mrs DARLING-I do.

Perso,nal Explanation

I) April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1525

Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable lady wishes to make a personal explanation, she may proceed. However, I indicate to her that it is the practice of the House for an honourable member wishing to make a personal explanation to let me know of that request earlier so that I will know when. she stands the purpose of her standing. The honourable lady may proceed.
Mrs DARLING-Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will do that in the future. Today's Brisbane Courier-Mail contains a story on page 2 headed 'Questions Pose a Costly Question'. Unfortunately, copies of the Courier-Mail arrive late in the national Parliament so I do not have a copy of it. I have had my secretary in Brisbane relay the story through a parliamentary stenographer. With your leave, Mr Speaker, I wish to read a part of the report in order to establish the basis of my claim of misrepresentation.
Mr SPEAKER-First, the honourable member should state the misrepresentation. She is then entitled to state the true state of affairs.
Mrs DARLING-Do you wish me not to quote sections from the newspaper?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable lady will state how she has been misrepresented.
Mrs DARLING-There are two points of misrepresentation. The Courier~Mail report states:
How much does it cost for the Public Service to answer a member's questions? A small fortune!
How do you find out how big the small fortune is? You get the Public Service to spend a small fortune.
That, at any rate, appears to be the theory behind a little clash between Mrs Darling (Lab., Qld), and MrCameron (Lib.,Qld).
Actually, Mrs Darling did not put an endless series of questions on the Notice Paper. Only a record 61 on Tuesday and 13 more yesterday.
Her questions covered such issues as pensions and the Utah mining company's wage policy.
The article then lists some of the items 'on which I asked questions. However, it goes on and this is my point:
But yesterday, Mr Cameron took issue himself, with his own question on notice, No. 1173, "Motivated by a concern of cost to the taxpayer."
Outside Parliament, Mr Cameron said: "Mrs Darling may well have set a record with her questions. Her reasons for asking are easily understood.
"However, it probably will cost a small fortune to provide her with all the answers. I do not dispute the rights of members and senators to seek required. information.
I wish to raise two points relating to this report. Firstly, I made it perfectly clear in my maiden

speech and since then that I entered the Parliament with the intention of giving real representation to all of the people in my electorate. I cannot be held responsible if the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron) does not share my views on parliamentary representation, a basic principle of which is that members of Parliament should vigorously seek information from the Government on issues of concern to their electors. I contend that I was doing so. Obtaining information during Question Time is like extracting blood from a stone. The Notice Paper is the only opportunity for seeking and getting information.
Secondly, I claim to have been misrepresented on the grounds of the imputation contained in the statement, as reported, by the honourable member for Fadden. Plainly, he has attempted to impute some dubious reason or ulterior motive to my quest for information. Today, it has been pointed out that a Liberal member of this House placed more than 600 questions on the Notice Paper. The honourable member for Fadden alleged that my questions cost a small fortune. I dispute that strongly; but, if it were remotely true, surely the questions of the honourable member for Canning (Mr Bungey) will send the Government broke. My real point is that I was pursuing information I thought was necessary for me to represent the people in my electorate. I disclaim and rejectany imputation put forward by the honourable member for Fadden.
Mr SPEAKER-Arising out of what the honourable member for Lilley has said, I indicate to honourable members that it has been the practice of the House that where a question is put on the Notice Paper and to answer in the form of the question as stated would involve an extent of work and involvement by members of the department of a Minister, it is reasonable for the Minister to approach the member who put the question on notice for the purpose of ascertaining the specific point of, information sought so that, if possible, there can be a minimisation of the extent of work involved in answering the question. That is not meant .to diminish in any way the right of the honourable member to ask for the information, but it is a sensible course to follow in order not to cause too great an expenditure on the obtaining of information which might not in fact be the essence of what the honourable member is seeking.
AUSTRALIA-JAPAN FOUNDATION
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-Pursuant to section 25 of the Australia-Japan Foundation Act 1976, I present

1526 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

General

the Australia-Japan Foundation annual report 1979-80.
AUSTRALIAN APPLE AND PEAR CORPORATION
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) -Pursuant to section 37 of the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973, I present the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation's sixth report, 1980.
CAPITAL TERRITORY HEALTH COMMISSION
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health)-Pursuant to section 72 of the Health Commission Ordinance 1975, I presentthe Capital Territory Health Commission annual report 1979-80.
SHIPPING
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)- On behalf of the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) and for the information of honourable members, I present the Australian shippers' annual report for the year ended 30 June 1980.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING TRIBUNAL: REPORT OF
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW COUNCIL
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report of the Administrative Review Council on the procedures of the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal. The Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) will be making a statement later today outlining the steps the Government will be taking to invite comment on the report. The Government in this case has taken the step of tabling the report in manuscript form prior to printing. This has been done to ensure that there will be opportunity for public comment on the recommendations made by the Administrative Review Council before the Government reaches a decision on the recommendations. Limited copies of the report will be available in the Bills and Papers Office, the Senate Records Office and the Parliamentary Library. It is hoped to make printed copies available shortly.
PRESENTATION OF ADDRESS-IN-REPLY
Mr SPEAKER-I have ascertained that His Excellency the Governor-General will be pleased to receive the Address in Reply at Government House at 4.45 p.m. this afternoon. I shall be glad if the mover and seconder, together with other .honourable members, will accompany me to present the Address.

SPECIAL ADJOURNMENT
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House, at its rising, adjourn until Tuesday, 28 April 1981, at 2.15 p.m., unless Mr Speaker shall fix an alternative day or hour of meeting or, in the incapacity or absence from Australia of Mr Speaker, the Chairman of Committees may fix an alternative day or hour, such alternative day or hour of meeting to be notified by telegram or letter addressed to each Member of the House.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (11.32)-Mr Speaker, I notice that the Government is consi4ering altering the sitting hours of the Parliament. I am wondering whether, with your indulgence and co~operation, the Opposition will be given a chance to have an input in the discussion of the matter, rather than be presented with a fait accompli.
Mr SPEAKER-A few moments ago the . honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) raised the same issue with me. Perhaps the Deputy Leader of the Opposition was not present at the time. He asked whether I would request the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) to receive notice of the honourable member for Corio's request that there be consideration of the decision by all honourable members. The Leader of the House is present and has heard those remarks.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (11.34)-in reply-The honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) has also made contact with me on this issue. He has distributed a proposal with some alterations. I think it is necessary for there to be some discussions between both sides of the House. I am quite happy to make the necessary arrangements, in conjunction with the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) and you, Mr Speaker, so that adequate consideration can be given to this matter.
Mr SPEAKER-Does that satisfy the honourable gentleman?
Mr Lionel Bowen-Yes, it does.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
GRIEVANCE DEBATE
Welfare Housing-National Identity Card System-Taxation-Uranium-Public
Service-Lebanon-Department of Veterans' Affairs-Tasmania: South West National Park-Rundle Shale Oil Project-
Question proposed:
That grievances be noted.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (11.35)- Today in this debate I wish to raise the matter of housing and the lack of social planning by the Fraser and Hamer governments which has

Grievance Debate

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1527

created a crisis shelter situation in the Latrobe Valley area of my electorate. The occurrence of resource development is causing suffering which has extended across the whole of the electorate of McMillan. I wish to outline some of the present problems for the benefit of members of this House. Statistics and facts collected during 1979 and 1980 highlight the accommodation situation in the area. Over 1,000 families are on the Victorian Housing Commission's waiting list. Emergency accommodation facilities are unable to house anywhere near those in need. Atotal of 350 youths need emergency accommodation every year. Over 250 requests for places to rent are made each week to real estate agents. About 3,000 people live in caravans. Many people live in substandard or overcrowded housing. The Housing Commission estimates its waiting periods for the area as follows: For Traralgon it is indefinite, for Morwell it is at least three years and for the city of Moe it is 13 months.
For those who are able to find a home to rent, market rents in the Latrobe Valley are as follows: A three-bedroom house in Traralgon costs from $70 to $120 a week. In Morwell it would cost from $65 to $110. A two-bedroom flat in Traralgon ranges from $70 to $100. In Morwell it ranges from $60 to $90. There is also the problem of the high bondage rates for people who wish to rent. A flat bond is between $250 and $300. The bond for a three-bedroom house is between $300 and $500. For those who live in caravans, the cost of an onsite caravan park is from $50 to $80 a week. The house and land price increase in the Latrobe Valley has been far ahead of the State average..
I wish to refer toa report which has been produced in the last 12 months. The report is entitled 'Planning for the Community' and is on housing needs. It was compiled by the Mission of St James and St John. It arises out of a housing need study project which commenced in June 1980. It is the result of a joint effort between the project officer, other staff members of the Mission of St James and St John and residents of the Latrobe Valley. The concern which gave birth to this project originated from the experience of family aides working with vulnerable low income families. Many of these families have housing problems which are caused by the influx of workers in the valley. This concern about housing, combined with the commitment to social justice by the Mission of St James and St John, has brought together this report on planning principles, social responsibility and community consultation, all of which have special reference to the Latrobe Valley's housing problem. The report discusses the nature of planning, who plans it, for

whom it is planned, who benefits from it, the concept of corporate social responsibility, the planning structures and authorities involved in the Latrobe Valley and the housing situation in that area.
In the planning of future developments or extensions of present developments, there should be meaningful consultation with community groups affected by these developments. These consultations should be public and they should be conducted with genuine community representatives, such as local government and community groups. This should be undertaken on a systematic basis over a period and in some depth. The information should flow in a two-way process with real options for action, so that consultation has a chance to affect the decisions that will be taken. Professor Milton Friedman, who was in this Parliament building just two days ago, sees the social responsibility of business as being to seek profits and not to seek to serve other social ends except as decreed by government in democratically arrived at decisions. These views are consistent with the Fraser Government's ideology, which has permitted the accommodation crisis to reach the extent it hasin the Latrobe Valley.
Local control of the future of the Latrobe Valley has been reduced following the action of the State Government's Minister for Planning in this way: Several committees have been asked to wind down. These committees are the Central Gippsland Regional Planning Authorities Interim Committee, the Central Gippsland Brown Coal Resource Working Committee, the Latrobe Valley Co-ordinating Committee, the Latrobe Valley Development Committee and various subcommittees. In their place the State Government has initiated just three committees. They are the Latrobe Valley Ministerial Council, the Latrobe Valley Consultative Committee and the Strategic Planning Advisory Group, which is known as SPAG.
Attempts that have been made to co-ordinate development in the Latrobe Valley are left to the Strategic Planning Advisory Group which reports to the Ministerial Council in relation to the area. There is considerable doubt whether this Group can amend or make plans or whether it simply looks at how such plans are best realised. It is feared by locals that the bureaucrats committee will vet ideas which are from the local representative consultative committee and which are meant for the Ministerial Council, thus effectively removing any involvement by local bodies in Latrobe Valley planning.

1528 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Grievance Debate

This step, undertaken by the State Government, effectively centralises decision-making power because only the Latrobe Valley Consultative Committee has local representation in its capacity as an adviser to the Latrobe Valley Ministerial Council. The Federal Government this year announced that there would be an observer on the Latrobe Valley Ministerial Council. That is a little late considering that it has been in power five or six years. As the honourable member for McMillan I would like to point out at this stage that I have not been informed as to what method this will take. The only information that I have been able to glean up to date has been a Press release by the former member for McMillan stating that the Prime Minister and the Premier of Victoria have decided that the Federal Government should have an observer. Who he is or what he is, I still do not know. The Latrobe Valley local opinion was expressed in the Latrobe Valley Express on 15 April 1980 and 29 April 1980. It clearly indicated how the local people feel. The article stated:
Obviously the sudden emphasis on coal as an energy source has over-ridden the niceties of democratic and public participation. The fact that the meetings are closed to the public is to act not for the Latrobe Valley but for those arms of the State Government with vitalinterests in the Valley.
The committees are interdepartmental task forces. The insistence that the local committees be disbanded and the subsequent closed meetings reveals a strong emphasis on centralisation rather than on co-ordination and consultation. Furthermore, the fact that social and economic planning has not to this stage complemented industrial development is evidence that these committees are not co-ordinating development. The Latrobe Valley Express says that it is not an effective departmental committee but is a front to confirm the fears that the State Executive firmly controls the Latrobe Valley. Once again I refer to the report and quote from its conclusions and summary. At page 14 it is stated:
While there is a commitment to comprehensive planning within various legislations establishing statutory bodies, there appears to be inadequate attention given in the development plans of those statutory bodies to the human impact of those developments.
It states further:
We believe that it is because of the failure of community consultation in the past and the general failure to engage adequately in social and economic planning, that there is such a critical shortage of rental and public housing in the Latrobe Valley. We believe that only the closest co-operation between the Ministry of Minerals and Energy and the Ministry of Housing can begin to alleviate this shortage, which demands the Government's highest priority.
In summary the report concludes that people matter more than things. The social environment

is also within the scope of planning. This report on planning and housing needs in Victoria's Latrobe Valley concludes that the community networks must also be examined in an inquiry into the environmental effect of physical developments. Statutory bodies need to pay more attention to how they can best implement socially responsible planning. The Government must engage in genuine consultation with local committees. Consultation, if genuine, means that government decisions can be changed. The report calls on the State Government to reaffirm the importance of local government in planning and the current housing situation. The Latrobe Valley housing situation has been caused by the neglect of planning and the Fraser Government's approach to cutting back funding for housing. In the last five years we have seen funding go from some $103Il). down last year to $64m. The way the housing agreement is shaping up this year money. will be paid to the Federal Government. It appears from figures available that State governments will be paying more to the Federal Government than they are receiving. Hence people in these development areas cannot look forward to this Fraser Government assisting them if it continues to follow its present policies.
Mr JULL (Bowman) (11.45)-In following the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) in this debate I think that one aspect of the provision of welfare housing should be brought to the attention of the House. It was not my intention to talk about this subject this morning but it seems an opportune time to refer to it. I believe that all members of the Government are cognisant of their obligations to provide welfare housing in certain areas. The area which particularly concerns me at the moment-this is a phenomenon which has just happened since the introduction of the Family Law Act-is the provision of housing to deserted wives and newly separated wives. In Queensland at the moment about 56 per cent of the total applications before the Queensland Housing Commission come from supporting mothers.
In my electorate in a new block of units that was funded by the Commonwealth Government and opened just last year, 42 of the 44 units are occupied by supporting mothers. Obviously we have an obligation to look after them. I am wondering whether we should do our sums to see whether a system can be devised whereby the payment of a supplementary rent allowance could be introduced to ease the pressure on organisations such as the Queensland Housing Commission and to try in some respects to maintain those deserted wives in their own family homes. I suppose a

Grievance Debate

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1529

number of cases can be cited. Obviously some wives are just thrown out of the family home. Others are left with the family homes but quite often are in a situation in which they have to pick up the entire running costs of those homes. If maintenance money is not forthcoming they are in great difficulty. It would seem to me to be a much more logical step to try to continue to maintain those supporting mothers in their own environment, in their family homes, for as long as possible rather than have the situation in which we have to spend an incredible sum of money to provide this sort of accommodation. That is not the particular subject about which I wish to speak today.
The next subject. I would like to broach touches a few sensitive nerves in this chamber. But it is a situation that I think we will have to examine very closely in the not too distant future. I refer to the issuing of identity cards to all Australians. I would like to cite as an example, a case that came before me in my electorate in Brisbane last week. One of my constituents who owns a small supermarket came to see me. A few days previously he had been visited by the Australian Federal Police. This supermarket is located in a fairly isolated area. There is not a bank within five kilometres of this population region. For the last three and a half years, since he took over this supermarket, this man has made it a practice to cash pension cheques. The visit by the Australian Federal Police last week resulted in a situation in which he found that he had been cashing cheques for the last three and a half years for a woman who was known to him, or so he thought. This woman had been presenting cheques on behalf of a person who has been dead for nine and a half years. The problem in the situation is that there is an obligation now on the shopkeeper. He is in factresponsible for some of those debts to the Commonwealth.
This is not the first time that this type of situation has come to my notice. There must be some criticism of the Department of Veterans' Affairs in as much as it has not brought its records up to date, obviously for the past nine and a half years. There again, there have been a number of cases where people, purely genuine in their motive, have cashed Commonwealth Government cheques but have been left holding the bunny. A number of allegations also have been made in recent times about a number of people attending tertiary institutions in Canberra who allegedly are receiving the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme allowance and also are in receipt of the unemployment benefit. I am sure that each and every member of this House has had cases of

people fiddling the system brought to his attention.
It is a very difficult situation to get around. It is a very sensitive situation to get around. But it is interesting that in most countries some form of national identity card is issued. Maybe this is one way that we can achieve some control over the social security benefits that are paid. It may be one way in which we can keep a degree of honesty in some sections of the community. From my investigations it would seem to be almost impossible to determine how much money the Commonwealth Government is losing through some of these practices. Although, as I say, it is a terribly sensitive issue, I believe that some very close investigation should be carried out to see whether, in fact, some sort of national identity card system could be instituted in Australia, what would be the long term ramifications of that, what the cost would be and what the cost savings to Commonwealth revenue might be.
The third point I want to make during the grievance debate concerns the Income Tax Assessment Act, especially section 23KC and section 23AD (3) (c). These sections of the Act apply to recipients of compensation payments made to victims of nazi persecution and other persecution during World War II. This is a matter that I have raised in the House before. It is a matter which I understand has just been dealt with by the national conference of the Returned Services League. That organisation has extended its sympathy to the victims of nazi atrocities and some Japanese atrocities and is. pressing the Government to make changes to these sections of the Act. These changes should be made because I understand that Australia is one of the few countries that taxes this form of reparation payment.
I wish to bring to the attention of the House two cases in my electorate. One concerns a Dutch born person who was a reserve officer in the Dutch Free Forces in Indonesia during World War II. He fought the Japanese and was duly captured by them. I think he was sentenced to a 15-year prison term. After three years he escaped from the Japanese prison camp. Some time later he was reunited with his wife who had also been a prisoner in another camp. They returned to Holland to find that the Nazis had destroyed all of the family property and that his father had been shot by the Gestapo. He was left with absolutely nothing. He finally migrated to Australia penniless. He worked very hard as a librarian. His four children serve the Commonwealth Government in various departments. They are making a great

1530 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Grievance Debate

contribution. One, for example, is with the Australian Army and he has just been involved in an Australian training course in Pakistan.
This gentleman received no income at all in terms of war reparations. Some years ago the Dutch Government decided that it would cover the situation of personnel who had been imprisoned in Java. Of course, the first thing that happened when reparation payments were made by the Dutch to people in Australia was that they were SUbjected to taxation. I feel this is an unfair situation especially in light of the fact that most countries have some form of agreement on the non-taxing of these types of reparation payments, whether they be made to the victims of nazi or Japanese atrocities.
The second case which I raise is quite similar to the one I have just outlined. It concerns a man of Polish extraction who escaped from Poland. He joined the Polish Free Forces in Britain and fought during World War II. He married after the War and became an English citizen-a resident of the United Kingdom. Finally he migrated to Australia. Now he is of advanced age and is very sick. Obviously the toll of war is telling. He applied for a service pension in Australia but found out that in fact he was not eligible to receive any sort of a pension.
I believe that the number of these cases coming to light is very few and certainly the cost to the Commonwealth would not be all that great. But this is a terribly sad situation in terms of pure humanity and in light of the incredible suffering of so many of these people who fought bravely and well and who accepted the consequences of what they did. It would also be sad if we had to knock back their applications in Australia for any form of war service pension or, most importantly, we taxed some form of compensation that may be paid by' the government of the country of their birth on the basis that they have been victims of atrocities of World War II. I sincerely trust that in the run up to the federal Budget the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) will look very closely at these situations to see whether we cannot get some justice for the very few people in Australia in this category. Most importantly, of course, we should recognise them as fine citizens who have made a tremendous contribution to the free world.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (11.55)-We are most concerned about the way this Government and the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) is pushing Australia headlong into the irresponsible endorsement of new uranium projects despite increasingly tough market conditions

and with great risk to future generations and to the Australian and international environments. We cannot afford this rush on economic, environmental and safety grounds. The reasons should be well understood even by this Government. Firstly, there has been a complete failure by any nuclear nation to dispose of eve,n one pound or one gallon of high level waste safely and permanently. Governments are increasingly fearing catastrophic nuclear accidents. I ask the House to note that the clean-up bill from the Harrisburg incident has been estimated at $1,500m and that millions of litres of radioactive waste remain in the plant to this day and will remain there precisely because of the high level of radioactivity. It is totally impossible to devise or police safe non-proliferation arrangements in this dangerous and complex world. Forecasts of world demand and the price of uranium continue to fall and so-called safeguards standards are reduced as this Government struggles for a share of a contracting world market. There is no workable Commonwealth State legislative framework-just an ineffectual hybrid that mocks environmental protection needs.
There are new mining projects awaiting or receiving approval which involve new mining techniques both environmentally dangerous and economically unsound. I draw attention of the House to some of the new projects. The first project I wish to refer to is at Koongarra in the Northern Territory. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) stated in August 1977 that this area which was specifically excluded from Kakadu National Park to allow uranium mining 'has particular environment problems because of the sensitivity and fragility of the environment of the area and the location of the deposit upstream of a major wetland area'. But the Minister for Trade and Re" sources gave the blueprint for the destruction of this magnificent and unique area when he stated in the House on 24 February last that the then Minister for Home Affairs and Environment had advised him 'that the object of the environment protection legislation had been met and completed in relation to the Koongarra project and that there were no environmental objections to approval being given to Koongarra, provided certain conditions were met'. What were those conditions? They have not been made public. I now call on the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) to do this so that we will know whether the local environment in the Kakadu National Park has been protected. If Koongarra goes ahead, the two catchment areas of the Kakadu National Park will be threatened

Grievance Debate

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1531

by uranium mining. Furthermore, the Government plans to change key sections of the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act to allow Denison Mines Ltd to extend leases into the park area. This makes a farce of the whole concept of a national park. It is a disgrace for this to happen in an area nominated by the Government for the World Heritage list.
Let me turn now to South Australian projects about which I am concerned-Honeymoon and Beverley. These two projects involve the extraction method of insitu acid leaching which United States experience shows results in contamination of the water table, ground waters and streams. It is designed to inject thousands of gallons of acidified water down a number of wells. After the solution dissolves uranium in the ore body it is pumped to the surface and the uranium yellowcake recovered. Then highly radioactive liquid waste will be returned to the mined out areathat is the water table-and solid wastes will be simply covered with clay. Only 50 jobs will be produced from the $25m investment-$500,OOO per job.
The United States Federal Water Pollution Control Administration sets strict controls on monitoring procedures for the same process proposed at Honeymoon. It specifically recommends against the type of monitoring system planned for Honeymoon as it is ineffective and technically backward. This is another example of mining companies expecting less than stringent environmental standards in Australia than prevail in the United States.
The larger Beverley deposit lies on the other side of Lake Frome in South Australia where the same hazardous mining technique is also proposed. It is particularly offensive to the Opposition and myself to read these bogus environmental impact statements and the smug way that these companies assume their projects will be finally accepted under the current confused welter of Federal-State environmental legislation. But, given such a loose legislative framework, this is to be expected. Currently the States are handling development applications calling for environmental impact statements which are studied by the Federal Minister for Home Affairs and Environment under pressure from the Department of Trade and Resources organisations to subject them to minimum analysis and not to put them to a national inquiry under the Federal environment protective legislation. There is no uniform State legislation covering general environmental matters on uranium mining.

How many environmental impact statements does the Government hold? When will we hear the reports? When will they be the subject of public inquiries? Just how many public inquiries into uranium projects has this Federal Government initiated? I say that it has not initiated a single one. It was an Australian Labor Party Government which initiated the famous and worthwhile Ranger uranium inquiry. There is an interdepartmental committee report which clearly indicates that the prime Government preoccupation is to remove any legislative impediments to the development of an Australian commercial nuclear industry. This Government will move to allow the legislation regarding the administration of development approvals and environmental studies to be left to the States and seek to restrict Commonwealth activity to the simple commercial promotion and implementation of overseas safeguards agreements.
How stupid and irresponsible it is of the Government to allow the deplorable State competition which has arisen over aluminium and coal-to-oil projects, with the hawking of cheap power and the diminution of environmental standards, to extend to uranium mining. If these hawks in West~n:t.Australia, Queensland, in the Federal Government, and perhaps in South Australia proceed with the projects companies are clamouring for, Australia will have a multiplicity of environmentally damaging and economically wasteful mines producing uranium surplus to the world market. We could see Ranger producing 3,000 tonnes per annum, Jabiluka producing 4,000 tonnes per annum, Nabarlek producing 1,000 tonnes per annum, Yeelirrie producing 2,000 tonnes per annum, Koongarra producing 1,000 tonnes per annum, Honeymoon producing 450 tonnes per annum, Beverley producing 750 tonnes per annum and, if the Roxby Downs project proceeds, another 2,000 tonnes per annum, making a total of 14,200 tonnes per annum. There is no way that all of this stuff will be sold. We will be lucky to get rid of half of it, judging by the depressed international market, for the industry is declining. Uranium market requirements are steadily weakening. In the past year in the United States of America there have been 19 cancellations of nuclear power projects and not one new order.
The Minister for Trade and Resources has been lamentably one of the super-optimists. He has been consistently wrong in his predictions. He predicted that Western nuclear generating capacity would be almost 400 gigawatts by the early 1980s, but the production has turned out to be

1532 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Grievance Debate

only 122 gigawatts. The Australian Atomic Energy Commission said in 1975 that world needs would be 107,000 tonnes by 1985. In fact in 1980 the Commission had to reduce that prediction to 39,000 tonnes. It said that we could meet 20 per cent of the world's requirement. So, if the Australian Atomic Energy Commission's usually over-optimistic predictions are reliable, maximum Australian share of the world market in 1985 would be 7,000 to 8,000 tonnes per annum at a very optimistic level. This Governm,ent is going to allow the States to commit themselves to producing more than twice that amount.
In a glutted market, four things will happen. First of all, the price will come down. That is already happening. Secondly, there is a clear message that the smaller Australian mines that come on stream later will miss out in a contracting world market. Thirdly, nuclear proliferation safeguards agreements will be watered down by this Government and so will the environmental standards. Then, when the real pressure goes on to recoup the total billion-dollar capital investment, thousands of tonnes of Australian uranium will be flogged off at rock bottom prices and placed in stockpiles around the world by nations that we will never be able to trust in the long term to meet their obligations under the obsolete safeguards agreements which have been negotiated by this Government. But the real and chief architect of this commercial and environmental stupidity and vandalism is the Minister for Trade and Resources. He has the gall to demand full Federal responsibility for the uranium industry.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CARLTON (Mackellar) (12.5)~Today, I wish to deal with the question of the quality of top management in the public sector. By 'top management' of a department, I mean the combination of Minister and permanent head, who together have to play the role equivalent to that of chief executive of a private sector business enterprise. It will be my thesis that, despite substantial expenditures on the Public Service, despite attractive levels of remuneration and associated benefits such as indexed superannuation and relative security of employment, Australians are not getting value for money when we look at the managerial capacity of the Public Service. Certainly we have a dazzling selection of individual talent and some functions are run with considerable skill, but I am obliged to conclude that there are failures in top level management of such an order that they must be a product of an inadequate management system. This is a great pity because, in a wealthy and

well educated country such as ours, devoting a significant part of its wealth and talent to public sector administration, there is no valid excuse for a failure to employ techniques that are by no means new if we look at the best experience around the world. In the time available this morning I can cite only one example.
The events of the past few weeks following the release of the Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry on Domestic Air Fares demonstrate a management failure of substantial proportions. Holcroft's methodology for setting air fares in a non-market situation may be disputed, but what cannot be disputed is the incapacity of the Department of Transport to respond to a series of questions that were pertinent, in a top management sense, to the resolution of the actual po~icy issues involved, and not just to a limited defence of an existing policy position. The distinction is quite critical, and I hope the real lessons to be learned from the last few weeks, that of managerial deficiency, not back bench revolt, will, in fact, be learned by the Government and its Public Service. I regret the necessity to mention a specific department as an example of inadequacy of top management, as I have no wish to attach personal blame to anyone. However without mentioning specific examples, I cannot demonstrate what failure actually means in this context. Public servants will want to remind me that I defined top management earlier as the combination of the minister and the permanent head, and therefore top management failures can be attributed to failures in political direction as much as failures of Public Service management. That is certainly true, but again I emphasise that my purpose is not to level personal criticisms at Ministers any more than at permanent heads. It is the system I wish to criticise, and I also wish to make constructive suggestions.
Let us therefore look firstly at the ministerial component of top management. The capacity of a political party to see its philosophy translated into policies that are implemented effectively depends on the capacity of Ministers to direct and control the Public Service. Under the existing system, Ministers suffer severe limitations in their capacity to meet these demands. Some say this derives from a genetic or environmentally induced inadequacy that is not susceptible to treatment. I would say from my own observations that our Ministers stand up well by comparison with chief executives in industry or in other large organisations in terms of intelligence, conceptual ability, common sense and drive. They do not usually possess the particular skills of a well-trained chief

Grievan(:e Debate

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1533

executive in industry, nor under our political sysBoth components of the top management team

tem should they be expected to. What they lack is must contribute to a satisfactory management sys-

flexibility in organising their own time to attend to tem, and I would suggest that it is the prime re-

critical tasks, and the kind of staff support that sponsibility of a modern public service to provide

most executives would regard as essential. The the framework within which there can be a cre-

problem is quite serious and demands urgent ative and fruitful relationship between the Minis-

study. In any major business or non-profit ter and his Department. If this top management

enterprise, a chief executive will spend at least team works well, there will be much less need for

one third of his time on forward policy. I would be departments to complain about interference from

surprised if Ministers spend more than five per the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet,

cent of their time on forward policy. Any chief the Treasury, the Department of Finance or the

executive confronted with a typical Minister's Public Service Board.

work load and seeing the need for more time for forward thinking would delegate responsibilities and reorganise his time to fit in with what he saw as his true responsibilities. A Minister has no such adaptive capacity. The doctrine of ministerial responsibility and the prysent organisation of our parliamentary system remove most of a Minister's freedom to order his own priorities and plan his use of time to best advantage.
So the first task for reform is to try to turn the Minister's job into something that can be done well by a civilised human being. This will require: Firstly, changes in the running of Parliament, including sensible sitting hours, modern voting methods and freedom of Ministers from quorum calls; secondly, a more predictable pattern of Cabinet and Cabinet committee meetings, with greater insistence on advance presentation of papers; and thirdly, a substantial increase-at least doubling-in ministerial staff support, including a capacity to employ more higher level staff. It is ludicrous tosuppose that Ministers can look at policy questions from a political point of view without substantially increased support from personally appointed staff. If such support is not made available from within ministerial offices, there will be strong pressure for overt political appointments within the departments, and I be-

Of the principal areas of top management weakness within the Public Service, the first appears to be that of strategic planning-thinking deeply, creatively and continuously in terms of the question: What are we trying to do and how can we do it most effectively in the face of economic, organisational or political constraints.
The second is the area of managerial philosophy which, translated colloquially, means, 'the way we do things around here.' I acknowledge the need to allow the maximum possible variety of individual approaches to problems and situations, but I believe that the public is entitled to expect within its Public Service the acceptance of a clearly-stated operating philosophy covering such practical matters as ethical standards, fact-based decision making, sensitivity to external forces, advancement through superior performance and a sense of urgency to compensate for the privilege of monopoly.
The third is the area of performance standards and control systems. Outside of the standard budgetary procedures for crude financial control, there should be more broadly defined performance standards, both quantitative and qualitative, and information systems to measure performance against plan.

lieve that that would be a bad solution.

The fourth is the area of management develop-

I turn now to the Public Service component of top management, the permanent head. If we are to have a strengthened political input to policy development from the Minister and his office, it is essential that we have a much more effective managerial component, both as to policy development and implementation, from the permanent head and his organisation. The kind of management that is provided by the Public Service must take into account to a much greater extent than it does the fact that the Minister is unlikely to come in as a ready-made chief executive who can be expected to ask all the right questions on policy issues. It must be a part of the function of the per-

'

ment. It is not surprising that top management skills are so noticeably deficient in the Public Service. There is no provision for acquiring them to be present. There seems to be a rather charming, gentlemanly view that these skills are acquired by instinct or experience. A high proportion of our top public servants should have post-graduate training in public or business administration, either in Australia or overseas. Those whose earlier careers. have missed this kind of training should be sent on mid-career intensive courses at the best institutions around the world. Those, it seems to me, are the four main weaknesses in the public service component oftop management.

manent head not merely to respond when asked, I am inclined to add another, although it is less

but to question the Minister on his objectives. fundamental. I refer to the method of selecting

1534 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Grievance Debate

permanent heads. It may be that better appointments would be made if outside assistance were available from the business, professional, academic and trade union worlds to complement the public service and political inputs to this process. The actual person who is the permanent head has a long-term effect on the quality of management in a department, and not all appointments have been elicitous, so why not have the best.
I conclude by quoting from a statement by Marvin Bower in his book entitled The Will to Manage:
Managing is the activity or task of determining the objectives of an organisation and then guiding the people and other resources of the organisation in the successful achievement of those objectives.
Any business can be permitted to drift with the tides of circumstance, subject to the external and internal forces at work. Alternatively, it can be managed.
Mr Deputy Speaker, let us choose to manage.
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (12.14)- This morning I would like to bring to the attention of the House the plight of many people in the Middle East who come from the small country of Lebanon. Prior to the Lebanese civil war, which took place between 1975 and 1976, Lebanon was one of the jewels of the Middle East. Unfortunately, one cannot say that about Lebanon today. There are in Australia approximately 200,000 people who have either come from Lebanon or are of Lebanese descent. They are all very concerned about the escalation in the conflict in Lebanon which has occurred over the last few weeks. They are fearful for the lives and safety of relatives that they have left in that country and very concerned that the-Australian Government and the Australian people should take some action in that regard.
It has been reliably reported that between 1975 and 1978, during the continuing conflict in Lebanon, almost 60,000 people were killed and almost one million fled their homes. A number came to Australia as a direct consequence of that conflict. Newspaper reports last week from Beirut indicate that approximately 200 people have been killed and more than 500 wounded. The level of conflict in northern Lebanon is comparable to that reached during the civil war. As I have mentioned, that causes grave worry to many of the Lebanese community in Australia.
In my electorate I have a wide range of people from Lebanon. Many are Christians and, as well, many new arrivals are Moslems. However, they share the common view that they would like to see the conflict in their recent homeland cease. If one seeks a common view among the Lebanese one finds that it is that Lebanon should be for the

Lebanese. They have managed in that small country for many years to have a balanced political relationship with each other. one that before the last decade had never flared into open conflict. They had a remarkable political system which involved the religious sharing of positions of power and authority. Indeed, if one looks at the Cabinet line-up in Lebanon, one could not find a more diverse group of people managing to do their very best to govern a country. I believe that because of the conflict that has occurred over the last few weeks, and the escalation before then, there now is a case for Australia to reconsider its entry criteria for people from Lebanon and the Middle East. I have stated in this Parliament on a number of occasions that I believe that the quota which has been set for this year-2,500 migrants from the Middle East-is ridiculously low. The Government's humanitarian program of accepting refugees from South East Asia is comIIlendable, b.ut I feel that it should take an equally commendable approach to the problem of the Lebanese who wish to migrate to Australia. There is a significant lack of appropriate criteria in respect of intending immigrants from Lebanon. The provisions of the Numerical Multifactor Assessment System are very strictly applied to Lebanese, with a consequent high failure rate. Special consideration should be given to applicants who have relatives in Australia who will undertake to help them settle into the Australian community.
The Lebanese in Australia have been a very successful ethnic group. They have settled in well, and frequently have engaged in small business enterprises. I believe that the statistics would show that the Lebanese have the highest proportion of self-employed of any ethnic group. They have provided a great deal of wealth for the Australian community. The Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs should allow the application of NUMAS to be modified in respect of the Lebanese, and should also enable applications to be made at centres other than Damascus. At present people must go to Damascus to apply to emigrate; there is no alternative. Some find that situation most difficult and, indeed, with the conflict at present centred on the area between Beirut and Damascus, well-nigh impossible. One cannot really solve the problem in Lebanon without considering also the Palestinian problem. I do not think we will ever have a peaceful solution in Lebanon unless the world's governments seek to provide a Palistinian homeland. There are in Lebanon large armed camps of Palestinians who are prosecuting their disagreements with others across the Lebanese borders. That is causing great

Grievance Debate

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1535

difficulty to the Lebanese. 1 think the world must come to a solution of the problem concerning a homeland for the Palestinians before it can even look at solving the problems of conflict in Lebanon. 1 believe that as a first instance to achieving some sort of peace in Lebanon there should be a total United Nations force controlling the military situation there. There are allegations by groups of partiality by the Arab peacekeeping force, some of which have been substantiated and some of which have not. The only way to overcome that is by having a total United Nations force in Lebanon rather than the split situation we have at present with the United Nations force in the south of the country and the Arab peacekeeping force in the north of the country.
Lebanon is an extremely small country whose major asset is its people. They have been a victim of the super powers' policies in the Middle East and, l.ike the people of all small countries, have very httle control over external pressures that are applied to them. 1 believe that the Lebanese should be allowed to get on with the government of their own country without outside interference fiom any of the super powers and from any of the large regional powers surrounding Lebanon. This morning the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) gave notice of a motion relating to what the Australian Labor Party believes might be a peaceful solution to the Lebanese problem. 1 have obtained the permission of the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) to incorporate that notice of motion in Hansard, and 1 seek leave to do so.
Leave granted.
The notice ofmotion reads as follows-
That this House(1) Urgently requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations to initiate immediate action by the United Nations Security Council to bring about a peaceful settlement of the conflict in Lebanon and
(2) is of the opinion that such settlement should embrace:
(A) Strict respect by all members of the United Nations for the territorial integrity of Lebanon within its internationally recognised boundaries;
(B) Extending the responsibilities of the United Nations Interim Force to apply to the internationally recognised boundaries of Lebanon;
(C) ~he transfer of responsibilities currently exerCised by the Arab League peacekeeping forces to the United Nations Peacekeeping Forces, and the subsequent withdrawal of the Arab League forces;
(D) Disarming of factional and communal militias; and
(E) Concurrent steps towards a settlement of the Palestinian question which will provide Palestinians with a national homeland.

. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-The honourable member should be aware that the incorporation of the notice of motion in Hansard will not entitle him to debate it.
Mr LEO McLEAY-I understand that, Mr Deputy Speaker. 1 believe that it would be going one small way in the right direction if this Parliament were to place on record its support for this proposal. 1 urge the Government to bring that motion on for debate as soon as possible so that this Parliament can place on record, both here and in the international forum, our support for the Lebanese people who live in this country and for their relations who want to see a peaceful solution to the ~onflagration in their homeland.
1 call upon the Government to consider seriously amending the migration rules for people from Lebanon. It is quite clear that a great conflict is going on there. We should have the same compassion for these people as we have had for people from South East Asia. We should reinstitute the special arrangements that the Australian Government had during the civil war for immigration proposals so that we can, once again, accept into the bosom of Australia the people who need to migrate to this country to escape this conflict. That would be most appreciated by the 200,000 Lebanese living in Australia. 1 believe that it would be most appreciated by the Australian community as a whole.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (12.23)-1 am pleased to enter this debate. 1 would like to bring forward several grievances. One grievance refers to a former member of this House, a former honourable member for Franklin, Mr Thomas Pearsall. Mr Pearsall was a very distinguished serviceman. He was a prisoner-of-war in Burma. On one occasion not so long ago when he wished to appear before the appeals tribunal of the Department of Veterans' Affairs he requested that 1 go along as a witness. 1 was rather surprised at what happened at that hearing, which was held in a very respectable way and every courtesy was shown not only to Mr Pearsall but also to me.
As a young politician, 1 realised that we seem to be forgetting some of the difficulties that ex-servicemen went through in every period of war, particularly during the terrible period between 1939 and 1945. Mr Pearsall appealed to the tribunal about a variation to his pension. Mr Pearsall had to outline in great depth the problems that occurred during that period. This made me realise that some of us do not really understand the difficulties that those men experienced during that time-the difficulties; the deprivation and the sadness that they encountered away from

1536 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Grievance Debate

home. Mr Pearsall had to refer continually to his below Franklin scheme, which is supported by the

diary. This was a difficult period for me.

Hydro-Electric Commission.

The crux of my grievance is that 1 thought that that appeal was unnecessary. That man endured 3+ hours of questioning relating to his previous war service. 1 found that that was, to a degree, unnecessary. 1 thought that some of the people that heard the evidence and some of the people that gave evidence about Mr Pearsall did not understand-like possibly a lot of other Australians-the problems that he endured. 1 spoke to Mr Pearsall afterwards and 1 said: 'I would like from you a letter that 1 can give to the Minister'. 1 am glad that the honourable member for Fisher (Mr Adermann), the former Minister for Veterans' Affairs, is present. He was a Minister who showed compassion and who was respected by every branch of the Department of Veterans' Affairs throughout Australia. Mr Pearsall gave me the letter and 1 read it very carefully. 1 would like to read one paragraph of it. This paragraph sums up what 1have endeavoured to say. It states:

1 have not entered into this debate to any marked degree. 1 am sick of people here trying to con the people of Tasmania, such as the episode with Prince Charles being asked to canoe down the river, only for publicity reasons. He would say that it was a beautiful spot and it should be preserved for the future heritage of everybody. Plenty of publicity was given to Don Chipp's trip down the Franklin River. What about the people who are employed by the HEC down there? What about the people of Tasmania who need that power? The Labor Party is a party of sheer hypocrisy. It says that it is all for the workers, but it seems to forget that many of the workers of the Hydro-electric Commission in Tasmania are looking after their jobs and want their jobs there in the future. There are elderly people down there who get cold in winter. The Labor Party says that it is all for the pensioners, but it seems to forget that those people get cold and will need cheap hydroelectricity in the long term.

The policy seems to reject everything as a matter of course

and let the servicemen appeal hoping he will be dead or get The scheme proposed by the Labor Govern-

sick of waiting in the meantime.

ment will cost about $113m more than the scheme

For a returned serviceman, a distinguished proposed by the HEC. It would also add about 17

soldier, a man who went through hell during that per cent to the HEC's accounts if that scheme

war period, to relate that means that we need to goes ahead. 1 request the Prime Minister to take a

take a very careful look at the situation. 1 intend very good look at what is occurring down there

to raise this matter in this House again at a later and to make absolutely certain that any statement

time and also to refer it to the Minister for Vethe makes has the support of all Government

erans' Affairs (Senator Messner). MrPearsall was members, particularly the members from Tas-

a prisoner of war and suffered greatly. 1 think that mania who know the scene, who live in Tasmania

paragraph of his letter to me requires further and who realise what it is all about.

attention. Mr Pearsall is battling on. The members of this House who know Tom Pearsall would know him as a great gentleman, which he is.

Putting aside that grievance I wish to deal now with another little grievance that I have. 1 always thought that if somebody says something, and that is reported, he is reported on what he has said.

The other grievance 1 have is about a question Nobody minds if they say something and some-

that was asked of the Prime Minister (Mr body reports what was said. The other night in

Malcolm Fraser) yesterday. To be quite truthful, this House 1said certain things about the family in

1 think the Prime Minister was conned. 1 state support of my colleague, the honourable member

here and now that if we go ahead with the propfor Braddon (Mr Groom). I said that if we could

osition outlined yesterday I, for one, will disagree. lower taxation, possibly it would allow certain

1 refer to the question relating to the South West mothers to stay at home and look after their chil-

National Park. The question was asked by a dren. 1 said also it would probably reduce the cost

member of the Opposition and he did it for the of child care centres if mothers were able to stay

specific purpose of getting a bit of publicity in at home because of economies. One lady in this

Tasmania, hoping that that will aid the Labor . place, like a thief in the night, walked out of the

Government there, which is in such a mess with chamber--

its procrastination that it cannot make decent, re-

spectable decisions to help the people of TasMr Holding-Mr Deputy Speaker, 1 take a

mania. It all relates to whether there should be acpoint of order. Under Standing Orders the

ceptance of the Gordon above Olga scheme, honourable gentleman is not entitled to describe

which the Labor Party down there proposed, and another member of this House as a thief in the

the Liberal Party's proposal about a Gordon night. 1ask him to withdraw.

Grievance Debate

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1537

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-In actual fact, whilst I find the expression a little distasteful the lady was not described as being a thief in the night. Her departure was described in that fashion.
Mr GOODLUCK-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. Like a thief in the night she left the chamber--
Mr Holding-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. I would have thought that if an honourable member suggests that a member of this House acts like a thief in the night it is a reflection--
Mr GOODLUCK-I will withdraw the statement as the honourable member is wasting my time. I shall go on. A lady from this chamber went out of the chamber and went upstairs to the Australian Associated Press Pty Ud-a very reputable organisation-and made a Press statement which went back to my local paper in Tasmania and which virtually said that I was against child care centres and the financing of such centres. It said also that I was a male chauvinist, et cetera. Firstly, I am married, I have five daughters and my mother-in-law is living with me. I do not think that I could be termed a male chauvinist. If I am, I have certain things in which I believe. If the honourable member wants a quote I will give her a quote. If she is going to carryon in that manned believe firmly that she should be chained to the kitchen. Let her take that statement and report back to the media.
I have forgotten the other grievance that I wished to put before the House, having been interrupted by so many interjections from the honourable members opposite. My time is nearly up anyway. Tasmanians have suffered a fair bit of antagonism during the past week. An unusual thing about it is that we have been denigrated by the Opposition. If the Opposition hopes to win seats in Tasmania it certainly is going about it the wrong way. Every time we get something for Tasmania there are allegations of pork-barrelling and all these other sorts of things. The main thing is that we try. The Opposition lost all seats in Tasmania because its members did not try. It should remember that very carefully at the next election.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (12.33) -It is generally accepted within the Australian community that although the laudatory statements made by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) and the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Carrick) concerning the Rundle shale oil venture were made primarilY for political purposes, they had the thoroughly

predictable result of talking up the value of the shares. It is now public knowledge that Senator Carrick was aware of the company's difficulties as early as 18 February and immediately informed the Government of those difficulties. I am concerned at the trading pattern of shares on the Sydney Stock Exchange, a pattern that I believe establishes a prima facie case for investigation and public disclosure. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table showing trading in Rundle oil shale partner shares from 2 February 1981 until 3 March.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is leave granted?
Mr Street-I have not seen it.
Mr HOLDING-It is just a straightforward table. These figures indicate that in Central Pacific Petroleum and Southern Pacific Minerals a fairly normal movement of shares took place from 1 February until 18 February. In the two days immediately after 18 February-that is immediately after Senator Carrick was informed of the company's difficulties and informed the Government of the difficulties confronting the companies-on 19 and 20 February, some 264,000 shares were traded in Central Pacific Petroleum and 345,000 shares were sold in Southern Pacific Minerals. That pattern of share trading is well above the previous share movement. When confronted with those figures .during Question Time today the Prime Minister, by imputation, suggested that any leakage of information could have come from within the companies concerned. He pointed out also that he did not spend his time studying stock exchange figures. I am perfectly aware that the Prime Minister, when he is at Nareen, spends his time counting sheep and, when he is in Canberra, spends his time presiding over them. However, these figures permit only three explanations. The first explanation-which I think would be most acceptable to all honourable members in this House-would be that the figures are purely coincidental and do not represent in any way any improper use of inside information. That is the first alternative.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I interrupt the honourable member at this stage to inform him that the Chair has been informed that leave will not be granted for the incorporation of the document.
Mr Street-There is no authority on it. Where are the figures from?
Mr HOLDING~They were obtained from the Stock Exchange report.
Mr Street-There is nothing on it to indicate:

1538 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Grievance Debate

Mr HOLDING-Will the Minister accept my statement on that?
Mr Street-Ifyou assure me that they were. Mr HOLDING-I assure the Minister that that is from where they were obtained.
Mr Street-They were compiled for you?
Mr HOLDING-Yes.
Mr Street-It would have helped if you had shown them to me first.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
SYDNEY STOCK EXCHANGE Trading in Rundle Oil Shale Partners

Central Pacific Petroleum

Date

Day's Day's high low Price

No. sold (100s)

2/2 3/2
4/2 5/2 6/2 9/2 10/2
11/2 12/2
13/2 16/2 17/2 18/2 19/2 20/2
23/2 24/2 25/2
26/2 27/2
2/3 3/3

6.60 6.50 6.50

6.50 6.30 6.30

6.40 6.40 6.40

6.00 6.00 6.00

6.00 5.94 6.00

6.00

6.l2 6.04 6.04

6.l0 6.10 6.l0

5.86 5.70 5.86

5.80

5.80

..

..

5.70 5.50

5.30 5.30 5.30

5.10 5.10 5.l0

5.105.00 5.00

5.l0 5.l0 5.10

5.00 4.80 4.90

5.00 5.00 5.00

5.00 5.00 5.00

4.90 4.~0 4.80

4.60 4.00 4.00

66 120
1 10 228
29 3
338 52 100
81 1,100 1,541
37 570 100 310 1,056 20 65

SYDNEY STOCK EXCHANGE Trading in Rundle Oil Shale Partners

Southern Pacific Minerals

Date

Day's Day's high low Price

No. sold (100s)

2/2

2.40 2.35 2.35

91

3/2

2.35 2.30 2.30

240

4/2

2.25 2.15 2.15

110

5/2

2.20 2.l5 2.20

63

6/2

2.25 2.20 2.25

582

9/2

2.35 2.30 2.30

130

10/2

2.40 2.35 2.40

430

11/2

2.35 2.35 2.35

150

12/2

2.30 2.25 2.25

150

13/2

2.20 2.l5 2.l5

1,240

16/2

2.10 2.05 2.05

130

17/2

2.05 1.90 1.90

790

18/2

1.95 1.95 1.95

450

Southern Pacific Minerals

Date

Day's Day's high low Price

No. sold (100s)

19/2 20/2 23/2 24/2 25/2 26/2 27/2
2/3 3/3

2.10 2.00 2.10 2.l0 2.05 2.08 2.l0 2.10 2.l0 2.00 1.95 1.95 2.00 1.95 2.00 2.00 1.95 2.00 1.95 1.90 1.90 1.80 1.70 1.70 1.60 1.50 1.57

540
2,910 240 220
310 420 1,690
240 690

Mr HOLDING-I apologise to the Minister. The second alternative is the explanation implied by the Prime Minister that the difficulties were known to the companies and to their managements. If there were any leak of information it could have been from this source. Certainly there is some disquiet on the Sydney Stock Exchange as to what has been described as a belated release of information and the possibility of insider trading. I can make no judgment in respect of that other than to make the observation that the nature of the difficulties confronting the Rundle partnership were known to the companies well before 18 February. If there were to be insider trading based on company knowledge the opportunity for that was there well prior to 18 February.
The third alternative is that if insider trading had taken place its source is within the Government and those associated with the Government. Today we have had exercises in righteous indignation from the Prime Minister in his denial that he or his family owns or have owned shares in these companies. We have had similar denials also from Senator Carrick. Of course, we are bound by those explanations and must accept them. I point out to the House that questions were directed to Senator Carrick in the Senate on 21 May 1980 and 23 May 1980 seeking information as to whether any members of the ministry held any shares in the Rundle oil companies. Whilst Senator Carrick was unable in the first instance to give any information on that matter, he subsequently indicated as follows in an answer to the Senate:
All Ministers have made declarations of pecuniary interests in accordance with the arrangements referred to by the Deputy Prime Minister in his statement of 22 November 1979 on the Report of the Committee of Inquiry coricerning Public Duty and Private Interest.
Whilst Senator Carrick indicated that he had no shares, all he was able to do-indeed, all that has been done by the Prime Minister to date-was to indicate to the House that the Prime Minister was satisfied with the declarations made by Ministers.

Grievance Debate

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1539

It is not a question of whether the Prime Minister is satisfied on these matters. The people of Australia, and all those people who have had shares in the companies and who have lost considerable sums of money as a result of what has occurred, have to be satisfied. When the Prime Minister is confronted with evidence of share trading and a very direct question as to the extent of ministerial interest or, indeed, the interest of Government members who may support the Government on this issue, it is thoroughly unsatisfactory, from the point of view of the people of Australia and this Parliament, for the Prime Minister to wax indignant.
That brings me to the next proposition that I believe has to be made in respect of this matter. It is no joy and it is no comfort to any member of the Opposition or, I believe, to any member of the Parliament to raise these matters in this way. I point out that the practice and the procedure which has been adopted by the Prime Minister's own party in his own State is for all members of the Victorian Parliament to sign a register which indicates the extent of their private interests. We are confronted with information of this kind. If this were a question which was within the jurisdiction of the Victorian Parliament, as a result of the policies of the Labor Party-subsequently adopted by the Liberal Party in that State-the matter would be resolved in five minutes. The interests not merely of the members of the Cabinet and their families but also of all members of Parliament are publicly known.
I believe that that is in the interests of parliament, and I believe that it is in the interests of senior public servants who are possessed of this type of information, to be in a situation where there is a register which indicates the extent of their interests. On that basis there can be, as there ought to be, complete public confidence in the knowledge that comes into the keeping of Ministers and senior public servants in the normal course of their duties. One does not like suggesting or implying impropriety. It is up to the Parliament and to this Government to introduce a systemthis Government bas turned its back on any system-which would place the Ministry and the members of this House above any allegation of this type.
The trading figures in respect of the Rundle shale oil speculation indicate a prima facie case for investigation. I ask the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) or a Commissioner for Corporate Affairs to instigate such an investigation as a matter of urgency and to disclose publicly the results of those findings. Again, I point out to the Government that it should not be necessary for a

member of this House to make this request in this way. Properly established procedures would put these kinds of matters beyond doubt. The Parliament is not served by the righteous displays of indignation that we saw from the Prime Minister this morning.
Mrs Child-I wish to make it personal explanation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-The question before the House is that grievances be noted. Is the honourable member seeking the call? There are three minutes in which she may address the matter. I presume she has a grievance.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (12.42)-1 do have a grievance. The grievance is against the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck). I listened to the broadcast of his remarks with some surprise in my room a few minutes ago. In some way he thinks that I misrepresented the implication of his words the other night. I read to the House the words recorded in Hansard. The honourable member said:
. . . and, I hope, keep some of the women home to look after their children. Then we might not need to direct some of the money that is directed at child welfare clinics, other clinics and so forth.
Those are the words that appear in Hansard. Those are the words that I quoted in a Press release to Australian Associated Press Pty Ltd. In actual fact, the words that are recorded on the tape are slightly different, since Hansard" has tidied the honourable member's remarks. The honourable member said: 'Then we won't need some of the money that is being directed to child welfare and the lot'. I maintain that my interpretation of what the honourable member for Franklin said is perfectly correct. He is intimating that more women should be kept at home looking after their children. He is intimating that Tasmanians do not need child welfare clinics. I say to the honourable member for Franklin that the people of Tasmania are of great interest to honourable members on this side of the House. As one who lived in Tasmania for many years, I have a deep interest in the welfare of its people. We all have a deep interest in their welfare. We are not on the side of the House that is advocating cuts in public expenditure that will fall heaviest on the people of Tasmania. Nor is this the-side of the House that is consistently talking about the votes. If the honourable member goes through the speech he made the other night, he will find that every time one member from his side speaks he is talking about votes; he is not speaking about the people of Tasmania. On this side of the Hous\! we are certainly interested in the retention of the wilderness parts of Tasmania. We are vitally

1540 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

High Technology Industries

interested in this. We are more interested in the workers. We have shown this interest for some time in our concern for their working conditions and for the 35-hour working week.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-It is now 12.45 p.m. In accordance with Standing Order 106 the debate is interrupted. I put the question:
That grievances be noted.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES STANDING COMMITTEE ON ROAD
SAFETY
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Mr Speaker has received advice from the Government Whip that he has nominated Mr Chapman to be a member of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Road Safety in the place of Mr Shack.
ESTABLISHMENT OF HIGH TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRIES
Discussion of Matter ofPublic Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)~Mr Speaker has received letters from the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) and the honourable member for Herbert (Mr Dean) proposing that definite matters of public importance be submitted to the. House for discussion today. As required by Standing Order 107, Mr Speaker has selected the matter which, in his opinion, is the most urgent and important; that is, that proposed by the honourable member for Lalor, namely:
The Fraser Government's abject failure to promote the establishment of Australian based and owned high technology industries, especially in computers and biotechnology, and to change Australia's extremely adverse position in technology transfer.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number a/members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (12.46)-The Fraser Government deserves the severest condemnation of the House for its abject failure to promote the establishment of Australian based and owned high technology industries and to change Australia's extremely adverse position in technology transfer. Historically, we have a long tradition of avoiding the challenge of developing our own indigenous technology. We have adopted the colonial model of technology transfer. As a result, one vital area after another has fallen into foreign ownership and the commanding heights of

the Australian economy are in foreign handsmotor manufacturing, food processing, drugs, chemicals, plastics, petrol and advertising, as well as control of so many of our raw materials. Unlike the Swedes, the Norwegians or the Japanese, who see the value of developing indigenous technology, we are happy to see ourselves, in Sir Henry Bolte's memorable phrase, as 'the world's quarry' and to buy our technology off the shelf.
Australia is in a particularly disadvantaged position in the computer industry. Australian imports of computer equipment rose from $64m in the year ended June 1973 to $291m in the year ended June 1979. Australia spends nearly $14 on imported computer equipment for everyone dollar spent on local manufacture-the most unbalanced proportion of any advanced country. The ratio of spending on imported versus locally produced computer equipment is as follows: In Australia the equivalent of $13.60 for everyone dollar spent locally; in Spain the ratio is 5.9:1; in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics it is 2.7:1; in Brazil it is 2.1:1; in Belgium, Canada and Switzerland it is 1.8:1--
Mr John Brown-What about the Poms?
Mr BARRY JONES-In France it is 1.5:1; in the Netherlands it is 1.3:1; in Italy it is 1.2: 1 and in the United Kingdom-I answer my colleague from Parramatta-it is a position of equal balance-one dollar spent locally for everyone dollar spent on imports. The worst way of developing a comparatively new technology is to invite a foreign multinational corporation in and ask it to make the running. This is what happened with the Australian motor industry with the result that the Holden which used to be known as Australia's own car is now a German car with minimal modification for local conditions. Any basic decisions about that industry will be made in Detroit or Tokyo, not in Canberra or Sydpey.
The Government's extraordinary exercise in inviting the National Semiconductor Corporation from the Santa Clara Valley-Silicon Valleynear San Francisco reveals that this method which has proved so disastrous in motor manufacturing will be followed to the letter in one aspect of computer chip manufacturing. The Government has proposed to National Semiconductor that it will provide $19m in land, plant and facilities if Natsemi will set up a silicon wafer fabrication plant in Canberra, in the hope;: that it will provide a diversified employment base in Canberra. The aim is to be commended. Canberra does need a wider base than public service employment and a high technology industry is worth striving for. But, will Canberra get what it wants?

High Technology Industries

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1541

The proposal under the Government plan is that a feasibility study will be carried out. That is a good idea, but who is to carry out the feasibility study? Is it the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation? No. Is it the Treasury? No. Industry and Commerce? No, again. A parliamentary committee? No. The Minister forNational Development and Energy (Senator Carrick)? No, not even him. Is it the Department of Science and Technology? No, to the power of three. The feasibility study will be carried out-wait for it-by the National Semiconductor Corporation of Santa Clara, California. This is better than appealing from Caesar to Caesar; it is a matter of appealing from Silicon Valley ~o Silicon Valley. Who has pushed the plan? The Treasury was against it and so was the Department of Industry and Commerce. The CSIRO has had its arms twisted up its back over the matter. The Fraser Government is lost at sea; it is clutching not at straws but at wafers.
The Minister for the Australian Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) says that Natsemi will employ 1,200 people at the plant, in addition to other support and construction jobs. Natsemi's Press release uses many figures, but these are not among them. United States sources in the semiconductor industry regard the figure of 1,200 as pure science fiction, as wafer production at the rate of 15,000 a week is not labour intensive. In February, I asked a senior executive in the Santa Clara valley what would be his attitude to a government which made an invitation of this nature to Natsemi, and he said: The view we would take is that it would confirm that you are feeble-minded'.
Mr Hodgman-You are an absolute knocker.
Mr BARRY JONES-I am simply telling the truth. It is essential that we understand that what is proposed is not a silicon chip manufacturing plant. It is a plant for faQricating the wafer on which the components of the microcircuitry which comprises the finished silicon chip will be imprinted. The wafer,whilst an essential component, provides only one element in chip making. The making of the chips and the attachment of terminals, which is labour intensive, will be done elsewhere. Canberra will be merely one link in a long technological chain. Where is the tech~ nology transfer there? The silicon wafer has the same relationship to the chip as photographic paper has to a finished photograph or, as I said on the ABC Science Show, it is like having a factory which makes communion wafers without having priests or a church for the sacrament to be administered ..

I have in my hand a clear plastic container which holds finished Natsemi chips. It bears a label which reads as follows:

National Semiconductor Corp. ANTI STATIC. Caution:

This container provides protection for static sensitive devices.

Handle devices with caution upon removal.

.

I ask honourable members to listen to this; it is printed in capitals:

MADE IN ONE OR MORE OF THE FOLLOWING . COUNTRIES: KOREA, HONG KONG, MALAYSIA, SINGAPORE, TAIWAN, MAURITIUS, THAILAND, INDONESIA, MEXICO, PHILIPPINES. THE EXACT COUNTRY OF ORIGIN IS UNKNOWN.

If the project goes through-that is, if it suits Natsemi's purpose-Australia's name will be added to that long, distinguished list. I wonder whether we will secure a higher degree of technology transfer than Mauritius. I hope so.

Whilst the Government has made this extraordinarily generous offer to Natserili, which is quite inconsistent with the Friedmanite free market philosophies spouted in this House by members of the Government in the past week, it has rejected help to Australian firms in the computer area. The Hartley Computer company of Brisbane is an admirable example of a small Australian firm which has mastered the new technology,first by producing first class computer
software fora specialised market and then by producing its '3900' mainframe computer which already has penetrated a small but significant market in Britain, Canada, New Zealand and even the United States, as well as in Australia. The shadow Minister for Industry and Commerce, the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford), and I visited the Hartley plant on 17 March. What help has this innovative Australian company received from the Fraser Government? Zero! Its turnover has gone from $600 to $23m in six years, with no help whatever from the Liberal National Country Party coalition. It was not offered $19m, or even $lm for that matter, and it desperately needed bank accommodation and venture finance. That venture finance was singularly lacking. I asked David Hartley what his response would be if he were offered $19m in facilities in Canberra and whether he would carry out a feasibility.study? He just laughed; of course he would. When 'I asked whether he could use the assets usefully in Canberra, subject to working out the best way to get the best value for moiley not just for his company but for the Australian community, he answered, 'Of course'. The point is: He was never asked. It is a supreme irony that, in the very month that the National Semiconductor project is beir.6 discussed, Dr Bill Caelli and his company, Electronics Research Australia Pty

1542 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

High Technology Industries

Ltd, is moving out of Canberra and up to Queensland.
Mr Hodgman-He supports Natsemi. Didn't you know that?
Mr BARRY .JONES-There has been a slight shift in direction.
Mr Hodgman-Check your facts. He publicly supported it.
Mr BARRY JONES-I have checked the facts. He was with me yesterday when I spoke along exactly these lines. This extraordinarily blind Government is saying 'yes' to large enterprises and 'no' to small ones, 'yes' to a multinational corporation and 'no' to an Australian company, and 'yes' to a part technology and 'no' to a comprehensive technology. Large firms should be encouraged to recognise that the hiving-off process, where large forins of enterprise break away from existing entities, has been very successful in the United States and Europe in generating new ideas and new employment. Many of the most productive enterprises--
Mr Hodgman-You are against it, and you are against the Territory, too.
Mr BARRY JONES-We are saying that the Australiancommunity, and the Canberra come munity, will not get the best,value for money out of it. If the Government wants to have an inquiry, let us refer it to a parliamentary committee arid hear the evidence. Let us hear what are the specific proposals, and then let the Parliament look at it. The Government should not give the matter to the proponents of the scheme and say 'You are the best people to conduct a feasibility study'. What absurd, almost insane, precedents, would be set in every other area of government funding. We would have to ask all the applicants for funding whether they could use the money and, if they said yes, we would say: 'Right, give it to them'. Many of the most productive enterprises in microelectronics and biotechnology have been developed by new small firms and resisted by old, established corporations. This Government will do to the computer industry exactly what it has done to the motor car industry unless it encourages the development of new, small, innovative firms that can do their own things. This hiving-off process, encouraged in the United States by enterpreneurial spirit and the availability of risk capital-neither of which - are very apparent here-is contrary to the Australian tradition of playing safe by adding new enterprises to existing corporations and importing both technologies and ideas.

At the moment Australia has six great strikes against it getting into new technology areas. First, there is a prevailing lack of intellectual vitality, second, a contracting educational base, third, inadequate investment in research and development, fourth, the absence of an entrepreneurial spirit, fifth, the absence of risk capital for new ventures, and, sixth, the existence of the Fraser Government. The Fraser Government is engaged in a constant sell-out of Australian national interests. It has no interest in promoting Australian intellectual property. Its sell-out on research and development has been appalling. We rank as one of the lowest countries in the technologically advanced world because we have not encouraged our own technologies. Instead of that, this Government offers us a part technology, not the whole technology. A measure of our backwardness in the area is that the Government does not understand the implications of it all.
Mr Hodgman-You are against it.
Mr BARRY JONES-I am not against it; I am for the best value for money for the Australian community.
I want to say a few words about biotechnology. The application of biological organisms, systems or processes for manufacturing and service industries is the potentially largest of all future growth areas in the economy. Biotechnology will not be a large employer. Some biotechnological processes, such as brewing and fermenting, are very ancient. However, the techniques of gene splicing by which genes from recombinant DNA are spliced into plasmids from specific bacteria, which are then able to replicate, thus manufacturing the desired substance, were developed only in the 1960s. Biotechnological processes have a very low labour content. Many problems need to be faced up to in the whole question of biotechnology.
This Government does not even recognise the nature of the challenge. It has done very little in this area. Very small sums have been allocated to universities for them to carry out research. One small company has received a total of $450,000something of that order-over a long period. It will be tragic ifthis is to be another area in which Australia simply misses the bus and gets in too late. A measure of the ignorance of the Government and the lack of intellectual vitality that is so prevailing in the Government was evident a couple of weeks ago when I asked the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) what the Government was doing. He was not able to provide an answer.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

High Technology Industries

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1543

Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr SCHOLES-Yes. During the remarks of the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) said, by clear interjection, that I, as the person responsible for the Opposition, was opposed to the diversification of industry in Canberra. That is a personal misrepresentation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Chair is not obliged to hear all the interjections. All I can suggest is that when the honourable member for Lalor is playing solo trumpet the piccolos should remain quiet. I did not hear the interjection.
Sitting suspended from 1.3 to 2.15 p.m.
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology) (2.15)-1 welcome this opportunity to talk on this subject of great national importance. It is far too seldom that this Parliament gets an opportunity to talk about science and technology. We need to spend more time discussing it and informing the Parliament and the people of Australia. I will say at the very outset that the Government is not idle in this field. It is doing a great deal. I had lunch today in the dining room with the South Australian Minister who is responsible for industrial affairs. He made the point that exciting things were happening in South Australia and that many of them were supported by the Commonwealth. This is happening in all the States. It is a co-operative effort between the Commonwealth and the States to introduce high technology. Admittedly we are just starting, but we have started.
The Government's attitude is to maximise economic, social and other benefits and to minimise the social consequences. I am sure my friend from Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) would agree with those priorities. This will not happen quickly. It cannot happen overnight. A great many threads must come together to form the whole pattern of this policy. We have to mobilise the intellectual forces of the nation. This is not an easy job. It will need co-operation from both sides of the Parliament. Yesterday the Opposition spokesman on science and technology, the honourable member for Lalor, spoke at the National Science Forum in Canberra. I read his speech and I agree with much of it. However, after reading his speech I felt that he was not very well informed about many of the programs which were being carried out by my Department and other departments. I have offered to have him fully briefed. It is a great pity that he

did not have the briefing before this debate. One point that the honourable member for Lalor made in his speech disturbed me a great deal. He described public servants as third rate. A headline in the Canberra Times this morning stated: 'Thirdrate bureaucracy thwarts new technology'. That is an appalling slur on some very fine officers. In my dealings with officers of my Department and other departments I have found them to be imaginative, innovative and very enthusiastic. I will make sure that the honourable member for Lalor meets some of them so that he can revise his opinion.
Mr Barry Jones-I said that we had second rate politicians as well.
Mr THOMSON-That is certainly true about honourable members on the other side of the House. The officials concerned in this important field work very hard to implement government policy and they generate much of that policy by their advice, which is excellent advice. They are also producing results. I should like to deal with some of the specific programs that are being undertaken by the Government in co-operation with industry, the States and very often, although not always unfortunately, with the unions.
There is no doubt that technology is important for the economic growth of Australia and for the long term employment of our educated and skilled work force. One of the ways this is being done is through the Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentive Scheme. The Government is aiming at assisting new and existing technologies. This scheme certainly has been one of our great successes. Only yesterday in the Parliament I introduced a new Bill upgrading and expanding this scheme. The scheme aims at helping industry help itself. In many cases, unfortunately, industry is not responding quickly to the market and by injecting research and development finance from the Government we hope to rectify this deficiency. This year the Government is spending $54m on industrial research and development incentive grants to industry. That is an enormous increase from the $14m which was spent on the scheme only three years ago.
Mr Barry Jones-But you start from a shockingly low base-an appallingly low base.
Mr THOMSON-I suggest that the honourable member for Lalor read the report and look at the facts.
Mr Barry Jones-I have read it very thoroughly.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The Minister will resume his seat. Prior to

1544 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

High Technology Industries

lunch the honourable member for Lalor took the House by storm with a very erudite speech. Whilst there were a great number of interjections he swept them aside with the very vigour of his presentation. In the quieter environment I suggest to the honourable member for Lalor that he remain silent.
Mr THOMSON-The impact of the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Scheme is enormous. It seeds all sorts of new and interesting research developments. It has been estimated that more than 29,000 new jobs will be created in the next 10 years from research and development projects so far aided by this scheme. The honourable member for Lalor mentioned biotechnology. Let us look at what is happening in the biotechnology field in Australia. There is a wide range of biotechnology research and development projects being funded under the scheme. The support for this year for those projects is about $2m. It is a start but this field is growing very rapidly. The projects include work on enzyme technology, protein manufacture, industrial chemicals, bioconversion of wastes and pharmaceuticals and others. For example, Biotechnology Australia Pty Ltd, which was mentioned by the honourable member for Lalor, received a grant of $460,000 over two years-that is not many years-to undertake a fermentation technology project. I understand that this work is aimed at the more efficient production by fermentation of single cell protein and fuel alcohol. The Australian Academy of Science produced a report on one major area of this technology, recombinant DNA, last year. The report revealed a disappointing lack of interest by Australian industry. My ministry subsequently has taken steps to rectify this situation. We cannot do these things in a hurry. It takes time to educate an industry which has grown up in the past and which has exciting possibilities for the future.
Mr Barry Jones-We have a long way to catch up.
. Mr THOMSON-I agree that we have a long way to catch up but we are. The previous Labor Government did very little to help it catch up.
Mr Barry Jones-Not enough, I agree.
Mr THOMSON-It did nothing. This Government at least is trying to do a great deal. The speech of the honourable member for Lalor this morning was most inaccurate in many of its applications. At the moment my Department is organising a symposium to be held later in 1981 on biotechnology. Its purpose is to stimulate industrial applications of biotechnolpgy by alerting

Australian companies to the very great possibilities flowing from research in this field. An officer of my Department attended a major international meeting on this subject in the United States this week. I had planned this week to meet a number of people in the United States to discuss these programs but unfortunately I had to return to Australia. Some first class research in biotechnology is being undertaken in Australia with the support of the Government.
Mr Barry J ones-The Government does not know about it.
Mr THOMSON-Government laboratories are also working on this matter.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will resume his seat. The House is addressing itself to a discussion on a matter of public importance. The honourable member for Lalor should not read the discussion as meaning having a chat. If he cannot contain himself I suggest that he listen over the relay system to the remarks of the Minister. I ask the honourable member for Lalor to remain silent. If he does not remain silent I will be required to deal with him.
Mr THOMSON-In the computing, calculating and counting sector the Government has given more than $1m in research and development grants. The Government has given more than $500,000 this year towards information storage. Overall computer support runs at over $2m this year. These are only seeding grants with great sums being spent by industry, which should be the case. Even more money is given by way of general grants. I repeat that these figures give the lie to the allegations made by the honourable member for Lalor this morning. The companies receiving these grants spend them complete without government interference. In his speech the honourable member for Lalor made great play about the decision of National Semiconductor Incorporated, which is being investigated by the Government and Natsemi.
An outstanding example of the Government's efforts to attract high technology industry to Australia, is that it is bringing to Canberra a world leader in micro-electronics technology. I am sure that the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) supports this move. I see that she does support it because she is nodding her head. Not all members of the Opposition agree with the honourable member for Lalor. Australia will, as a result, get most favoured customer access to Natsemi products, assistance from Natsemi in making greater use of integrated circuits in products and processes and high level technical training. Australia will also get many other benefits which

High Technology Industries

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1545

are being discussed at the moment. Officials from my Department and the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation are working very closely with Natsemi in these discussions and investigations.
The CSIRO and my Department strongly support the introduction of these high technology industries into Australia. The proposed wafer plant gives Australia the most skill-intensive part of the technology. Natsemi does not seem to share the honourable member for Lalor's low opinion of Australian skills. Natsemi must satisfy itself that the proposal is sound before it commits its investment. As I said officers of my Department and the CSIRO are assisting this undertaking. There is a great Australian involvement. The honourable member for Lalor referred to the views of Dr Caelli on Natsemi. Let me quote what Dr Caelli is reported to have said in the Canberra Times of 25 March. He said:
Australia can be proud that we have got in on this deal. It is the biggest shot in the arm the indigenous computer industry ever had. The value to Australia will be enormous.
Those are the words of Dr Caelli. I spoke to him the day before yesterday on this subject.
Mr Barry Jones-Now tell us why he has left Canberra.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-I warn the honourable member for Lalor.
Mr THOMSON-,-I would like to add that almost all countries, except the United States of America, have a trade deficit in technology. It is interesting to note that Japan has a five to one technology deficit of imports over exports and that Australia has a 10 to one technology deficit. That is not a bad comparison between Japan, that great industrial leader and Australia, which is just starting out in this field. Japan has an importexport technology ratio of five to one and Australia has a 10 to one ratio. Importation of technology and subsequent adaption is the policy followed by many countries. Australian industry must be encouraged to do this.
I would like to touch on a number of other programs. I draw the attention of honourable members to the productivity improvement programs. I will not go into a great deal of detail except to say that they are very successful programs. I will have great pleasure in encouraging the honourable member for Lalor to be briefed on them. The Department, in conjunction with the industry, has set up a technology transfer council. We were criticised in this respect. This trial is working very successfully. The council has established a technology referral network in the metals manufacturing area, which is responsive to

its problems. The network is a great success and I hope it will be expanded in other areas.
Another very interesting development that has been going on over the last couple of years is the recognition by the Department of a lack of high technology entrepreneurship within Austrlalia. We are a very inventive nation but we are not good at entrepreneurship. Therefore several workshops called adventure workshops have been held on entrepreneurship. This has been a very successful seeding operation. When the next workshop is held I will invite the honourable member for Lalor to attend.
The honourable member for Lalor mentioned this morning the problems associated with venture finance. Venture finance is certainly a problem in every country. We are taking steps to do something about this. High technology is a risky proposition and many financial institutions in Australia are reluctant to provide capital. We are awar'! of this problem. We are already doing things to bring together financial institutions and high technology industry. Several workshops have been organised by my Department. A large symposium will be organised by the Australian banks and the Academy of Technological Science to discuss this problem. Something is being done.
I do not have time to mention in detail such things as Interscan and information technology week, which will be held in August. I hope that the honourable member for Lalor will take part in and give active encouragement to this Australia wide information technology week.
Mr Barry J ones-If I get an invitation.
Mr THOMSON-The honourable member will certainly get an invitation. The Opposition has a problem in coming to grips with high technology and its importance to Australia. The main reason is that sections of the trade union movement have turned their backs on high technology. They have adopted a Luddite attitude, opposing the introduction of technology unless it is on their terms. They are blind to the benefits that technology will bring to employment. High technology essentially is an attitudinal problem which will take time to solve. We are doing everything we can to make sure that the adverse effects of technology will be minimised. We have sought the opinions of almost everybody in formulating our policy.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The Minister's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.

1546 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Parliamentary Conference-Zambia

RUNDLE SHALE OIL PROJECT
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-I table a letter dated 3 March 1981 addressed to me from Southern Pacific Petroleum NL and also a letter dated 25 March 1981 likewise from Southern Pacific Petroleum NL. In so doing I make it clear to the House that both of these letters are being tabled with the full approval of and in fact at the request of the company concerned.
Mr Keating-I might for the public record just ask the Treasurer why the Government persists in not tabling Senator Carrick's letter to the Prime Minister?
Mr HOWARD-That matter was canvassed at Question Time this morning. I have nothing to add to what was said then.
Mr Keating-On a point of order, if the Minister is prepared to table letters from companies, why not the ministerial one?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- There is no point of order.
TWENTY-SIXTH COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY CONFERENCE-
ZAMBIA
Mr FISHER (Mallee)-by leave-I present the report of the Australian branch delegation to the Twenty-Sixth Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference held in Zambia in September-October 1980.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr FISHER-The Commonwealth of Australia branch delegation to the Twenty-Sixth Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference in Lusaka, Zambia during September-October 1980 comprised Mr J. Corbett, M.P. as Leader of the Delegation, the Honourable G. M. Bryant, E.D., M.P., Mr A. W. James, M.P. and Senator the Hon. R. Bishop. As all members of the House of Representatives who attended the conference retired from the House at the dissolution of the last Parliament, I have been asked by Mr Corbett to present the delegation's report to the House and I feel it a privilege to do so.
At the outset it should be noted that the size of the branch delegation to the conference was reduced when two proposed members of the delegation found it necessary to withdraw because of the general election to be held in October last year. The conference was attended by 184 delegates from Commonwealth countries together with observers from several other organisations. It proved to be a most successful conference and a

summary of its proceedings is included in the delegation's report. Members of the branch delegation were greatly impressed by the arrangements made by the Zambian branch and by the warmth of their welcome to Zambia. No effort was spared by the host branch in attending to the comfort and convenience of the delegates throughout the conference and the associated tours in Zambia.
Members of the delegation also had the honout of presenting Australia's independence gift to the Parliament of Zimbabwe when travelling to Lusaka. In April 1980 the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Praser) announced that two dispatch boxes would be presented as an Australian independence gift for the chamber of the Senate of Zimbabwe. Members of the delegation made the presentation on Thursday, 18 September 1980 at a specially convened meeting of the Zimbabwe Senate. The gift was the first of any nation to the Zimbabwe Parliament and members of the delegation were privileged to sit on the floor of the Senate chamber for the presentation ceremony. The delegation was warmly welcomed .and enjoyed generous hospitality during its brief stopover in Zimbabwe.
I feel privileged to have had the opportunity to present this report on behalf of my former colleague and National Country Party Whip in the House of Representatives, Mr Jim Corbett. Mr Corbett, as member for Maranoa for 14 years served this Parliament of Australia and its people with distinction in that period. His leadership of this Commonwealth parliamentary delegation was the culmination of an outstanding parliamentary career. I commend this report for the consideration of all honourable members.
AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION TO THE ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC
CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT DEBATE OF THE PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY OF THE COUNCIL OF EUROPE
Report
Mr CHARLES JONES (Newcastle)-by leave-Mr Deputy Speaker, I present the report of the Australian Delegation to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Debate of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe held in Strasbourg on 25 September 1980.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr CHARLES JONES-I ask leave to make a short statement in connection with the report.
Leave granted.

Assembly of the Council ofEurope

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1547

Mr CHARLES JONES-The statement that I make is on behalf of Mr Bruce Graham, the former member for North Sydney and myself. This is a completely bipartisan statement so the first part is according t6 Graham and Jones and the second part, with the leave of the Minister at the table, the Minister for Communications and Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair), is according to Jones. The bipartisan part of the report is that Australia has been a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Developmentthat is, the OECD-since 1971. Prior to that, Australia was a member of the OECD Development Assistance Committee. In 1979, Australia became a member of the International Energy Agency-that is the IEAan autonomous body of the OECD. The OECD is an instrument for inter-governmental co-operation among 24 industrialised countries on matters relevant to economic and social policy. It offers Australia the unique opportunity to participate in an international organisation alongside other Western industrialised nations in a wide range of work related to economic and social matters. The areas covered by the OECD include major economic policy issues, energy, trade, science, technology, manpower, education, environment, transport and North-South questions. We are grateful for the Council of Europe's annual invitation for members of the Australian Parliament to participate in the debate on the activities of the OECD, which those attending have found an interesting, valuable and stimulating experience.
Both the former member for North Sydney and myself have had the privilege of attending the OECD annual debate, he representing the Government and I representing the Opposition. At the different times when we have been there we have found it an excellent opportunity to meet members from other parliaments, not only in Europe but also from associate countries such as the United States of America, Canada, Japan and New Zealand. That gave us the means whereby we could exchange points of view. Likewise, attending the OECD debates, as well as the meeting of the Council of Europe, allowed us to attend internal committee meetings and to put points of view concerning what is happening in Australia. It gave us the opportunity of meeting the Council's economic committee. The Australian and New Zealand delegations were there and we all put forward matters that were of concern to us regarding the policies of countries in Europe, particularly those in the European Economic Community.
I, as a member of the International Socialist Movement, was allowed to attend the socialist group meeting. The Parliament is broken up into

political groups. There was a socialist group, a conservative group, a liberal group and a communist group. So I, as a member of the International Socialist Movement, was permitted to attend a meeting of the socialist group with an open invitation from the chairman, who happens to be a member of the British Parliament, and thereby take part in the discussions that were under way. It is of great value to me and to members of parliament in Australia that we can attend these meetings. I see on my right the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young). He will be going there this year as he has been selected by his party already. The meeting will be of great value to him.
Mr Young-Because of' his economic background.
Mr CHARLES' JONES-What economic background? Do not interrupt! It is of value to all of us, even members of the Government if they would like to take the opportunity to attend meetings of the conservative. or liberal groups. Just the fact alone that one can attend meetings as well as the fact that honourable members can meet people and put their points of view forward is beneficial. I believe that Mr Graham and myself put our points of view forcibly at a meeting of the Council's agricultural committee. The chairman of the committee decided that he had had enough of our forceful argument and made the excuse that we all had a commitment to meet, a social function as guests of the British delegation, and terminated the meeting. With the assista'nce of the advisers who were with us, we really gave them a hammering. As far as other activities of the debate were concerned, we should be appreciative of the special privilege extended to visiting delegates by the chairman, the President of the Council. That privilege included the associate countries. The Council gave us unlimited time to speak on the debate dealing with the OECD annual report, whilst restricting their own members to 10 minutes. I am pleased to say that we did not abuse that privilege. I think that we spoke for something like 16 or 17 minutes. But the fact is that the Council still extended that privilege to us.
One factor that came out of the meeting this year was the opportunity for countries to put forward resolutions on the debate and to bring up those matters which they think should be brought into the debate. The Canadians started it. They did not put it to a vote, I am pleased to say-not that I had any strong feelings on their resolution-but at least it has raised the question of what the associate countries can do. I believe that the Council agreed with what was done by the Canadians. These are a few of the points that can be taken note of in the report.

1548 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Assembly of the Council ofEurope

I raised a number of matters in the debate, and one of them was a matter I had raised two years earlier concerning a visit of OECD officers to Australia. Their mission was to put together the report on this country. I raised this matter in this Parliament during a grievance debate and again in 1978. The Secretary-General of the OECD spoke to me privately about the matter and therefore 'I will not discuss the tone of that discussion publicly. On this occasion he raised the matter at the Council in response to my speech. He made a statement to the effect that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) in Australia had been approached to meet the OECD delegation when it was in Australia. On the previous two occasions when I attended the Council meeting I said that when officers of the OECD come to Australia they shpuld not confine their discussions only to people in government departments; they should talk to chambers Of commerce, the Chamber of Manufactures or whatever other industry or organisation they wish to talk to if they feel they can get information from them. They should talk to the Executive of the Australian Council of Trade Unions and not only to the members of the Government but also to the Leader of the Opposition and the Opposition shadow Treasurer, in this case the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis). I made that proposition on two occasions in this House. In the reply of the Secretary-General, Mr Van Lennep, he said that the Leader of the Opposition in this Parliament and the shadow Treasurer in this Parliament had been approached to talk to the delegation. That reply put me in a pretty awkward situation. When I came back, I approached both of these men and the Leader of the Opposition said to me without any reservation that he was not approached to discuss internal matters with the OECD mission, nor had the honourable member for Gellibrand been approached. No 'arrangements had been made to discuss the matter with him. Whilst I am not going to war with Mr Van Lennep, the facts are all in this report. I make it very clear that neither the Leader of the Opposition nor the shadow Treasurer, Mr Willis, was approached by the mission.
I hope that when future delegations come to Australia they will do as I have suggested and get as broad as possible an impression of what people in this country think about the state of the economy, environmental matters or whatever matter it is on which the mission is to report. I thank the Leader of the House for the courtesy he extended to me in giving me leave to make a statement on the report. I think the delegation is well worth supporting. I believe that the Parliament should

continue to send delegations to the Council of Europe. Such delegations should not only take part in the annual debate on the OECD but also should accept the invitation of the Council and take part in the debate on those items that are of concern to Australia. That would give us the opportunity of putting forward our point of view to people who are acting in the interests of Europe. '
Dr EDWARDS (Berowra)-by leave-I will not detain the House for long. I pay tribute to the work of our former esteemed colleague, Mr Bruce Graham, formerly the member for North Sydney, who led the Australian Parliamentary Delegation to the Council of Europe in Strasbourg for the debate on the work of Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. I was scheduled to lead the delegation but just prior to it I was elected to the Executive Committee of the InterParliamentary Union at its Berlin conference and was unable to do so. It was at very 'short notice that Mr Graham took my place. As indicated 'in the report presented by the honourable member for Newcastle (Mr Charles Jones), Mr Graham addressed the Council and put before it the policies of this Government and facts relating to the Australian economy. He pointed to our success in containing inflation to a rate of about 10 per cent compared with the OECD average of 12t per cent-2t percentage points higher. He pointed to the relatively strong real growth taking' place in the Australian economy. This has been associated with an increase inemployment in Australia, as honourable members will be aware, of about 150,000 over the previous year. This was a faster growth than that which occurred in most of the other OECD countries. Australia, with its inflation rate and international competitive position put right, and its rich endowment of resources, is embarked on a great period of growth and development to the benefit of all Australians and the whole world. The only cloud on the horizon now is the burgeoning rise in wage costs, which was not fully apparent at the time Mr Graham spoke.
As he himself said a moment ago, the honourable member for Newcastle stated in his own speech to the Council that the annual published reports of the OECD on the Australian economy do not result from wide consultation in Australia and present largely the views of the Australian Treasury and Government. He said that the OECD survey was 'simply a mouthpiece for the Australian Government'. Mr Emile Van Lennep, the Secretary-General of the OECD, replied specifically to that point in his concluding address to the debate. The honourable member for Newcastle referred to one aspect of this reply. I will

Broadcasting and Television Act

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1549

read the reply in full. I refer to annex C of the report which contains Mr Van Lennep's remarks. He said:
Let me state the facts about the visits of the last two missions of the Secretariat to Australia.
The first of these two saw, apart from the government departments, the Australian Employers' Federation and the Australian Council of Trade Unions.
He then says that the mission had sought appointments with the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) and the Opposition spokesman on Treasury matters, the honourable. member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis), a matter about which the honourable member for Newcastle has commented. Mr VanLennep continued:
The second mission, a year later, again saw government departments-as OECD missions do in all countries they visit-and apart from that made a tremendous effort to obtain other views, through visits to the Melbourne Economic Institute, to the Monetary Group at Monash University, and to the Institute of Labour Studies at Flinders University.
I can assure Mr Jones and, as far as necessary, others, that the OECD Secretariat also has the ability to read (Ind to follow very carefully the development of views expressed in individual countries, and it also reads newspapers.
I can assure Mr Jones, therefore, that the Secretariat, in its well-known and generally praised efforts to have an intellectually independent and certainly not a politically biased international analysis, takes into account, first, the internationally agreed strategy of the OECD and,. secondly, the particular aspects on the national basis-political, economic, social and others. fhope that Mr Jones will agree with ine that perhaps it is not necessary to raise this matter again. I hope that the' facts I have given have shown that we act according to his general wishes-namely, with full objectivity.
If the Government's approach to economic policy is what seems to come through in the OECD annual reports on the Australian economy it is simply because those policies are in line with the broad consensus of economic opinion throughout the world, certainly amongst OECD countries.
Apart from the main OECD debate, as the honourable member for Newcastle has stated, in committee and other discussions my former colleague, Mr Graham, and the honourable member for Newcastle spoke out strongly on Australia's behalf, especially in attacking the unconscionable levels of agricultural protection in the European Economic Community-particularly the insanity of selling heavily subsidised surplus sugar to our northern neighbour, Papua New Guinea. The delegation, Mr Graham and the honourable member for Newcastle, are to be commended for their efforts on Australia's behalf in the Council of Europe. I certainly reiterate my grateful personal thanks to my former colleague, Mr Bruce Graham, for the great job he did on that occasion.

GOVERNMENT REVIEW OF ASPECTS OF THE BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT 1942-80
Ministerial Statement
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications)-by leave-The House will recall that on 4 December 1980, in replying to a question in this place, I announced that the Government was to examine the following issues in relation to the Broadcasting andTelevision Act 1942-80:
1. The machinery and procedural aspects of sections 90 to 92KA of the Act.
2. Inadvertent breaches of the Act by shareholders in companies acquiring interests in radio and television broadcasting licences through share trading on the stock exchange.
3. Networking, in capital cities and regionally.
This statement relates to those matters, although the Bill that I hope to intrqduce shortly into the House may well embrace a wider compass.
At the outset of the review, comment was invited from interested organisations and individuals. Subsequently, submissions were received from television and radio broadcast operators, their industry bodies, public interest groups, unions and organisations representing institutional investors. More than fifty substantive submissions were received and taken into account in the review of the Act and in the development of proposed amendments.
The review of these aspects of the Act has now been completed. To avoid the widespread speculation on the result and to ensure some opportunity for public debate on the conclusions the Government has reached, I now announce. the broad thrust of those conclusions in anticipation of the introduction of a Bill to incorporate the changes outlined below when Parliament reSumes after the Easter recess. This statement will ensure that there is a full awareness of the Government's intention' by the Parliament, the public, the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal, and the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
It is important to stress that, with the amendments to be proposed, the basic structure of decision making will remain the same. The Government will continue to carry the responsibility for the formulation of policy governing the development of the broadcasting system, and the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal will retain the responsibility it has had since 1978 for regulation

1550 REPRESENTATIVES. 9 April 1981

Broadcasting and Television Act

and administration. Consistent with this arrangetelevision within a capital city. The Government

ment and with the recommendations of the Adis concerned that these provisions should remain

ministrative Review Council's report on the Auseffective and appropriate for the 1980s.

tralian Broadcasting Tribunal Procedures, which call for the provision in legislation of clear statements of relevant policy criteria, proposed changes will enable policy to be taken into account more effectively and introduce greater certainty into the exercise of the discretionary powers of the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal, to the benefit of the public, the industry and the Tribunal.

In the recent review, the Government looked carefully at the procedures for the examination of share transactions with the objective of avoiding delays in the ABT's consideration of major transactions, minimising the necessary number of inquiries, and streamlining procedures wherever' possible. To these ends, amendments are to be made which will: Firstly, permit applications for approval or acquisitions to be made after, as well

The Tribunal will retain its powers to grant, as before, transactions have taken place; secondly,

renew, suspend, or revoke licences. A licence may in the case of major acquisitions-that is, where

not be transferred without the Tribunal's consent; the purchaser would be in a position to control the

and approval will be required for any significant licensee company-enable the Tribunal to inquire

change in shareholdings. These are considerable. into the acquisition in conjunction with a licence

powers in the hands of a tribunal and it is import- . renewal inquiry which, at the request of the

ant. that they be exercised in the public interest. applicant, shall commence within three months of

'Public interest' has been one of the criteria conthe application; and, thirdly, permit any pur-

sidered by the Tribunal. Previously, there was no chaser to participate fully in the management or

clear definition of this broad concept and the operation of the licensee company prior to a de-

range of discretion in matters before the Tribunal cision being.made.

has .led to uncertainty in its proceedings. The Government has decided, therefore, that the Tribunal should be given clear legislative guidelines on what constitutes public interest.

The Government's review also confronted problems that arise in relation to institutional investors. Experience has shown that an investor can be put in breach of the Act through the pur-

It will be with respect to the following specified chase of shares by another party in which the in-

criteria that the ABT will consider applications vestor is a shareholder. It is clearly necessary to

before it: Whether a person or company is fit and provide a fair solution to this problem without

proper to hold an interest in a licence; whether the. weakening the present ownership limitations,

applicant will provide adequate and comprehenwhich have general community and industry sup-

sive program services reflecting the needs of the port. Accordingly, it is proposed to enable the Tri-

community to be served by the station, and enbunal to permitthe holding of a direct or indirect

courage the production of Australian programs; interest in a licence of up to 10 per cent, without it

the commercial viability of the applicant and his being considered a prescribed interest. This pro-

or its technical, financial and management vision will be limited to markets with more than

capacities; and in regional areas the degree of conone commercial television station-that is, at the

centration of ownership or control of radio and moment, the five mainland capitals-and where

television. The ABT shall also take into considerthe interest is in excess of 5 percent, the onus of

ation any additional criteria that might be notified proof will be on the applicant to satisfy the ABT

in writing by the Minister to the Chairman of the that the interest in question does not carry with it

ABT. If any criteria are so notified, it will be the possibility of control or significant influence in

necessary for them to be published by the ABT the affairs of the licensee. This change will allow

within 28 days of such notification, and they shall third parties who may acquire excess prescribed

also be included in the annual report of the interests through share trading provisions, but

Tribunal.

who have no possibility of influencing the licence,

The second major modification concerns the ownership or control provisions of the Act. It has been 16 years since the last major change to these provisions, yet there have been significant alterations in the industry over that time. Perhaps I should have said when mentioning earlIer the con-

to hold up to a 10 per cent shareholding in multistationed areas. Of course, a number of institutional shareholders have found some difficulty with this restraint at the moment in that they have become inadvertently in breach of the legislation without any direcUntention of so doing.

centration of ownership and control in regional The present level of ownership diversity in

, areas that there remains within the Act the reregional-that is, one commercial station-areas

straint against anyone individual or company will remain unaffected. In addition, all persons ac-

owning more than one commercial licence for quiring excess prescribed interests as a result of

Broadcasting and Television Act

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1551

share transactions will be allowed a period of at least six months to bring themselves within the permissible limits. Several further changes are envisaged in relation to the ownership or control provisions. In order to clarify the existing nonresident ownership provisions, there will be a redefinition of the restriction of non-resident ownership of radio and television stations. No individual non-resident or non-Australian company will be in a position to exercise control, as defined in the Act, of a licensee company. There will also be modification to the provisions under which loan interests in television stations may give rise to prescribed interests, by allowing exemption for ABT registered lenders. This amendment will increase the opportunities for stations to obtain finance by means other than bank overdraft, but will retain safeguards against undue control by a lender over the affairs of a licensee.
Finally, where breaches of the Act occur, existing monetary provisions have not been changed for 16 years, and are now to be reviewed. On the other hand, existing provisions for revocation or non-renewal of licences are obviously excessive in some cases and may provide little deterrent for persons acquiring interests in companies other than a licensee company. The proposed amendments will allow for continuing effective public scrutiny; they will provide reasonable balance between the desirability of discouraging 'trading'in licences against the importance of freeing the share market from unnecessary restrictions; and they will provide the mechanisms to ensure that procedures are adhered to strictly. At the same time, there will be appropriate transitional provisions, so that any unresolved application can be treated as a fresh application under the new procedures, unless the applicant wishes to proceed under the old provisions. This will ensure that no person or company with an unresolved application-I understand there are a good number-will be inconvenienced, unfairly penalised by the amendments, or denied any benefits to which he or it might be entitled under those amendments. It will also mean that the Government, in no way, will be intruding in any proceedings that are now partly en route.
The policy in relation to networking arrangements between radio and television broadcasting stations also has been reviewed. Networking arrangements have been entered into in Australia for many years and the Government recogniseS that, in its various forms, networking is necessary for the efficient operation of our broadcasting services. It is noted that, with the expected growth in the number and types of broadcasting stations, and the advances in satellite and other related

technology, networking will be facilitated, especially among c6mmercial television broadcasters. Under these circutristances, the Government reaffirms its suppciit for networking ar~ rangements between radio and television broadcasting stations. Such arrangements will not be discouraged, as long as they are consistent with the Government's important objective of fostering and preserving localism and where they are within the ambit of regulations to be made. I intend to discuss with the broadcasting industry arrangements for the iJpplementation of this policy and, after consideration of the industry's comments, detailed arrangements will be concluded by the Government and announced to the House.
Finally, as the House is aware, my colleagues the Attorney-General (Senator burack) and the Minister representing the Attorney-General have today tabled in the other place and here a report by the Administrative Review Council on the inquiry procedures of the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal. The ARC report contains a large number of detailed recommendations covering all aspects of public inquiries. The report recommends a uniform-set of public inquiry procedures, including the use of extensive prehearing documentation and preliminary conferences. In summary, these recommendations will lead to greater consistency in Tribunal procedures.
I take this opportunity to announce that the Government endorses the general principles contained in the ARC report. There will not be any decision, however, as to the specific recommendations until the public and the broadcasting industry have had the opportunity to comment. Necessarily, this statement does not express with the same precision as legislation the changes proposed to the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-80. The details will be included in the Bill, which I hope to present to this House as soon as possible after the resumption immediately following the Easter and ANZAC Day recess
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-'---by leave-The Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) has already mentioned that the report of the Administrative Review Council on the inquiry procedures of the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal was presented a little earlier today: The Review Council's report looks into some of the problems which have emerged in relation to the proceedings of the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal since its establishment in 1977. There have been some serious problems in relation to the conduct of the activities of the ABT. We welcome the report of the ARC and, in fact, find a lot to commend in the recommendations of the report. However, one has

1552 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

. Broadcasting and Television Act

to contrast the way in which .the Minister is deciding to deal with the report of the Council in relation to the proceedings oJ the Tribunal and the way in which he is dealing with the forthcoming amendments in-other areas-of the Broadcasting and Television Act.
It will be recalled that when the Tribunal was established it was the objective of this Government-under a different Minister-to take politics out of broadcasting by giving the power of licensing, issue and renewal to the Tribunal rather than to the Minister, and to provide for public involvement in the whole question of the issue and n:newal of licences. The amendments in 1977 also introduced a motion of public interest as a consideration which the ABTshould have in mind when deciding whether to issue or renew a licence or to authorise the transfer of a licence. Over the last three years while the ABT has been operating the main problems which have emerged are those which have been the subject of the Administrative Review Council's investigation and report. The problems which have arisen in relation to the ABT concern the proceedings of the ABT. Those problems are: The questions of who has standing before the Tribunal; legal representation; the participation of public interest groups before the Tribunal; cross-- examination and how that should be conducted; and a number of other matters dealing with the way in which the Tribunal conducts its inquiries.
The Administrative Review Council has made a number of very important recommendations in this area. The thrust of the recommendations is to remove the question of uncertainty in relation to the Tribuunal and its procedures and to provide also for a reasonable sort of procedure which can avoid the heavy formalism possible at the moment to institute such things as preliminary hearings and so on. These are the fundamentally important problems which have emerged over the last threeand-a-bit years in relation to the proceedings of the ABT. These problems really were brought to light as a result of an appeal by the Australian Labor Party against the way in which the Tribunal conducted its investigations into the transfer of the ATV-10 licence in Melbourne. It ~ill be remembered that the High Court upheld the appeal and sent it back to the Tribunal for rehearing. That was really the catalyst which caused the reference to the Administrative Review Council. The Administrative Review Council has really addressed itself to the serious problem which confronted the Tribunal. There was one other serious problem which confronted the Tribunal and that was the personality of the first chairman. The appointment of Mr Bruce Gyngell by this

Government was, of course, a disastrous appointment and led in large measure to the problems which arose and which are now the subject of the Administrative Review Council's report. In the end that chairman had to be sidlined and a new one appointed. These are really the two problems to which the Government should be addressing itself at this time when it is talking about amending the Broadcasting and Television Act. It has already fixed up the question of the chairmanship but it should be acting urgently on the recommendations of the Administrative Review Council. The Government has said that this report wiIl be available for public comment and that, at some time in the future, some amendments will be introduced to put into effect the recommendations-or some of them-of the Administrative Review Council.
That has to be contrasted with the way in which the Government has set about amending the Act in relation to these other matters. The Minister in a very perfunctory Way announced -a review and called for public submissions. There was no formal notification of the review and no formal mechanismfor the receiving of public submissions. The Minister said that he had received 24 public submissions. This ought to be contrasted with the number of submissions which were received in relation to the major inquiries which have occurred in this industry over the last--
Mr Sinclair-Fifty.
Mr DAWKINS-The Minister for Communications says that there were 50 inquiries. But stiIl that has to be contrasted with the large number of submissions which were received in relation to recent inquiries such as the Green inquiry and the Tribunal's own investigations in recent times. So really there has been verylimited opportunity for public input into this review. Certainly there has been no opportunity for the public to scrutinise the submissions that have come in from various vested interests which exist in this industry. This Government is hell bent on bringing in these amendmentswhich go to issues which are not the real problems in the operation of the Tribunal but really are problems which the Government considers to be urgent for a whole number of reasons, primarily because problems have arisen which have upset its friends.
In the first instance the real problem with which the Government is trying to deal is the fact that the Tribunal has had a discretion in relation to public interest considerations in the transfer of licences and, indeed, the issue and renewal of those licences. The Tribunal had the power to consider and to use its discretion as to whether the

Broadcasting and Television Act

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1553

transfer, the issue, or the renewal of a licence was, should not be an undue aggregation of power in the hands of

in its view, in the public interest. When conany few.

: ;.,

sidering the transfer of ATV.:..-lO because of the fact that the Tribunal used its discretion in the matter of the public interest question in a way which upset the Government and some of the

In July 1977 the Tribill'lal~aid: " ,,>: It is generally consid,e9*i to be in the public interest ,that
there should not be any undue concentration of ownership or control by anyone person or company.

friends of the Government these amendments have been introduced.

Later on a Liberal Party policy document stated:

The Government set up a so-called indepen-

We believe that in the interests of objective of news the widest possible spread of ownership of the media is desirable.

dent tribunal in the form of the ABT. It set it up as an umpire to determine what should be done in the transfer of licences. The Government said

In 1977, one of the Minister's predecessors, the late Eric Robinson said:

that it wanted to take politics out of broadcasting. But when the umpire came in with a decision that the Government did not like it decided to shoot the umpire. This is a praqtice which has become all too common with this Government. It exhorts everybody in the community to abide by the de-

It js our view that responsibility for the licensing and reguhitory functions in the broadcasting area should rest with autonomous statutory authorities rather than with the government itself.
The principle of a broadcasting system not subject to political interference is one. of the basic aims of the changes proposed in this Bill.

cision of the umpire and indeed to go to the umpire for a decision but when the Government does not like the decision of the umpire it shoots him. That is what it is doing in this case. It is removing the discretionary power which the Tribunal had in relation to what was in the public interest and what was not.

The amendments which are foreshadowed by the Minister in his statement completely fly in the face of those two objectives-in the one case, the resistance of concentration of ownership and in the second case the desirability of removing political interference from the issuing and the renewal of licences. However, the reason for the need for

In effect this statement deals with issues which these foreshadowed amendments is that when one

go to the question of what affects the Governof the powerful friends of the Government went

ment's friends. On the one hand, the Minister has before the Tribunal he was balked in his efforts to

decided to allow public consideration of the reobtain another television station. This rush to

port of the Administrative Review Council but, change. the laws at this time is simply to suit

on the other hand, it has allowed no public disRupert Murdoch. The ABT said at that time that

cussion in relation to these matters. Of course the it was not in the public interest that Rupert

Minister is doing what he does best in these matMurdoch should obtain the ATV television chan-

ters. He is not taking any notice of what anyone nel in Melbourne because, if he did, he would

else has said. He is simply forging ahead and he is have a dominant position in relation to the 0-10

deciding to amend the Act in a way which pleases television network.

his and the Government's friends rather than looking at the real problems which beset the ABT. In the first place the statement heralds the re-

The Government has now abandoned the question of concentration of ownership. It has re-

introduction of the involvement of politics in broadcasting. In the second place it opens the way for unprecedented concentration in relation to

.

moved the objection to undue concentration of ownership as one of the considerations which the ABT might make in relation to the transfer of a li-

this industry. This flies in the face of what the.Liberal and National Country parties have been saying over a number of years. As far back as April

cence. However, this placed the Government in an enormous dilemma-on the one hand it wanted to protect current ownership of the re-

1956 the then Postmaster-General said:
Ownership of commercial TV stations should be in as many hands as practicable and it should not be possible for anyone organisation to obtain control of any substantial number of

gional television stations while at the same time allowing for concentration of ownership in the metropolitan areas. So what we have now is the Government saying that the diversity of owner-

stations.

ship in regional areas is of paramount importance

In 1960 the Government said:
These provisions are enacted to express this Government's policy that this very important channel of communication should not fall into the hands of too few.

but.in the cities it does not matter a bit. One can have as much concentration of ownership in the cities as one likes so long as in the regional areas the current ownership of those stations is allowed

Again in 1960 the Government said:

to remain as it is.

.

The area of mass communications is one in which the

Mr Sinclair-There is already a restraint on

Government has consistently taken the stance that there that in the Act which has not been removed.

. 1554 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Broadcasting and Television Act

Mr DAWKINS-I know, of course there is. What the Government is removing is the power of the Tribunal to prevent further concentration of ownership in the cities. The Government is not dealing with the question of the drift towards concentration of ownership in the cities. The Government has two entirely different standards. Concentration is all right in the cities; it is no good in relation to the regional stations. The regional stations, of course, have not been saved by this because it is not just a question of takeovers or of being bought out by larger interests that threaten the regional stations; it is a question involving the existence of powerful networks throughout Australia. It is the networks that will control the product and, therefore, its distribution and in that way they will be effectively able to control the regional stations as well as the networks of which they are part.
I think there are just a couple of other things which have to be borne in mind. On page 4 of the Minister's statement there is a very worrying indication of what will happen in the future. Should there be a takeover just after a licence has been renewed then; does not have to be a public inquiry into that takeover until the time of the next hearings in relation to the licence renewal. Licence renewal hearings take place every three years. That means that a station could go for three years before there was any public inquiry in relation to a takeover. At the moment those inquiries can take place almost immediately but under these proposals it could be up to three years before there was any public hearing in relation to the takeover of a licence.
Mr Sinclair-That is not right.
Mr DAWKINS-The Minister should look at page 4 of his statement. Point 2 states that the amendments will:
. . . in the case of major acquisitions, that is, where the purchaser would be in a position to control the licensee company--
That means a takeover. These amendments will-
enable the Tribunal to inquire into the acquisition in conjunction with a licence renewal inquiry, which, at the request of the applicant, shall commence within three months of the application . . .
That means that if the person involved in the takeover wants the inquiry to take place within three months it will but unless he requests it the Tribunal could let it go until the next scheduled inquiry into the re-issue of the licence. That could be, as I read it-I would be delighted to have the Minister--
Mr Sinclair-That is not the intention. It is to accelerate the hearings, not to delay them.

Mr DAWKINS-That means that one would not have to wait three years before there was an inquiry, that it would take place immediately after the takeover.
Mr Sinclair-As soon as the Tribunal was in a position to consider them, which might be three or four months, but as soon as possible. At the moment there is a delay. The intention is to accelerate hearings, not to delay them.
Mr DAWKINS-I am grateful for the Minister's clarification because that is not clear from the wording of the statement though, no doubt, it will be when the legislation is before us. When one reads point 2 in conjunction with point 3 which allows the purchaser or the person taking over the licence to participate fully in the op"erations of the licensee company, one sees that there is the possibility that somebody taking over a licence could, in fact, operate it for three years and then be so well entrenched that any inquiry into the takeover would simply be a fait accompli.
The main area, however, in which politics is reintroduced into the proceedings for the issue and, indeed, the transfer of licences, relates to the question of the public interest. At the moment, as I indicated, the question of what is in the public interest in relation to the transfer of a licence is entirely at the discretion of the Tribunal. The Tribunal has the power to decide what is in the public interest. It has the power to disallow a transfer because it considers it not to be in the public interest. Now we have a limitation of that discretion-indeed, a removal of it altogether. We have four criteria on which the Tribunal can consider the question of the public interest. I will not go into them. They mean that there is a very narrowly defined area in which the Tribunal can consider the question of what is in the public interest. This has effectively meant that thy question on which the Tribunal made its decision in relation to ATV-10, that is, the undesirability of there being a further concentration of ownership in the television industry, will now be removed as a ground on which the Tribunal could disallow a transfer on the public interest ground
That flies in the face of government policy which, as I indicated, goes back a long number of years and, indeed, is against the policy of my party as well. We agree with the pre-existing policy of this Government, that is, it is very undesirable to see a great concentration of ownership in this industry. What this effectively means is that by removing the very grounds on which the transfer of the licence to Mr Murdoch was disallowed, this is handing to Mr Murdoch the television station in

Broadcasting and Television Act

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1555

Melbourne and with it the wh(lle of the 0-10 network. As well as severely circumscribing the criteria on which the ABT can make decisions in relation to the public interest there will be a provision which allows the Minister to notify of other criteria on which the ABT can consider the whole question of public interest. This is wide open. The Minister can make any declarations he likes, any notifications to the Tribunal he likes. He can add new criteria to the four which will be mentioned in the Act. He can do that without any reference to Parliament. He can effectively amend the Act by adding certain sections to it. But he does not have to bring those changes to the Parliament at all. It is true that they will have to be published but that does not allow for any public scrutiny at the time that they are issued. It certainly does not allow for any parliamentary scrutiny. This means that the Minister at any time, when the Tribunal is considering a transfer or the issue of a licence, can take into account the interests of an applicant and amend the Act without reference to Parliament to suit that applicant.
Sir William McMahon-He can't amend the Act.
Mr DAWKINS-Yes, he can amend the Act.
Sir William McMahon-That is up to the Parliament.
Mr DAWKINS-But he can. What this Bill is going to do is to give the Minister the power to notify the Tribunal of other criteria that it can take into account when it is considering the question of the public interest. That is effectively amending the Act without reference to Parliament. I am glad to see the right honourable member for Lowe (Sir William McMahon) is alarmed at this. That is, in fact, what is being proposed. I invite him to take this up in the channels which are available to him but not to me. That means that the Minister can directly assist an applicant with whom he might have a common interest. It allows for all kinds of pressures to be exerted on people. I think it is highly undesirable and brings politics firmly back into the area of the administration of broadcasting licences. I do not say that the Minister would do that but there would always be the suggestion that he might use this power, which does not require a reference to Parliament, to assist the family of his leader who we know has extensive television interests in northern New South Wales. I am not saying the Minister would, but it is open to him to advantage those interests if he wants to. Similarly, another government at another time could advantage some other sectional interest in the community that either had a licence and wanted to retain it or

wanted to obtain a licence. I doubt very much whether any future Labor government would use this power but as long as it exists any Minister with that wide power. would be subject to the most strenuous pressure to use it. Of course, the changes effectively can be made in secret.
There are two other matters to which I refer. The first is the increase from 5 per cent to 10 per cent in .the limit of the prescribed interest. This will simply be an opportunity for those people who already have an interest in broadcasting licences to extend their interests. At the moment they are limited to 5 per cent; now they will be able to extend their interests to 10 per cent or, if they already have an interest of below 10 per cent in two licences, they can begin to buy into a third metropolitan station. I do not think this is desirable. It will lead to a further concentration of ownership, a further concentration of influence, within this important industry. The second matter is in relation to the six-month period in which .people can bring themselves into line' with the ownership provisions. The Opposition has no objection to that. We think it is a reasonable provision because of the sorts of problems which have developed inadvertently through the purchase of shares over which some people who end up with a prescribed interest have no control.
I conclude simply by saying that these foreshadowed amendments do not address the real problems. The real problems go to the questions of the procedures of the Tribunal. The Tribunal, notwithstanding those problems, has begun to make great headway in putting the broadcasting industry onto a proper footing into which the public has proper input and an interest in its outcome. Also, it has done a lot to avoid the concentration of power which is so dangerous. The Victorian Government saw that as being dangerous in the media; consequently, it set up an inquiry into the ownership of newspapers. As a result of these proposed amendments, we have a number of steps backwards. We will see a further concentration of power and, more importantly, we will see handed on a plate to Rupert Murdoch the television station ATV 10 and, as I have said, with that television station will go the absolute control of the 0-10 network which operates in four capital cities around Australia. That is a position which the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal said was against the public interest. However, this Government has decided to legislate, notwithstanding that declaration of the Tribunal, to ensure that Rupert Murdoch gets what he wants and that the deal which was struck late last year between the Government and Mr Murdoch finally will be consummated.

1556 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Incident on an Australian Aid Project

PHILIPPINES-INCIDENT ON AN

Investigations of events surrounding the inci-

AUSTRALIAN AiD' PROJECT

dent have been given a high priority by the Aus-.

Ministeri~ISta:tement
Mr STI~EET (Cor~n~~~ite-Minister. for
Foreign Affairs)-by leave.,---On 16 February 1981 two construction surpervisors assigned to the Philippines Australia Development Assistance Project-PADAP-located in the province of Zamboanga del Sur on the island of Mindanao were robbed, abducted and subsequently shot by a group of bandits. One of the supervisors, Mr Gordon Murdoch, was killed and Mr Harold Hough, a New Zealander, was seriously wounded. Contrary to some reports there is no evidence t~at the attack was politically motivated or that It was directed specifically against the project or the personnel assigned to it.

tralian Embassy in Manila, which has maintained close consultation with the Philippine authorities and the Australian Development Assistance Bureau which sent a senior officer to the Philippines to investigate. On the basis of reports that have been submitted to me, I inform the House of the incident and its implications for the project. The bulk of evidence points to project personnel, who regularly travelled the road on which the incident took place, inadvertently coming upon a ro~d block and robbery. The subsequent events remam unclear. The bandits, for reasons that are unknown, apparently decided to abduct the t~o Australians after the robbery and were takmg them away when shooting started. This was associated with the arrival of Philippine Armed

The incident has been a source of great distress

to all associated with the project. Australian aid

personnel have never previously been victims of

such a violent attack, although they -have on

occasions faced real threats to their personal

safety. I wish to make a statement today about the

cinocnidduecntt~dthbeyouPthciolimppeinoef

the investigations so far and Australian officials

and my intentions regarding the future of

PADAP.

Forces personnel at the site of the hol.d up. T~e two supervisors were shot by the bandIts as their captors attempted to retreat from the military forces.
Despite improvements that have already b~en made to security arrangements, the fact remams that there is no way by which the Philippine or Australian governments can provide an absolute guarantee of the personal safety of perso.nnel on this and indeed on severalother projects mother countries short of withdrawing from these aid

Before dealing with the incident, I pay tribute. to the many persons and their families who, over
the years, have accepted appointments to ~us tralian aid projects and who have commItted themselves to achieving the objectives of Australia's aid programs. Often they have been asked to work in extremely difficult and generally remote areas where the lack of development has given rise to security problems. WithOut the support of dedicated people such as the late Mr ~ur
odor cah~oMthrerHowuogrhkeadndonotPhAerDs wAhPoahnadvesiamtiolanreptIrmoje-
ects in other countries, Australia would not have been able to earn its well deserved reputation as an aid donor.

activities. The risks must, however, be balanced against the benefits to the people being served by the project. In this case the benefits are ~er.y substantial indeed. The project had a most slgmficant and positive impact in its .are~ of in~uence ~nd ~as made a substantial contnbutIOn to Improvmg hving conditions and to providing greater econo,?ic opportunities for the mostly rural populatIOn affected by it. For example, there is eVidence that the project has improved access to markets a~d rural credit for those people and, as a result, there has been an increase in the volume and number of agricultural crops.
Intensive project activity in the testing and dissemination of new crop varieties with cooperating farmers has made a ~ig~ifi~ant im?act

The Philippine Government reacted quickly to assist by providing an aircraft to transfer the wounded man to Manila on the day of the shooting. Assurances of continued assistance in.improving security arrangements have been receIVed and measures have already been taken in this regard.
Regret and concern about the i~cident hay~ b~en expressed at the highest levels m the PhIhppme Government and by many from the province itself. The importance attached to the project and

on rural production, as has the lfngatIOn project. Small farmers have been the primary beneficiaries of the livestock and pasture development aspects of the project. Transportation ~osts have been reduced as a result of restoration of roads, while the population in the project are~ now enjoys improved access to health, educatIon and .other basic services. Many villages .which prevIOu~ly had no clean and reliable water supplies are serviced by pumps installed by the project.

appreciation of the efforts of the Austra~Ian perThe project's achievements are clearly substan-

sonnel assigned to it have been re-emphaslied.

tial. In particular, a great deal of progress has

Incident on an Australian Aid Project

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1557

been made in ensuring that the bulk of the population shares equitably in the economic and social benefits generated by the project. As the project comes nearer to completion those benefits will become more evident. A number of Australian priests, who are working in the area, have noted the benefits that the project has brought to the local population. For its part, the Australian Government is fully committed to the project and is doing all that it can to see that its objectives are realised.
In the light of all these circumstances, I have decided that Australia's involvement in PADAP should continue but have directed ADAB to investigate alternative means of implementing the project whereby Australian personnel will in future be less exposed to risk. For instance, I have directed that the geographical coverage of the project be reduced and that access to more distant work sites be improved. This will ensure that Australians are not required to work in either remote areas or areas where it is difficult for local authorities to provide adequate protection, As a result, the risks faced by Australian personnel will be significantly diminished.
In conclusion, the Philippines Australia Development Assistance Project is an aid activity of which all Australians-especially those who have worked on it since 1974-have every reason to be proud and one which I believe deserves the Government's continuing support.

There are a number of disturbing features of the Philippines-Australia Development Assistance Project. There are C]u,estions which I believe we must ask-questions to which the Minister has not provided answers in his statement. I acknowledge that risks involved in aid projects must be balanced against the benefits to the people being served by the projects. But we must be certain that the people are really getting the benefits. A number of claims have been made with respect to
PADAP, alleging that the primary benefit which flows from it flows not to the people of the region but to the Marcos Government in Manila. These claims have been made, not by irresponsible and uninformed groups or people, but by academics and at least one Catholic priest who has some knowledge of the area. The priest in question is
Father Soorley. He has claimed not only that the project does not benefit the residents of the area but also that it is positively detrimental to their welfare. He said, regarding the 384 kilometres of highway so far built, that it has been used only by military vehicles and large companies. He has said that this particularly expensive part of the project is of no real use to the Filipino residents in the area. Similar views have been expressed by academics. These statements do not, of course, accord with those of the Minister, who has made contrary statements today. If they are true, however, they indicate that in PADAP the Australian Government may be supplying a form of direct or indirect military assistance in the -guise of civilian aid.

Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) -by leave-The statement made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) deserves close attention. At the outset, on behalf of the Opposition, I extend our most sincere condolences to the family of the Australian official who was killed in the Philippines, Mr Murdoch. He served his country well on projects in Australia as well as overseas. I also extend the Opposition's good wishes to the New Zealander who was seriously wounded, and wish him a speedy recovery. I am aware from my own travel and experience in Asia that many of our aid officials work under extremely difficult conditions and, very often, in remote areas. I think that many other honourable members would be able to vouch for that. I would like to make it Clear that I alIi well aware that this project got under way under a Labor government and that a number of the comments I will be making will be made with the benefit of hindsight and in the light of developments which could not be foreseen at its inception, including the most unfortunate incident to which I have just referred.

The building of roads and bridges may bring economic benefits, although even these are often more a matter for large corporations than smallholding peasants. We areall aware that peasants in these countries do not usually possess motor vehicles. They may possess a push bike or a push cart, but that is about all. More importantly, these roads and bridges do allow penetration of motorised military vehicles into formerly remote guerrilla strongholds. The point is that PADAP is located on the island of Mindanao. Mindanao is the stronghold of the Moro National Liberation Front, a group which has, since the commencement of this project, escalated its position and become a group which is now supported by a large proportion of the population, if not an outright majority of the predominantly Moslem population in the areas in which it operates. The question which must be asked is this: Are we exposing Australian workers to unacceptable risks by placing them in such areas where they are very likely to be identifie<:l with central government ofP.cials by the local residents who are hostile to

1558 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Incident on an Australian Aid Project

those government officials and to the possibility that the Lynch committee will rec-

government?

ommend its abolition is most disturbing and it

should not happen.

I believe the time has comeJor the Government to exercise more. caution with respect to the areas in which we conduct our development assistance programs. The first responsibility of any Aus-

AUSTRALIA AND THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH EAST ASIAN NATIONS Ministerial Statement

tralian government must be to Australian citizens. Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for

The incident which is the subject of the Minister's Foreign Affairs)-by leave-I wish to respond,

statement occurred in an area which is and has on behalf of the Government, to the report on

been one of the most troubled regions in the Australia and the Association of South East Asian

Philippines. We should seriously consider the adNations by the Senate Standing Committee on

visability of concentrating our economic assistForeign Affairs and Defence, which was tabled in

ance programs in areas which are not the centre of Parliament on 4 December 1980. The report was

contention between established governments and issued after a wide-ranging inquiry by the Com-

insurgent forces. If such an approach occasionally mittee during 1979 and 1980. The Committee

causes problems, that cannot be avoided. We heard evidence from many individuals and groups

must ensure, both at the planning stage of our aid and the report covers the many issues involved in

programs and by careful monitoring during their Australia's relations with ASEAN and the coun-

development, that our assistance is really going to tries of ASEAN.

the people. There should be land distribution and redistribution, but it does not always follow that the individual small farmer will get the benefit. There can be irrigation and dredging projects but again, where Australian aid is involved, we should assure ourselves that they will be for the benefit of the individual small farmer. It is important in looking at irrigation, water conservation and the construction of roads for markets that the people themselves get the benefit. We should not leave it to some elite group or other people who can ma-

I commend the Committee and its members for its report and would not wish to let the opportunity pass without paying a tribute to Senator Peter Sim. I understand that this is the last of a distinguished series of reports the Committee has produced under his chairmanship. I believe all honourable members will agree that the report owes much to his wide understanding of the relationship between Australians and the peoples of our neighbouring region.

nipulate those land acquisitions or their ownerThe report on Australia's relations with

ship for their own gain so that there is no clear ASEAN brings into focus a central concern of our

benefit in economic terms to the small landforeign policy. Australia's long-standing ties with

holders or the people generally.

the individual countries of ASEAN have gained in

significance since those five nations came together

We do not tie our aid programs With stringent conditions. That is very important. We ought to be proud of it. We are about the only nation in the world that does not do that. We are entitled then, by the same token, to indicate clearly the way in which our aid can be given. The Government's policy, whilst commendable in those terms, makes it even more important that we select the sites bearing in mind the sort of criteria I have mentioned-that is, that they be carefully selected. I realise that we are posing questions and seeking answers. The real issue is that we want the Government to conduct a comprehensive review

in a joint endeavour to work for the social and economic development, and the stability, of their region. Australia, as a close neighbour, is intimately affected by events there. Not only does the region include some of the world's most rapidlygrowing economies, but also changes occurring there have obvious political and strategic significance for us. Australia's national interest demands that we follow these changes closely, that we support ASEAN in meeting the challenges these changes pose and that we seek, consistent with our national interests, to influence the way in which these challenges are met.

of the policies. The Minister's statement has merit The Committee's report cautions against any

as far as it goes, but it really addresses itself only attempt to categorise the relationship between

to the unhappy incident. It does not indicate that A.ustralia and ASEAN as in some way -special'.

the Government is prepared to examine the real The Government agrees with this view. In fact,

causes of the problems now or in the future. In neither ASEAN nor Australia has sought to cre-

this context, I believe that it is essential that we reate an exclusive or 'special' relationship. Australia

tain a properly staffed, highly professional Ausand the ASEAN countries have global policies

tralian Development Assistance Bureau. The and obligations and a multiplicity of links with

Association ofSouth East Asian Nations

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1559

other countries which it is not desirable or intended to set aside. To harbour the belief that the ASEAN-Australia relationship is 'special' would be to invite a potentially damaging complacency in the relationship. At the same time; there should be no doubt that the Australian Government continues to place a high priority on its relations with the countries of ASEAN and the Association itself. Vietnam's invasion of Kampuchea, with support from the Soviet Union, and the resultant problems which have flowed from that invasion, have served to underline a number of important politico-strategic concerns shared by Australia and the ASEAN countries.
In 1974 Australia became the first country to establish a 'dialogue~ relationship with ASEAN. Regular consultations are now held on political, economic and development issues and a range of other matters. They have included one meeting at Heads of Government level-in 1977 the Prime Minister met with his ASEAN counterparts in Kuala Lumpur. Meetings between the Australian Foreign Mini~ter and his ASEAN counterparts are now an established practice and are a welcome and most valuable feature of the dialogue. The frequency. of consultations between other Ministers of the ASEAN and Australian Governments has also increased since 1977.
Consultations at the Ministerial level are supplemented by regular contact between Australianand ASEAN officials in Canberra, in the ASEAN countries and in other centres such as the . United Nations in New York. Consultations have been given form through the annual ASEANAustralia Forum, a meeting of senior officials, which is scheduled to meet next in Canberra in April. Between Forum meetings, the ASEANAustralia Consultative Meeting-AACMestablished in 1978, brings Australian officials from twelve departments into regular consultation with the heads of the ASEAN diplomatic missions in Canberra. Matters of detail affecting our trading relations and our development cooperation programs are dealt with by special working groups under the AACM. This consultative machinery has proved an effective and practical way of enabling a continuous process of consultations on matters of interest and concern to the six countries.
The Government agrees with the Committee's recommendation that priority be given to developing policy-making processes to coordinate effectively the interdependent elements of domestic and foreign policies. The Government considers that the political and economic, foreign and domestic elements of Australian policy should continue to be treated as parts of our total

policy towards ASEAN and not approached as entirely separate entities. As well, in formulating policy towards ASEAN, full account needs to be taken of Australia's important bilateral relations with the ASEAN countries. It is important that the practice of adequate consultation on policy matters affecting Australia's relations with ASEAN be continued. To provide a co-ordinated approach, the Government in 1977 established the Inter-departmental Committee on ASEAN. I believe this machinery is working well.
The Government accepts the Committee's recommendation that consultative procedures in policy co-ordination should be broadened to promote close liaison with the non-governmental sector when the issues involve them. Some advance has been inade in this area since evidence was presented to the Senate Committee. In practice the Government and departments maintain close contact with the business community and with. business groups, including the bilateral Business Co-operation Committees, Chambers of Com-. merce and similar bodies which link the Australian and ASEAN private sectors. In addition, officialsprovide briefings and seminars for individuals and groups in the Australian business community and these have resulted in a better understanding by Government and business alike of matters arising in dealing with ASEAN.
To meet the growing demands of AustralianASEAN relations, the Committee recommended that Australia's diplomatic missions in the region be provided with adequate staff and resources to ensure that Australia's policies are effectively implemented. Our posts in the ASEAN countries are regarded as having a high priority in claims on staffing and resources. At the same time, there is need to balance the requirements of our ASEAN posts with requirements elsewhere, such as those arising from the opening of new posts. Because of this, pressure points do exist. Staffing levels, both at our posts and in Canberra, are kept under constant review.
In respect of economic relations, the Committee recommended that emphasis be given to developing economic policies as they are a key element in the relationship and serve both ASEAN and Australian long term interests. Efforts are already underway, through consultations with the ASEAN countries and through trade and investment development initiatives, to widen regional understanding of Australian economic policies. In July 1979 a Joint Trade Com-
mission was established with the Philippines and a
Joint Trade Committee was established with Thailand. These bodies, together with the AACM, provide useful and direct means for

1560 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Association ofSouth East Asian Nations

exchanges of information on matters of trade interest between Australia and the ASEAN countries.
The Committee states that the development of economic policies should include a careful explanation of Australia's position on tariffs, including domestic implications, commitment to tariff ree ductions and responsibilities to the Australian community. The Government's approach to industries assistance, which involves a commitment to lower and more stable tariff levels, was set out in the White Paper on Manufacturing Industry and endorsed by the Study Group on Structural Adjustment. This approach recognises the need to take into account the ability of the community to absorb change and the need to deal with short term problems. The ASEAN countries have been advised of the Government's approach to these matters and this practice will continue.
The Government notes the Committee's recommendation, in respect of trading relations, that the general approach to preferences should continue 'where it is practical and mutually beneficial'. It further notes the Committee's recommendation, on p"rospects for trade development, that Australia should continue to stress its commitment to a reduction in trade barriers on a reciprocal and non-preferential basis and intensify its efforts to achieve such reductions. Tariff preferences accorded to products of developing countries have been regarded as an important concession by those countries, including ASEAN. As signatory to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, Australia has supported and participated in reciprocal and non-preferential reductions of trade barriers in the context of global trade negotiations such as the multilateral trade negotiations. Outside of that framework, however, reductions in tariff occur in the context of reviews of industry assistance and are not dependent on reciprocity. To tie such reductions to reciprocity would in some instances involve maintaining barriers higher than economic prudence would justify. Whilst opportunities for reciprocal reductions of trade barriers arise in the context of GATT negotiations, reciprocity is not required of developing countries in such rounds and, in the present global climate, demands for reciprocity from developing countries would not be well received.
The Government has already taken action in the direction recommended by the Committee to encourage and support links between private sector organisations in Australia and ASEAN. The ASEAN-Australia Business Council was established in June 1980 and I note that the Committee acknowledges the initiatives that the Government

has taken to support the development of industry links with ASEAN. Co-operation with the ASEAN-Australia Business Council and the various Business Co-operation Committees and Chambers will be continued where appropriate as part of these initiatives. In the end, success or failure will depend upon the independent efforts of business people but I can assure you that, as a Government, we will do all we can to create, as far as possible, the conditions for success.
In respect of data on trade flows, the" Committee recommended that the Australian Government should give further consideration to providing more detailed statistics on the balance of payments with ASEAN countries, particularly to serve industry needs. Further progress has now been made on the review of regional balance of payments statistics mentioned in the letter of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) to Senator Sim and quoted on page 38 of the report. The Australian Statistician is now able to release broad statistics on the balance of payments with each ASEAN country, although he is unable at this time to release statistics at a detailed level. '
The Committee expressed support for the proposal that the Australian Government should post a labour attache to ASEAN. It is the Government's view that such an appointment is not required at this stage but that the matter should be kept under review.
The Committee's recommendations that the relevance and significance of development assistance in Australia's relations with ASEAN and its member countries should be kept under constant review are consistent with Government policy. Bilateral development assistance to the ASEAN countries is kept continually under review through project and program reviews, and through direct consultation with recipient Governments, aid co-ordination officials and the various international consultative organisations, such as the Inter-Governmental Group on Indonesia-IGGI. The ASEAN-Australia Economic Co-operation Program-AAECP-which brings Australia and the ASEAN countries together in regional programs, is also cQntinually reviewed through regular meetings of the AACM's special working groups on development co-operation and on trade, and through the annual meetings of the ASEAN-Australia Forum.
In its conclusions and recommendations on. immigration, the Committee stated that it is cqncerned that Australia is still seen as a European outpost in an Asian region. It "recommended that the Government concentrate on projecting Australia's identity which is evolving through the

Association ofSouth East Asian Nations

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1561

changing structure of its society. The Committee also recommended the further development of immigration policy along the lines recently adopted, a humanitarian approach to the needs of refugees and the intensification of efforts to finalise the reunion in Australia of families from East Timor.
In general the Government accepts these recommendations. A substantial shift of opinion has taken place in ASEAN countries since Australia's restrictive immigration policies were changed. While Australia is still seen by some as excessively predisposed towards Europe, the view is less widely held than six or seven years ago. The understanding that many suitably qualified people are eligible to migrate to Australia is now more widespread, as is recognition that Australia, while having close cultural and other ties with Europe, shares many of the preoccupations and interests of the ASEAN countries.
Personal contacts are indispensable as a basis of undertstanding between countries. The Government agrees with the Committee that student exchanges and migration from the ASEAN countries play an important role in building this understanding and in removing any Impression that Australia remains a European outpost in an Asian region. Changes to our private overseas student policy have recently led to the introduction of new arrangements whereby a greater number of such students will be able to enter Australia for long term study.
Since the report was drafted, Australia has maintained its resettlement and humanitarian support of Indo-Chinese refugees and its efforts to complete the East Timor family reunion program. The Australian Government has contributed some $30m to Indo-Chinese refugee and related programs overseas, with further substantial private contributions from Australian citizens. We have accepted some 47,000 Indo-Chinese refugees, most of them from ASEAN countries of first asylum ,Upwards of one in every 310 persons in Australia is an Indo-Chinese refugee and community groups have backed and supported the Government's efforts. In addition to its vital humanitarian contribution, the Government's Indo-Chinese refugee program has been a p~sitive factor in Australia's co-operation with ASEAN.
In line with the Committee's recommendation, the Government is engaged in a co-operative effort with the ASEAN countries to stem the flow of illegal narcotics through the region. The Government agrees strongly with the recommendation that everything possible should be done to prevent the incalculable damage which could be

done to the fabric of our societies by the spread of narcotics, and has recently devoted increased resources to this area.
In respect of the news media, the Committee urged continuing efforts to ensure information flows between Australia and the ASEAN countries and recommended that the Government initiate further discussions with the Indonesian authorities to ensure that Radio Australia has a correspondent in Indonesia. The Government considers that the Committee's comments on these matters touch on significant aspects of the relationship between Australia and the ASEAN countries. We recognise the importance of encouraging informed and balanced coverage of developments in the region by the Australian Press and support the Committee's view that the ASEAN countries should be encouraged to establish media representation in Australia.
The Government believes that Radio Australia has an important place in expanding perceptions of Australia in the region and awaits with interest the report of the Committee of Review of the Australian Broadcasting Commission which has considered Radio Australia's operations. We are aware of objections within the Indonesian Government to aspects of Radio Australia's broadcasts. Contacts between the Australian Broadcasting Commission and the Indonesian authorities aimed at securing the return of an ABC correspondent to Jakarta have taken place. I hope that these will be successful.
The Government notes the Committee's support for the establishment of an Asian studies council, a proposal put forward in a report prepared by the Asian Studies Association of Australia. Government departments are already examining the report and the Government's views on it will be made known later in the year. In the meantime, my colleague, the Minister for Education (Mr Fife), has asked the Tertiary Education Commission to take account of the report in preparing volume I of its report for the 1982-84 triennium.
On education and cultural relations the Government accepts the Committee's recommendation that every effort be made to meet requests from the ASEAN countries for assistance in education, particularly in the teaching of English. Australia already supports a number of projects in the ASEAN countries related to education. These include bilateral aid projects, support for the South-East Asian Ministers for Education Organisation, for the activities of the Australian Vice-Chancellors Committee under the Australian-Asian Universities Co-operation

1562 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Association ofSouth East Asian Nations

Scheme, and for an ASEAN, education deve10p- ' the report. I am well aware of the capacity of the

ment project under the ASEAN-Australia Econpeople who prepared the report. Two of my party

mic Co-operation Program. In these fields, as in colleagues, Senator Cyril Primmer and Senator

the particular field mentiqned by the report, that Gordon McIntosh, were members of that Com-

is English teaching, the Government welcomes mittee. They made a valuable contribution. I was

and makes every effort to meet requests from in the area at the time the Committee was making

ASEAN governments according to their own investigations prior to completing its report on the

priorities.

Association of South East Asian Nations region. I

The Committee in its report recommended that the work of non-governmental organisations continue to be supported by the Government and, in response to the needs indicated by the ASEAN
countries, that that support be expanded wherever possible. Non-governmental connections be-

am also a friend and overseas travelling colleague of Senator Sim. I think we were away some 10 years ago. I am very aware of his interests in that region imd of his Australian patriotism. I wi&h him well in his retirement. He has made a first class contribution in the area of foreign affairs.

tween Australia and the ASEAN countries have I deal now with the report as I see it and as, I

been the subject of a recent inquiry by a working think, the Opposition sees it. The Minister

group established by my predecessor. The group indicated in his speech that we must seek to

has now completed its work and I plan to make a influence the policy of ASEAN and its individual

statement on this shortly.

members. Obviously we must do that in our

The Government accepts, in the context' of available resources, the Committee's recommendations about the importance of providing information about Australia in the ASEAN countries. An extensive information program is pursued by our diplomatic missions in the region. In addition, the Government has given support to Chulalongkorn University in Thailand in establishing a course on Australian politics, and in assisting the University of Indonesia which hopes to establish a Chair of Australian Studies.

national interest. The general question arises as to how we can best do that. The essential element in determining the amount of weight which our advice carries in regional councils is the extent to which we are pursuing our own foreign policies as they affect the best interests of this region. Each of the ASEAN countries wants stability in this region. We want stability. Therefore, we have a responsibility in our own interests and in the interests of our regional neighbours to pursue foreign policies which will promote stability. Recent moves by the Government and others have

The Government welcomes the public attennot contributed to that result. There is a tendency

tion which the Committee's inquiry and report to increase tension by escalating the involvement

attracted to Australian relations with ASEAN. of super-powers. In that context I mention the

The report has served to und~rline the important entry to the area of B52 bombers with nuclear

place of ASEAN and thy ASEAN countries in weapons, the problem of China and Vietnam and

Australia's foreign policy. The findings of the the,question of the Soviet Union wanting a base at

Committee are broadly consistent with the initiat. Cam Ranh Bay. This all comes about from super-

ives the Government has already taken, or is power involvement in areas where they are not

taking, to strengthen our relations with ASEAN. going to be able to offer solutions.

The report has, at the same time, thrown into reOn a different level, this Government has failed

lief some areas in which problems exist and has to take initiatives in the region which could con-

made useful suggestions on what might be done to tribute to the easing of tensions particularly bet-

deal with them. The practice of consultation with ween Vietnam and ASEAN. We must realise that

ASEAN is firmly established. I believe that this the super-powers see our region not in our terms,

will assist with the resolution of any differences in not in terms of our interest, not in terms of our

a co-operative spirit. In dealing with the issues stability, but in terms of their own strength,

which must arise from time to time between influence and stability. When their interests hap-

neighbours, I am sure we will all remain aware of pen to coincide with our interests and those of O\lr

the fundamental interests we have in common in ASEAN neighbours, of course, they can be con-

the preservation of a secure, strong and selfsistent. But unless they do coincide the result is an

reliant region.

adverse one to the region. Certainly, it was not in

Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) -by leave-The statement of the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) relates to a report of

our interests to have a bloody 30-year conflict in Vietnam which has left such a tragic legacy of in-
stability and hostility.

the Senate Standing Committee on Foreign I note from the report and other sources that

Affairs and Defence. The Opposition welcomes there is increasing militarisation of Australia's

Association ofSouth East Asian Nations

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1563

contacts with ASEAN. I want to sound a word of warning about this. The question of giving military aid does not guarantee stability. Honourable members will notice the most recent position which seems to be surfacing to some extent in Thailand. First, the records and reputations of some ASEAN governments in the fields of human rights and civil liberties are far from acceptable. I would not like a situation to arise in which Australian military and security help to ASEAN governments contributes either directly or indirectly to internal security measures taken for political reasons. We have just referred to the problems of the Philippines particularly in Mindanao. There is a problem in that country in that the Marcos regime is not readily recognised as having the support of the people. The same problems arose in South Korea, We have evidence which shows that if that happens, there is bloodshed, there is instability and there is no peace for the region.
Moreover, Australia should take all precautions possible to ensure that any military help or advice which we do give is so directed or controlled that it cannot be used by any ASEAN partner against another or against their neighbours unless for self-defence. Such precautions are only prudent. The possibility of ASEAN tending to emphasise military relations at the expense of economic co-operation is not one Australia should welcome.
The Minister stated, and the committee recommended, that the Government should give further consideration to providing more detailed statistics on ASEAN countries particularly in relation to industry and industry help. He then went on to say that in spite of the fact that the Committee expressed support for the assignment of a labour attache to ASEAN, the Government's view is that such an appointment is not necessary. We must ask: Why not? If the Government can assist industry and do its homework for it, why should not the Australian trade unions, for example, be entitled to the benefit of information on trade union developments, or the lack of them, in ASEAN countries? Not only trade unions, but also the Government may well find it instructive to receive information on the curtailment or suppression of attempts by workers in these countries to protect their interest. Let us have a bit of balance in the whole field and let us introduce balance into the information which our embassies are collecting. The Opposition believes that this is a worthwhile recommendation which should have been accepted. For example, we have recently posted a labour attache to Japan. It is no less important, and perhaps more important, for us to

have. regular detailed reporting from ASEAN capitals on the wages and conditions and union membership of workers' in the ASEAN region, particularly those employed in making products for exports to Australia because Australia is obliged to compete with ASEAN industries. Any decisions on tariffs and import quotas should be taken in the full knowledge of the wages and other costs involved in the production of goods. Also there is the question of whether there will be import quota regulations.
Another vital source of information on ASEAN manufacturing and trade is also given unsatisfactory treatment by the Government in its response to the report. Let me refer to it. The Minister states that the Australian Bureau of Statistics is not able to provide detailed figures on ASEAN balances of payments. The reason appears to be the limits on funds made available to the Bureau. Funds for the extra staff and research facilities needed to provide such detailed figures should be given at once. The cost would not be great, but the benefits could be large.
The Minister also referred to Indo-Chinese refugees. I applaud the Government's efforts and those of the thousands of Australian families who have helped in the resettlement of these unfortunate people. We must continue our efforts in this regard. But I come back to the point that it is only by fostering stability in our region that we will avoid further war and racial conflict in our areaevents which are the genesis of all refugee outflows.
The Minister stated that the Government recognises the importance of encouraging informed and balanced coverage of events in the region by the Australian Press and Radio Australia. That is all very well, but what has happened? The fact is that our correspondents have been thrown out, one after the other, in the case of one ASEAN country. The Minister states that efforts to secure the return to Jakarta of the Australian Broadcasting Commission correspondent have been made. I hope they are continuing. I hope, in fact, that the Minist~r might give us a progress report. For example, what are the Indonesian authorities saying? Are they seeking to impose conditions for the return of the correspondent?
The Minister could also give a progress report on another matter concerning Indonesia. The report of the Senate Committee mentions reunification of East Timorese with relatives in Australia. There have been Press reports, not denied, that large sums of money perhaps have had to be paid by Timorese to Indonesian bureaucrats dealing

1S64 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Association ofSouth East Asian Nations

with their cases. If bribery and bureaucratic obstacles are part of the problem the Government surely should make a protest. We would like to know more about that. When the Indonesian Foreign Minister visited Canberra he made promises about reunification. We would like to know what progress has been made towards keeping those promises.
The Minister in his statement mentioned a number of matters which I will refer to very quickly. He spoke particularly about stability in the region and the problems of Vietnam. Honourable members should note that not once did the Minister mention China. The real problem for Vietnam is China. The problems for the region is the hostility that took place between China and Vietnam. The reason for the refugee exodus is the 'surgical strike' on Vietnam by China. Everyone condemned it, as well they should have. One need only go to Hanoi, and I have, to realise the severe problems that exist there. These problems will continue.
It is important in that context that we should not create barriers between ASEAN and Vietnam. We should be getting the countries of the region closer together. We do no want to encourage or oblige Vietnam to seek Soviet assistance on the basis that there might be a further 'surgical strike' by China. Also, the problems of Kampuchea are still far from resolved.
I want to make this point very clear: We would not have had the problems of refugees if there had not been a conflict between the super-powers, with the United States perhaps encouraging China in its attack on Vietnam. If a resumption in fighting takes place, Australia's very survival could be at stake, not only in terms of military operations but in terms of mass migration of millions of people.
Do not let us minimise the problem. We are dealing with millions of people, many of whom feel they would rather leave the region. When we look at the poverty in that region and the inability of the people to get land rights or human rights, we can understand why any human being might want to leave. Yet in terms ofland prosperity, fertility and rainfall, the region is a most magnificent area. The tragedy is that it does not have any democracy. We must remember that.
Australians have worked hard over two centuries to develop a system which, while it can be criticised, is I think a long way ahead of many other systems. Our people fully appreciate democracy and individual rights. We should not adopt a mea culpa syndrome, that there is always something wrong with us in this region and that

we should be indicating to the people to the north that is us who should do better. I want to see a foreign policy in which we indicate to these people that they can do a lot better. It is important that Australia be very mindful and proud of its past, particularly the fact that we have fought for freedom in two world wars, the second of which was partly in this region. Many Australians were killed fighting for what democracy is all about. I want to see peace and stability. This cannot be encouraged, maintained or guaranteed if there is an air of hostility towards VietnaQ1. To ignore the problems of China, the influence of the United States and the Soviet Union, and the.real problems of the Association of South East Asian Nations is to ignore democracy and how it can work. It is no good having dictators or a ruling elite always pretending to help the country whereas, in fact, they are helping themselves.
As I indicated in my earlier statement today on the Philippines, when we talk about aid projects I want to see aid given to the people of the area, so that they have a chance to improve their economy and their standard of living. It is important for them to have land reform, to get the benefit of irrigation, or improved strains of rice, and to be able to sell crops at a proper price to guarantee that their standards of living will improve. When we talk about aid in these areas, let us talk about land reform, and about reform in human and civil rights, education, health, housing and all these matters which are very basic to these people.
If we talk about narcotics, we must talk about alternative cash crops which can certainly be grown. The matter should not be left on the basis that the people have to be exploited by producing the narcotics themselves. There is so much that we can do.
For example, the most important thing which concerns the people of East and West Timor is dry land farming. We are experts in that.field and it would cost us very little to show these people how they could improve their agriculture.
I come to this other element which I think has done us untold harm. I refer to the Harries report of the Committee on 'Australia's relations with the Third World' and the fact that we, in Australia, are overprotective. It is emphasised again in this report that we have to lower tariffs. Can we not get it through the heads of people in Parliament and the bureaucrats that we are the least protected of these countries that are putting up protective barriers. We allow a 60 per cent import penetration in the textile area whereas the Japanese allow only 10 per cent and the Americans allow 8 per cent.

Association ofSouth East Asian Nations

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1565

When I go to Malaysia to look at an Australian factory and I ask: 'Are you having troubles in selling the product to Australia?' The answer is: 'No, but I cannot get the product into the United States, Japan or the European Community as they will not allow it. Your market is a small one and I am happy with what I can sell there'. We look at the question whether he should be there. He is there for the reason that he is in a free trade zone to make money. He does not pay any taxes. Everything is provided for him, including cheap labour. But are the female staff members in the factories happy? I suggest that they are not. They are working for something less than one dollar a day and they are working long hours making a blouse or a skirt. Is that a real economic advantage? Would it not be better to see these young ladies back to their home towns being educated and learning some better skills; doing something worthwhile and getting some happiness out of life, because there is so much that needs to be done in these areas.
I am very critical of reports that berate Australians for being overprotective. I make the point that we do not want to see cheap labour manipulated, particularly by trans-national companies. Honourable members can bet their lives that the product those companies make is sold and exported at what the market will bear. The benefit does not go to the people who produce it. They are exploited on the basis that at some stage they will get an economic advantage. I fail to see the reason for this because it brings nothing but unhappiness, misery and hostility.
In all these regions, there is also an official hostility to trade unions or any organisations of labour, if they suggest there ought to be an improvement in housing or in wages. Such a stand has already caused a couple of revolutions in South Korea and it could bring about communist control in that country. It can happen.
I can also see the same things happening in the Philippines. If masses of people there are to be exploited for the so-called economic gain of the elite or overseas interests, we are just fostering the inevitable revolution. Because they see no alternative, people will change to a communist system, usually through the gun. Democracy never gets a chance. The problems are there.
Luckily for us, the monarchy in Thailand is a very intelligent one indeed. We owe the stability in Thailand to the King, not to the generals. Let us make it very clear that the stability is not due to the armies or the coups. Instability is the real problem.

I can see problems developing in Indonesia, which I note is entering the nuclear age, not that we would want to encourage it. Why would Indonesia want nuclear reactors? The most important thing to theSe people is energy sources. The best way Jor them to get that is by the production of synthetic fuel, or the ability to convert crops into fuel, particularly as that country has a high annual rainfall, and favourable temperatures, so there can be rapid crop production. How much better would it be if we encouraged people there to go into ethanol production.
If honourable members look at the question of food, they will notice that our main export to those people is wheat and dairy products. They need those products. Then we keep berating ourselves on the basis that there is an imbalance in trade. I have received a signal to tell me that I must conclude, and I will. There is so much more that we can do. I do not want to see any more 'Harries Reports' or any more berating of Australians because of what we have done 'wrong'. We are leading the field in the area of production and we want an independent foreign policy that guarantees that there will be no war or hostility in the whole region to jeopardise that position.
GOVERNOR-GENERAVS SPEECH
Address-in-Reply: Presentation to Governor-General
Mr SPEAKER-I suspend the sittings until 8 p.m. in order that I may present the Address-inReply to His Excellency, the Governor-General, at Government House. I shall be glad if the mover and the seconder, together with all other honourable members, will accompany me to present the address.
Sitting suspended from 4.22 to 8 p.m.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-I inform the House that, accompanied by honourable members, Mr Speaker waited today upon His Excellency -the Governor-General at Government House, and presented to him the Address-inReply to His Excellency's Speech on the Opening of the First Session of the Thirty-Second Parliament, agreed to by the House on 7 April 1981.
His Excellency was pleased to make the followingreply:
MrSpeaker,
Thank you for your Address-in-Reply which you have just presented to me.
lt will be my pleasure and my duty to convey to Her Majesty The Queen the message of loyalty from the House of Representatives, to which the Address gives expression.

1566 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Quarantine Amendment Bill

QUARANTINE AMENDMENT BILL 1981

Bill presented by Mr MacKellar and read a

first time.

'

Second Reading
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health) (8.1)-I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is an omnibus Bill by which the Government seeks to extend and up-date the Quarantine Act: To provide comprehensive quarantine and disease control arrangements for the Cocos (Keeling) Islands Territory; to give effect to outstanding recommendations for legislative change put for:vard by the Senate Standing Committee on NatlOnal Resources in its report on the ade~~acy of quarantine; and to make additional provIsions and amendments and to provide additional ~owers ~h.ich a.re required for effective quarantme admlmstratlOn and enforcement in Australia. The B~ll is a reflection of the Government's strong commitment to an efficient quarantine service which must .continue to play an effective and major role in Australia's social and economic well-being.
~onou~able members will know that a high secunty ammal quarantine station is under construction in the Territory of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands. The station will provide a safe means of achieving genetic improvement in our economic livest?ck th!ough the importation of genetically supenor ammals from disease risk areas of the world. Without the security of an off-shore station, importation of such animals from all but a very few c~untries could not be contemplated. Current estimates are that construction of the station will be completed in September 1981. Security of the station depends on appropriate quarantine and other disease control arrangements for the Territory as a whole. Because of the integrated nature of the arrangements which are required, the legislation must encompass animal, plant, general and human quarantine areas and authorise all necessary measures to prevent the introduction or spread of diseases affecting animals, plants and man. The Government has decided that these comprehensive quarantine arrangements would best be achieved by extending to the Territory with amendment where necessary for ~erritory appli~ation the relevant powers, functions and reqUirements of the Quarantine Act. The proposed legislation would differentiate betw.een Australia and the Territory to ensure that sUlta~le controls can be exercised over the movement of vessels, people, animals, plants and goods between Australia and the Territory.

The Bill also makes provision for the internal ~ontrol of ~iseases and pests of animals and plants m the terntory. These powers are exercised in All:stralia by State authorities under State legislatlOn and form an integral part of Australia's overall animal and plant protection framework. These necessary State-type powers are not currently available in the Territory. I draw the attention of the House to clause 4 of the Bill which provides for the application of the quarantine Act in the Territory. Clause 7 of the Bill amends section 13 of the Act to authorise the Governor-General to make proclamations which will prohibit or con- ~rol the impo!tation of animals, plants or goods mto the Terntory from Australia or overseas. I would like to emphasise that for the purposes of entry into Australia of persons, vessels, goods, animals or plants the Cocos Islands will continue to .be regarded as an oversea place under the amended legislation. Similarly Australia will be an oversea place for the purpose of entry into Co.cos. Clause 41 provides for the making of regulatIOns relating, inter alia, to the internal Statetype stock and plant disease control measures to which I have referred. The system for setting the fee~ which are to apply for the management and mamtenance of animals at the quarantine station will also be provided for in the regulations.
I would now like to turn to the report of the Senate Committee on National Resources. This report 'The Adequacy Of Quarantine And Other Control Measures To Protect Australia's Pastoral Indu~trie~ From The Introduction And Spread Of Exotic Livestock And Plant Diseases' was tabled in November 1979. The Committee recommended, inter alia, that the Quarantine Act be amended to eliminate problems relating to the granting of pratique and the lack of certain po~ers. for quarantine officers, and to provide legislatIve support for contemporary quarantine problems not currently covered by the Act. The Governmen~'s response to the Committee's report was tabled m another place in September 1980. The Gover~ment pointed out that, although many ~f the Important matters referred to by the Committee had been taken up by the Quarantine Amendment Act 1979, the need for further action would be closely examined in the light of the Committee's concern.
The Bill before the House proposes amendments developed in the light of the Committee's views. It follows an extensive review of relevant legislation and current quarantine requirements and problems. I would like to highlight some of the more important changes. There are new arrangements regarding imported animals, plants and goods which will ensure that they remain

Quarantine Amendment Bill

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1567

under quarantine control until specifically released. Presently the granting of pratique to the vessel releases all the goods on board. The Bill also makes provision for pratique to be granted by radio message as well as by conventional means. New powers for the examination of imported animals, plants and goods before and after release from quarantine are included in clauses 24 and 27. An examination under these provisions would include sampling and testing, The Bill provides power for quarantine officers to ask questions, require documents or samples and undertake tests in relation to goods which are, or are suspected to have been, subject to quarantine. There are also new powers under warrant to enter premises for the purposes of examining goods, including animals and plants which are subject to quarantine. Finally, the power to order imported goods, animals and plants into quarantine on disease grounds are clarified and expanded. I believe that these and other amendments contained in the Bill, taken in conjunction with the amendments effected in the Quarantine Amendment Act 1979 meet the specific concerns raised by the Senate Committee on National Resources which are appropriate to quarantine legislation.
The Bill also rectifies a number of other deficiencies identified during the Department's examination. Section 69A of the Act provides for compensation under certain circumstances for goods, including animals or plants, which are destroyed under the Act for disease reasons. These arrangements were introduced in 1979 to encourage co-operation from owners and to facilitate prompt action in exotic disease eradication operations. The appropriateness of these compensation provisions for imported livestock species and certain other classes of imported animals has been reviewed. Advice to the Government is that no other major livestock importing nation-that is, Canada, the United States of America, New Zealand and the United Kingdom-compensates where destruction of imported livestock is ordered for disease reasons at a quarantine station. Inquiries in Australia indicate that this eventuality, should it occur at an Australian mainland station or the Cocos Island station, is an insurable risk.
In the circumstances, the Government has concluded that it is reasonable for Australian importers of livestock and certain other classes of animals to carry the risk of destruction in a quarantine station under the Act as part of total importation costs. The Bill therefore provides, at clause 33, that imported horses, asses, mules, pigs and ruminants, animals imported for a zoo or circus, or animals imported for research will not

qualify for compensation if they are destroyed at a quarantine station under the Act and had been in quarantine at all times between their importation and destruction. Compensation will still be paid for these types of animals if, after release from the quarantine station, they are later ordered into quarantine and destroyed. Compensation will also be available under the Act for other imported species such as cats and dogs, lawfully imported and for all animals of Australian origin. .
I now draw the attention of honourable members to clause 38 of the Bill. During coastal surveillance operations, a number of unauthorised landings in Australia have been reported. In the main, these breaches of quarantine legislation have been by foreign fishing vessels. These quarantine breaches by small craft in remote areas of Australia pose grave threats of the introduction of major exotic diseases. Foot and mouth disease, Newcastle disease and rabies are some of the diseases from which Australia is free but which are well established in adjacent countries. Much of our northern coastline is backed by economically important livestock areas which are also abundantly populated with feral animals and insect vectors capable of transmitting any introduced exotic disease. For this reason any reports of an unauthorised landing evoke a quarantine investigation of the landing place and appropriate measures to minimise the possibility of disease introduction.
Quarantine actions of this type have highlighted serious practical deficiencies in the relevant enforcement and penalty provisions of the Act. Amongst other things, powers to apprehend or detain vessels used in connection with major contraventions of the Act are inadequate. Also there are no provisions which compel persons on such vessels to comply with directions regarding quarantine clearances. As matters now stand quarantine measures can be nullified by non-compliance. Further, present penalties have little practical relevance or deterrent value in the situations which have been encountered. Accordingly, clause 38 of the Bill inserts new section 75A, which authorises the detention of vessels of less than 45 metres in length or aircraft which are believed on reasonable grounds to have been used in or in connection with certain specified major breaches of quarantine legislation. The Minister for Health may, after consideration of the circumstances, direct that the vessel be returned to the master or owner. In other cases the vessel will be forfeited to the Crown unless the owner brings an action in a court of competent jurisdiction for the return of the vessel within a prescribed period and

1568 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Quarantine Amendment Bill

the court finds that the vessel was not used in connection with a breach of the Act.
The new section also empowers quarantine officers to destroy any goods which may present a disease risk or any animals or plants which are on board, or which be believes have been on board the detained vessel. Honourable members should note that at section 75C an approved person is also empowered to destroy overseas animals which he locates on any prescribed sea vessel in Australia waters, unless he is satisfied that arrangements exist for the security of those animals. The possible eScape of such animals presents an unacceptable disease risk. These new provisions demonstrate the Government's determination to provide the strongest possible deterrent to unauthorised landings in Australia and to the disease threat that these and other activities pose. The Government is not prepared to tolerateactivities of this kind which place our economic and social livelihood at risk.
Finally, I draw the attention of honourable members to clause 35 of the Bill. This clause inserts a new section which relates to the provision of quarantine information to travellers to Australia. Honourable members will be aware that unauthorised importations of animal and plant materials by overseas visitors or returning Australians are a major potential source of disease introduction. Large quantities of such materials are intercepted at our international ports of entry. Better co-operation from an informed travelling public is essential if we are to continue to maintain the quarantine security on which our economic well-being depends. As one step towards this objective the Government is conducting a major national quarantine publicity campaign to increase awareness and encourage individual responsibility and self-regulation in quarantine matters. The Government has now decided on additional measures to ensure that travellers to Australia are informed of our quarantine requirements.
Accordingly, proposed section 74AA requires the masters of all vessels travelling to Australia, including aircraft, to advise everyone on board of our quarantine requirements. The content and form of such advice are to be in accordance with approvals of the Director of Quarantine. The Bill before the House is a most important piece of legislation. It would provide our quarantine service with increased capacity to meet Australia's present and future needs. It is a Bill which should receive support from all sections of the House. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.

COAL LOADER CAPACITY
Motion (by Mr Fife) -by leave-agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent Notice No. 53, General Business, being called on forthwith.
MrBAUME (Macarthur) (8.14)-1 move:
That this House-
(1) expresses its concern at the threat to Australian coal exports posed by continuing delays in the building of adequate coal loader capacity, particularly in New South Wales, and at the level of industrial disruption at existing coal loaders in that State, and
(2) calls upon the New South Wales Government to(a) allow private enterprise to build the additional coal loader capacity in Newcastle required to meet substantially rising demand for steaming coal; (b) ie-examine the urgent need for the construction by private enterprise of a coal loader in Botany Bay to cater for western and south western steaming and coking coals, and (c) increase the capacity of the proposed Port Kembla coal loader to receive coal transported by road in excess of the stated 2 million tonnes maximum in view of the inability. of the New South Wales Railways to provide adequate handling capacity for at least another 5 years.
My reason for moving this motion is very simple. There is a resources boom in Queensland, resulting in significant profits to the coal mining companies of that State and, of course, to all the other people who are involved in the coal industry, directly and peripherally, in that State. New South Wales is now being rewarded for the efforts in that State by large losses by coal mining companies, by the deferment of expansion programs, and by a lack of capacity to export the product which is so desperately needed by the coal consuming world.
Let us look at the reasons for this significant difference between New South Wales and Queensland. The most prominent reason for that difference appears to be in the capacity of the coal exporting facilities, the ports and the coal loaders, to handle that coal. There is no doubt that there is a significant difference between the two States. For example, at Hay Point in Queensland there is a coal loader which has a capacity at only one of its berths to cope with 6,000 tonnes an hour, The Port Kembla coal loader in New South Wales has a capacity of about 2,000 tonnes an hour. It is hoped that the new Port Kembla coal loader will have a capacity of up to 5,000 tonnes an hour. The basin coal loader in Newcastle has a capacity of about 2,000 tonnes an hour.
In every instance the capacity of those coal loaders is far behind the capacity of the coal loaders in Queensland to cope with the clearly evident demand for coal which has been signalled for many years in advance. It is bad enough that

Coal Loader Capacity

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1569

the present capacity is inadequate. In fact, the plans in New South Wales to cope with the projected capacity are such that there is no doubt whatsoever that this industry will be hamstrung by an inability to export the product which it will have the capacity to mine. Not only are unionists involved in the mining industry not receiving the reward that they should be getting for producing a lot of coal because the coal is not able to be produced but also the expansion programs in New South Wales are being held back by limitations on the capacity to export. (Quorum formed). I can understand the unwillingness of honourable members in the Australian Labor Party opposite to listen to a solid exposition of the incompetence and deliberate delays that have emerged from the way in which the New South Wales Government runs that State in relation to the development of its coal industry and the scope for workers in that industry to receive adequate awards but in particular their unwillingness to see the people of Australia benefit from the immense potential from coal exporting in this country.
Mr Hodgman-Why are there only five Labor members present?
Mr BAUME-I am glad that the Minister for the Capital Territory has mentioned that fact. Only five Labor members are present because, I

presume, the Labor Party is well aware of the disaster in New South ,Wales affecting the coal export industry. ThIS disaster is having an impact not only on the people of New South Wales in respect of the revenues that the State Government has failed to raise as a result of its negative and disgraceful incompetence in the coal export area, but also on the whole nation because of the lack of exports. Many ships have been diverted from the coal industry in New South Wales to other coal export areas.
Mr Kerin-Rubbish!
Mr BAUME-I am glad to hear the honourable member for Werriwa-who ought to know better-saying: 'rubbish'. For the benefit of the honourable member for Werriwa I will outline the delays that have taken place in the shipping of coal in New South Wales. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a statement of vessels delay periods between arrival and commencement of loading. At New South Wales coal berths during the six month period from October 1980 to March 1981. I have already received the approval of the Opposition spokesman for the incorporation of this statement.
Leave granted.
The document reads as follows-

VESSEL'S DELAY PERIODS BETWEEN ARRIVAL AND COMMENCEMENT OF LOADING AT NEW SOUTH WALES COAL BERTHS DURING SIX MONTH PERIOD OCTOBER 1980 UNTIL MARCH 1981

Balmain

Port Kembla

Newcastle (Channel) Newcastle (Basin)

A

B

CA

B

CA

B

CA

B

C

October 1980 November 1980 December 1980
January 1981 February 1981 March 1981

6

103 17.17

9

247 27.44 13

305 23.46 15

390 26.01

7

75 10.71

7

188 30,43 14

226 16.14 17

333 19.56

6

70 11.67

8

131 16.37 16

308 19.25 18 ' 438 24.34

7

127 18.14

9

128 14.22 14

187 33.36 18

208 11.55

4

71 17.75 12

174 14.5

7

122 17.43

9

122 13.56

4

102 25.5

14

106 6.14 11

378 34.36 12

395 32.92

Totals + average 34

548 16.12 59

974 16.51 75 1,526 20.35 89 1,886 21.19

A = No. of vessels loaded.

B= No. of days delay.

C=Monthly average vessel delay.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-I remind the honourable member that it is leave of the House and not of a particular member.
Mr BAUME-I thank the House. This statement. I am prepared to state its sourcecomes from the coal companies which have suffered the disaster of not being able to export their product. Let me dramatise: At the port of Newcastle there are two coal loaders. In the month of March the Newcastle channel coal loader had an average delay of 34.36 days for each ship trying to export coal, from that port. The Newcastle basin had an average delay of 32.92 days. If Opposition members want to challenge

these figures I invite them to present their own figures to demonstrate that this is not so. The reality is that, mainly as a result of industrial disruption, these ports have not been able to export even their inadequate capacity. I have already outlined to the House that as a result of four-and-a-half years of Labor Government, the capacity to export coal from New South Wales is grossly inadequate when compared with the capacity in Queensland, a State which is continually attacked by honourable members opposite for all sorts of reasons. Apparently Queensland is far more concerned and interested in the export of an Australian raw material which will benefit the whole

1570 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Coal Loader Capacity

.of Australia than is New S.outh Wales which is much m.ore interested in pursuing a specific phil.os.ophic line. I will devel.op that p.ositi.on later.
The en.orm.ous t.otal .of 4,934 shipping days have been l.ost in the last six m.onths fr.om these p.orts in New S.outh Wales. This figure relates t.o c.oal ships al.one. They have had t.o sit .outside th.ose p.orts waiting f.or the .opp.ortunity t.o l.oad the exp.ort material that we are trying t.o sell t.o the rest .of the w.orld. That represents an equivalent .of $50m worth .of waiting time-$50m w.orth .of flagfallwhich has resulted from the fact that these ships are sitting .outside the harb.ours, particularly the Newcastle harb.our, waiting t.o pick up c.oal. This is an appalling l.oss which has been generated. There are .one .or tw.o instances where there were .other reas.ons such as the New Year h.oliday .or the need t.o dredge s.omething. There is n.o d.oubt that individual days can be rec.ognised as n.ot being due t.o industrial disrupti.on. I happen t.o have with me a d.ocument, which I will table, listing every ship that has c.ome int.o these p.orts in New S.outh Wales in the last six m.onths. It details the date and time .of their arrival in that p.ort and the date and time .of their departure, l.oaded. If we l.o.ok at the basin c.oall.oader, f.or example, in Newcastle-
Mr Hodgman-It is Mr J.ones's elect.orate.
Mr BAUME-The Minister is quite right, it is the elect.orate .of the h.on.ourable member f.or Newcastle. We see delays.of 37 days f.or individual ships. Let me remind the H.ouse that the average minimum c.ost that s.ome.one has t.o pay f.or a ship sitting idle .outside .one .of these p.orts waiting t.o d.o s.omething is $10,000 a day. That is a minimum. If the ships are big the am.ount c.ould be up t.o $15,000 a day. If 4,934 ship days were l.ost in the last six m.onths al.one that represents $50m .of wasted m.oney which is being paid t.o the multinati.onal ship.owners wh.om h.on.ourable gentlemen .opp.osite appear t.o hate. Yet the industrial acti.on .of their Lab.or wing and the industrial acti.on .of the uni.onists inv.olved has resulted in $50m ending up in the hands .of these .overseas ship.owners in a peri.od .of six m.onths.
Mr Hunt-It s.ounds like a c.onspiracy.
Mr BAUME-The Minister f.or Transp.ort says that it s.ounds like a c.onspiracy. I take the view that h.on.ourable members .opp.osite d.o n.ot have the intellectual capacity t.o have entered int.o a c.onspiracy. I am certain that n.o decent Australian wh.o rec.ognises that his acti.ons w.ould lead t.o such a disastr.ous result w.ould have inv.olved himself in such a c.onspiracy. With respect t.o the Minister I reject the c.onspiracy the.ory. This is arrant stupidity. It represents the Jack phil.os.ophy g.one mad. An am.ount .of $50m that c.ould well have been

earned by the Australian industry has disappeared. S.ome.one has t.o pay this m.oney and, theref.ore, s.ome.one has t.o earn the m.oney t.o pay it. At the m.oment the $50m is being split in vari- .ous ways. T.o a degree the Australian exp.orter is having t.o pick up the bill. In s.ome .other c.ontrasts the .overseas imp.orter .or the shipper has t.o pick up the bill. The ultimate pers.on t.o pick up the bill is the Australian pe.ople. If the exp.orter picks up the bill surely that affects Australia? If it is the imp.orter it means that he then takes a different view when he c.omes t.o his next Australian exp.ort c.on~ tract. He kn.ows that the exporting p.oints are manned by ratbags wh.o will charge him up t.o $50m in wasted time t.o receive that product. He will take a different view when he seeks t.o buy Australian c.oal. He kn.ows that there will be disrupti.on.
The third pers.on is the shipper and he has a simple remedy. He will say: 'The next time. I enter int.o a c.ontract t.o take c.oal fr.om Australia. I will build int.o my price the inevitability .of disaster because .of the disrupti.on in the New South Wales c.oal industry'. H.on.ourable members sh.ould rec.ognise that n.ot .only is there industrial disrupti.on but als.o the New S.outh Wales State g.overnmental instrumentalities which are in charge .of exp.orting this product, particularly the Maritime Services B.oard are inc.ompetent. There is n.o questi.on ab.out that. That B.oard has .one .of the w.orst industrial rec.ords .of any State g.overnment department. I am n.ot asserting that myself; I simply refer t.o Mr B. W. J.oy, the secretary.of the Transp.ort Workers Uni.on, in his letter t.o the Premier .of New S.outh Wales. I seek leave t.o inc.orporate that letter in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The letter read as follows-
Dear Sir,
'As a result of Press speculation and widely 'different interpretations as to the Newcastle Sub-Branch of the Transport Workers' Union position re the construction and operation of a third coal loader, the union believes it pertinent to remind you of our position, which is as follows:
1. The third coal loader should be built as a matter of urgency, so as to facilitate the present export demand and to complement ongoing Hunter Valley development.
2. A decision on who should build, own and operate the third coal loader should be made on or before November 18, 1980. (A promise already reneged on by your Government).
3. The Transport Workers' Union will support any decision oftheGovernment (made on or before November 18,1980).
4. The Transport Workers' Union will oppose any bans lind or limitations placed on the construction of any third coal loader, or to the extensions of the existing loader, subject always to items 2 and 3 being complied with.
5. Of paramount importance is the welfare and job security of this union's existing workforce.

Coal Loader Capacity

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1571

Mr Minister, there have been suggestions that your Government is in a 'no win' situation. Be that as it may, such a situation has been caused by your own department's ineptitude.

The Maritime Services Board has one of the worst industrial records of any State Government department. Threats by other unions to take industrial action in Newcastle and other ports if the loader is not built, owned and operated by the State, are easily countered by similar action being contemplated by this union. No coal need be loaded Qut of Newcastle. In fact, no coal need be transported to the Port Kembla coal loader, or to any rail siding in this State if transport workers are of a similar attitude.

The eventual construction of any new loader will require concrete, steel and vast quantities of buildingmaterials, requiring transport workers to be engaged if they are of a mind to go along with this farce. My executive do not think this will be the case.

Consider the present position:

Newcastle has two (2) coal loaders.

The first is owned and operated by the State. Vast quantities of coal are re-directed to this loader from the Port Waratah Coal Services' storage areas. Employment for Maritime Services Board workers who are paid by the S~ate is guaranteed because of the tonnage arrangements worked out between the Government and Port WaratahCoal Services. .

The second coal loader, owned by private enterprise, cost $96 million to build-not one cent of it public money. However, all the coal received, stored and blended at Port Waratah Coal Services is still loaded on to ships by MSB State Government employees. This latter proposal will still apply if the third coal loader is built by Port Waratah Coal Services and job security for all Maritime Services Board personnel will be preserved, guaranteed and, in 'fact, additional new jobs provided.

Mr Ferguson, when will you tell the people the Government will not jeopardise project roadbuilding programs, much needed school building construction and job creation programs for schoolleavers? When will you tell the political ideologists the truth: We cannot afford it and neither can they! (After all, the completed project will cost $500 million, if commenced within the next month).

On the other hand, if you succumb to industrial blackmail by political ideologists and expect this union to support your stand, you will find that the real fight is just beginning.

In conclusion, it should be noted for the record that every

time this union has sought to confer with you there has always

been some excuse to defer your approaches. A promise that a

decision by November 18, 1980, as to who would own and

construct the loader has not been fulfilled. Despite our advice

that the Newcastle Trades Hall Council 'does not represent

this union, you have continued to ignore representations made

on behalf of our members who, in fact operate the most suc-

cessful and efficient coal loader in the Southern Hemisphere.

The Wran Government is suffering because of your posturing.

Mr Ferguson, it is time to support the majority of thousands

of hard working, dedicated supporters who are not impressed

by the extreme political ideologists you seem to want to

represent.

'

B. W.Joy

Mr BAUME-I thank the House. Mr Joy has pointed out that his own union-the Transport Workers Union-is strongly in favour of the next coal loader in Newcastle being owned by private enterprise. There is a fair case for that. Not only has it been established that the Maritime Services Board is monumentally incompetent-I suggest

that it perhaps be r!.lnamed the overtime disservice and very bored-- ,
Mr Free-That is terrific! Mr BAUME-Fam glad that honourable members recognise the merit of that point because this Maritime Services Board is so incompetent that the turn around time of a coal train entering its facilities is something like four times as long as it is for a train entering the one private enterprise loader in New South Wales which is, in fact, one of the two Newcastle loaders. The Transport Workers Union takes the strong view that it wants to make a quid out of coal exporting. Its members know damn well that the only way they can make a quid out of the new coal loader in Newcastle is if it is owned by private enterprise. So, there is a massive dispute between the industrial unions involved with the Maritime Services Board loaders and the Transport Workers Union, and its associates which are involved in the private enterprise loader. That has resulted in continual and massive industrial disruption in the port of Newcastle. My sympathies are all with the Transport Workers Union, as they are in the matter of the Port Kembla coal loader where we have had a continuation of monumental industrial disruption caused by the communist who happens to organise-to stage manage, if I might say-the distribution of that coal loader. I regret that the resentment of most workers against that man was reflected in a most unfortunate s~tuation in which some people endeavoured to shoot him. I have no sympathy for people who endeavoured to shoot him. All I recognise, and the House should recognise is that this man has generated such immense hatred and disaffection that some people were moved to shoot at him. I refer to Mr Kelly. His system was to organise a wildcat strike at Port Kembla when the tide was in the, right position. In other words, there was an eight-hour strike on one shift. This would mean that the next shift would not be able to work because of the tide situation. He would get two shifts out, if I can put it that way, for the price of one. The coal truck drivers from my electorate who belong to the Transport Workers Union would come down to Wollongong, their trucks laden with coal. These trucks were driven mainly by owner-drivers who had to pay off the indebtedness on their trucks. The Maritime Services Board-that gutless and incompetent instrument of the socialist Wran Government in New South Wales would refuse-Mr Kerin-Socialist! Mr BAUME-It would refuse to accept that coal. Opposition members might laugh at my use

1572 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Coal Loader Capacity

of the word 'socialist'. I hope' I have the opportunity to discuss the secret socialism of the Wran Government in a moment. As a result, those coal truck drivers received no inc,:pme for that time, not only for the one eight-hour period in which the ratbag strike would take place but also for the next eight hours when it was not possible for them to proceed with loading. These people generated a degree of hostility-of immense hatred, I might say-towards their alleged fellow unionists. These were the Jack philosophers of the Port.Kembla coal loader who could not care less for their colleagues.- That sort of hatred resulted in a disastrous situation in which a man was shot. I point out that in November 1980 we had delay rates of up to 30 days for loading a ship. Once the Maritime Services Board eventually got off its behind and approached the court and said: 'Can something be done?', the court said to the union involved: 'Look, would you behave?'.
Mr Deputy SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. Is there a seconder to the motion?
Mr MacKenzie-1 second the motion and reserve my right to speak at a later time.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (8.34)-The first comment I would like to make is that the Government must be pretty strapped for business to bring this motion before the House, to force us to listen to the diatribe from the honourable member of Macarthur (Mr Baume). Nevertheless, I will try to deal in a rational way, in contrast with the honourable member for Macarthur, with the points that he has raised. He raised three points in his General Business motion. In the first he calls Ilpon the New South Wales Government to allow private enterprise to manage the new coal loader at Newcastle. He attempts to resurrect the concept of a coal loader at Botany Bay. He also wishes to increase haulage of coal by road at Port Kembla.
Before I answer those three points in detail, I make several comments about the proposed expansion of the coal industry in both New South Wales and Queensland. Quite frankly, the reason these new loaders are required-they are required to some degree-is the very bullish expansion of the coal industry that is proposed, perhaps far more than is desirable from the national point of view. I refer to just a few facts and figures in regard to the industry. Our present coal production of washed coal is about 75 million tonnes a year.. We export about 40 million tonnes of that coal. The Joint Coal Board in New South Wales tells us that by the year 1990 we could be producing up to 250 million tonnes of coal and that by 1985 we

could be exporting between 75 million tonnes and 110 million tonnes.
Mr Hunt-That is if we can ship it.
Mr WEST-And by 1990-just listen to what I am saying-we will reach a high figure of between 115 million tonnes and 180 million tonnes. At present, in New South Wal~swe are exporting 12 million tonnes from Newcastle, 4 million tonnes from Balmain and 6t million toMes fromPort Kembhl-a tQtal of 22t million tonnes. Icite those figures to the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) to show the tremendous explosion in production that the Board is talking about and the vast sums of infrastructure expenditure that will be required. We ought to consider whether we can actually go that far. The Joint Coal Board is saying that by 1990 we might be exporting liP to 85 million tonnes of coal from New South Wales. That could raise a number of problems. For instance, private capital expenditure for the ~ctual project construction could amount to some $6 billion in the two States, the Board say's, over the next eight years. There will be massive export earnings to contend with. If the earnings go anywhere near those figures, we will be looking at approximately $2 billion extra by 1985.
Explosions of export earnings of this nature could cause-I will bevery brief because I have some points to make on what the honourable member for Macarthur said-a sque~ze on budgetary expenditure for social finance in areas such as housing, public health, public transport and they certainly will result in ri~ing interest rates. They could result in currency revaluation which in turn would result in preSSllre on other manufacturing and secondary industries. Unfortunately, we could eventually be forced to rely on profit repatriation to an undesirable level abrQad to mitigate the effect of possible revaluation and on a ~peedier repaymeot of loans than otherwise might be desirable. We could be forced to ignore the effect of capital outflow as a result of invisibles-such as the fact that we export only some 2 or 3 per cent of our raw materials on our national shipping line. We may be forced into a position where we actually are embracing these three effects, that we otherwise might have regarded as being deleterious, simply tokeep down the result of the revaluation. I put it to the House that the Opposition stands for a rationalisation of the so-called resources boom in the interests of producing a multi-tiered economy where we place just as much importance on the future of and employment in manufacturing industry and secondary industry in the public and services sector as we do on the export of raw materials.

Coal Loader Capacity

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1573

Having said that, I deal with the points made by the honourable member for Macarthur. Under the disguise of supporting a private enterprise run new coal loader in Newcastle, he is supporting the Port Waratah Coal Services proposal to construct the new loader. That company currently runs a loader there with a capacity of 15 million tonnes. It is currently being expanded to export 20 million tons of coal. The current capacity of coal export facilities in Newcastle is between 27 million tonnes and 28 million tonnes. There is a capacity of 7 million tonnes to 8 million tonnes from the old Basin loader and when the expanded facilities being constructed at the Port Waratah Coal Services installation are finished it will export some 20 million tonnes, so there will be a 27 million tonnes to 28 million tonnes capacity. It is proposed that, by 1984, the new loader at Kooragang Island, at a cost of $240m, will add 15 million tonnes to 20 million tonnes capacity to the coal export facilities at Newcastle. Adding them all together, by 1984 there could be a total capacity of 43 million tonnes to 47 million tonnes, provided that the Kooragang Island facility could be expanded to export another 30 million tonnes perhaps by the year 1990. If that occurred, there would be a capacity to export some 70 million tonnes from the port of Newcastle.
I now mention the industrial situation to which reference has been made. I make the point that the current industrial disputation in the port of Newcastle is caused not through any argument about who should operate orconstruct the new loader; it is because of a dispute between Australian Railways Union shunters and the Maritime Services Board over a wage issue. It really has nothing to do with the future of the new loader. The history of this matter is that some five or six years ago, when Port Waratah Coal Services began opeations it gave priority of employment to members of the Transport Workers Union, against the interests of those unions traditionally employed in the coal industry, that is, the Federated Engine Drivers and Firemen's Association, the Federated Iron workers Association and the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union. Understandably, the members of those unions were motivated by a fear that, once the old. Basin coal loader. is phased out, their jobs might go. Who can blame them for pressing for job security?
I understand-this information comes from the New South Wales States Government-that Port Waratah Coal Services has been most inflexible in its negotiations with the New South Wales State Government. It has insisted all along on 100 per cent ownership of the new facility and blanket

coverage to members of the Transport Workers Union. The company has not been willing to negotiate at all. The State Government requested it to be more flexible but the answer was a firm no. Then, through the Deputy Premier, Mr Ferguson, the State Government took a firm decision that the new coal loader would employ labour that traditionally has been employed in the industry. That firm decision has been taken and the position is that the new coal loader will be constructed at Kooragang Island. It will have a 15 million tonnes to 20 million tonnes capacity at a cost of some $240m. It will employ traditional labour. The new coal loader will be run by a company with a government equity of 20 per cent on the board and private enterprise equity of 80 per cent. Onethird of the capital cost will be raised by share capital. That is, of the $80m required, the State Government will have to provide only $16m and the other two-thirds will be raised by loans provided by the company in whatever form is decided upon.
Mr Hunt-What union is involved?
Mr WEST-They are the traditional unions that have been employed in the industry. That is the position. Despite the nonsense the honourable member for Macarthur put before the House, by 1984 the capacity of coal export facilities in Newcastle will be lifted considerably to between 43 million tonnes and 47 million tonnes.
I now lay to rest his second proposition that the Botany Bay proposal ought to be resuscitated in order to export between 10 million tonnes and 15 million tonnes of coal from the western coalfields and from the Burragorang Valley on the southern fields. That proposal is dead. It will not be resurrected. It is as dead as the dodo and the honourable member may as well forget about it. Even the Clutha Development company, 100 per cent owned by the British Petroleum organisation which is in turn 50 per cent owned by the British Government, has given up lobbying for that proposal, so the honourable member for Macarthur is simply wasting the time of this House in trying to resurrect that proposal for a coal loader at Botany Bay.
I now turn to Port Kembla which, of course, is in my electorate. Already the Maritime Services Board is constructing a new coal loader in the port of Kembla. Stage one will be completed in August next year. It will lift the capacity from 6.5 million tonnes a year to 15 million tonnes a year and, if stage two proceeds, it will increase to 23 million tonnes. It is just as stupid, just as time wasting and just as futile for the honourable member for Macarthur to raise the matters of Botany Bay and

1574 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Coal Loader Capacity

the fully private enterprise coal loader at Newcastle as it is for him to raise the matter of the so called F5t coal road to ensure, he hopes, that the coal from the Burragorang Valley will be continually hauled to the new loader at Port Kembla by road. He is ignoring the real problem in the South Coast area of the uneconomic and dangerous hauling of coal to the coal loader by road. Currently there are some 1,000 truck movements a day along the roads of the city of Wollongong. Because the Deputy Premier of New South Wales, Mr Ferguson, has pledged that when the new loader is finished only 2 million tonnes will be hauled by road, those movements will be redu!;ed to 500 a day. They should be reduced even further so that not one tonne of coal is ever hauled by road to a coal loader in New South Wales.

If the honourable member had his way-and because he represents the interests of the Road Hauliers Association against the interests of his own constituents on the South Coast-he would achieve a situation where we would have some 2,600 to 3,000 massive coal-hauling road monsters, belching diesel fumes and causing danger to other users of the roads of Wollongong.

Transport is a very great problem in the coal industry. It is not only a matter of constructing coal loaders but also of constructing the proper transport infrastructure to serve them. If we are to achieve 2 million tonnes a year to the port of Kembla by road only, it will be necessary for Bellambi Coal Company Ltd, which operates the South Bulli colliery, to construct a conveyor system so it can put its coal on rail at the Illawarra line. It will be necessary for the State rail authority to transport some 8 million tonnes to 9 million tonnes a year from the Burragorang Valley up the southern line and down the Illawarra line. That is possible, according to that authority. It will be necessary for Kembla Coal and Coke Pty Ltd at Coalc1iff to continue to send its coal by rail. Then we may achieve the 2 million tonnes.

I conclude by saying it will be possible, given a

disparate mix of transport arrangements, to haul

the 15 million tonnes a year to Port Kembla with-

out exceeding the 2 million tonnes a year as

promised by the Deputy Premier, Jack Ferguson.

I believe it is not necessary to construct a railway

line from the Burragorang Valley to the Illawarra

line because it would cost approximately $150m. I

also believe that it would eventually lead to stage

two of the loader project at Port Kembla being

implemented whereby 23 million tonnes of coal

would be exported--

.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Ml' Millar)--:- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Debate (on motion by Mr MacKenzie) adjourned.

PARLIAMENTARY CONTRIBUTORY

SUPERANNUATION AMENDMENT BILL

1981

.

Bill-by leave-presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.

Second Reading Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (8.51)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act 1948 to rectify anomalies andinequities and to make certain other changes. Honourable members will recall that the parliamentary superannuation scheme was amended in June 1978, having regard to suggestions made by senators and members and to the provisions of the various Sate parliamentary superannuation schemes. Those amendments have been in operation for almost three years and, during that time, certain anomalies and inequities have come to notice.
The most serious anomaly concerns the formula for calculating the retiring allowance payable to Ministers and office holders. One effect of the formula is that some members' superannuation entitlements are decreasing the longer they remain in the Parliament. The Bill introduces new provisions under which contributions and benefits will be expressed as a percentage of the salary payable for each office held. This is similar in concept to the basic pension scheme and will overcome the anomalies and inequities inherent in the existing additional pension formula. Nevertheless, the entitlements of some members will be lower, at least initially, under the new provisions and special arrangements have been made in these cases. The Government decided some time ago that changes were required and the new provisions will therefore apply to all members retiring on or after 1 July 1980.
The Bill makes a number of changes in relation to commutation of retiring allowances. These include extending the period in which members may elect to commute their retiring allowances to a lump sum, permitting members retiring on or before the end of the present Parliament to commute without any restriction as to age and giving the Parliamentary Retiring Allowances Trust power to defer a member's election to commute if

Parliamentary Superannuation Bill

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1575

it considers the member is likely to re-enter the Parliament within 12 months. The Northern Territory Legislative Assembly passed legislation in September 1979 to provide superannuation arrangements for its members. This Bill provides for benefits payable under the Northern Territory scheme to be treated for the purposes of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Superannuation Scheme in the same way as benefits payable under the State parliamentary superannuation schemes.
The Government's attention has been drawn to certain inequities concerning members of this Parliament who have qualified for pensions under State parliamentary superannuation schemes. The Bill does not make any immediate change in these provisions but will enable new arrangements to o'e introduced by regulation when the Government had had the opportunity to consider the matter fully. The Australian Government Actuary has advised that in the long term the proposed changes should not significantly increase the cost of the scheme to the Commonwealth. The Bill also inc1udesa new delegations provision and a schedule of formal amendments to the Act. I commend the Bill to the House.
Leave granted for debate to continue forthwith.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (8.54)-The Opposition supports the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Bill 1981. The details which go to the constituents of whaJ is proposed have been provided to the Opposition by the Minister for Finance, Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle. She has provided those details comprehensively and has responded to aU requests for further information from the Opposition. In the light of that fact, the Opposition has been fully informed. There is no quibble about that. The matter came before a full Parliamentary Australian Labor Party meeting this week in which all of the ramifications were explained. In consequence, there was unanimous support for the proposal.
The proposal will remove anomalies. It is anomalous-more than that, it is an injusticethat people with the same service as an. office bearer-there is a range of office bearing positions in this Parliament-or as a Minister should have different retirement alowances because of the fact that some of them have served a greater period as a private member of parliament than others; that is, the longer the service as a private member in the Parliament the less the retirement allowance in respect of the office bearing or ministerial position which was held. That is a serious anomaly. This Bill seeks to remedy it.

There are other glaring injustices which affect some people who have given long, faithful and quite valuable service to the Parliament and who were unaware that there would be a change in the general provisions for retirement allowances, especially in this area, which would bring about a disadvantage for them at the time those arrangements were introduced. This proposal will remedy that. In those circumstances, we wholeheartedly support the Bill. I repeat that the proposals were fully discussed by the Parliamentary Labor Party at its weekly meeting. There was unanimous support for the proposals because they seek to remove these anomalies and injustices. It will be a better and fairer system as a result of the amendments.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
Third Reading
. Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Howard) read a third time.
COAL LOADER CAPACITY
Debate resumed.
Mr MacKENZIE (Calare) (8.58)-1 have 15 minutes in which to try to impress upon not only members of this House but also the people of Australia who are listening to the debate the situation of crisis which is presently occurring in New South Wales as far as its most important resource development industry, the coal industry, is concerned. I have happily seconded the motion which has been moved by the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume). Over recent years, my friend and colleague has untiringly attempted to bring to the notice of the people of Australia the critical situation which the New South Wales coal industry faces. Three years ago the honourable member for Macarthur and I proposed and seconded the discussion of a matter of public importance on the same issue.
I have read the remarks which were made in that debate and it seems that very little has happened in the meantime. The honourable member for Macarthur said during that debate, which was on 24 May 1978, that New South Wales was a crisis State as far as the coal industry was concerned. At that time he referred to the inadequate loading facilities in Port Kembla and the fact that the Botany Bay coal loader project had been

1576 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Coal Loader Capacity

shelved and that the Balmain site was totally inadequate as far as expansion of the coal industry in New South Wales was concerned. It seems that very little has changed in the meantime. I remember the words of my colleague, the honourable member for Macarthur, when he referred to New South Wales as being a crisis State. I refer to today's headline in the editorial of the Sydney Morning Herald. It states: 'Coal crisis'. In the Australian some days ago the heading was: 'NSW must get coal act together'. Again in the Sydney Morning Herald of yesterday there was a most extraordinary commitment of paper Space to this matter under the heading: 'The Coal Crisis'. Virtually two full pages of comment and editorial feature appear relating to the crisis in the coal industry in New South Wales.
We are in this motion discussing a most important issue and something that I believe should be brought to the notice of everybody in New South Wales, indeed everybody in Australia. This is not irresponsible reporting. This matter has been highlighted in the most responsible journals and newspapers that we have in Australia. Let us look at some of the problems behind this coal crisis. I refer again to the Sydney Morning Herald editorial of today, Thursday 9 April, which states:
The NSW Government faces a daunting problem in constructing the third coal loader in Newcastle which is urgently needed to cope with the mushrooming demand for the State's steaming coal in the export trade . . . The Wran Government-
It refers to the Wran Government's attitude on this issue-
seems to be in a state of policy disorientation, if not paralysis on the issue . . . If the loader is not built in time to expand the State's capacity to export coal to meet the fastgrowing overseas demand for it, NSW will not only suffer losses in export income which could run into hundreds of millions of dollars a year. The delay could also weaken the State's overseas credibility as a supplier and encourage buyers to go elsewhere, including Queensland.
Whilst I have many friends in Queensland my friendship does not extend to handing over the coal industry in New South Wales'to others so that they can export steaming coal from other States. What is happening? Again I must refer to Press comment. The Australian of 21 March this year pointed out that the number of ships that were tied up off Port Newcastle was an all time record, at least since the war. There were more ships tied up off Port Newcastle at that stage, more tonnage, than we had seen before in peacetime. That is hardly a reflection of which the unions and the New South Wales Labor Government can be proud. On 21 March 1981 some 38 ships were moored off Newcastle harbour as a result of a railway shunters strike which is estimated to have cost the New South Wales coal industry

some $66m to $70m in lost exports alone. That revenue loss of enormous magnitude has resulted because of a railway shunters strike that has been going on for nearly a month. On top of that, the ships were incurring demurrage charges of some $300,000 a day. My colleague, the honourable member for Macarthur pointed out that in the last six months the demurrage charges ,alone to the shipping companies have been about $50m.
I believe that is a very sad indictment of the New South Wales Labor Government and of the unions concerned. It is a dreadful loss of export income and dislocation of a most impoI'tant resource industry to New South Wales. The Australian editorial of 21 March 1981 stated that the New South Wales coal industry, with its huge reserves of steaming and coking coal, had the brightest future of virtually any State energy resource base in the country at the time. That is not a New South Wales paper. That appeared in the Australian. I refer again to today's Sydney Morning Herald. A headline states: 'Huge coal fleet waits .empty as unions feud'. The article confirms that a very large sea-borne fleet of bulk carriers has been lying off Newcastle waiting for coal to be loaded. How much longer can they wait?
I think this is a situation in which we need to ask the question: Who is winning and who is losing out in this matter? The first people who are losing out, in my opinion, are the employees of the industry; the miners themselves. The workers within the industry are earning very good salaries. They work hard under difficult conditions foI' it but their salaries are, on average, about $400 a week. Some are getting much more than that. I know of people who are getting $700 a week and, at times, even $1,000 a week. This strike, these disputes and the inadequacy of coal loading facilities and rail transport facilities are jeopardising not only the jobs of these workers but also the jobs of their children. It is interesting to note that the Miners Federation has called upon the New South Wales State Labor Council to try to resolve this dispute because those unions realise it is in their best interests to ensure that New South Wales coal exports are met and that the commitments to importers and to contractors are also met.
I refer to some of the effects that this strike, these disputes and troubles are having on mining towns. I represent some mining areas in western New South Wales. My colleague, the honourable member for Paterson (Mr O'Keefe), and I represent the entire western New South Wales coal fields. Some of the cities and towns in my area are Lithgow, Wallerawang, ,Cullen Bullen, and Portland. These areas are on the edge of a major

Coal Loader Capacity

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1577

development program. We see new residential developments, new shopping facilities, new roads and new infrastructure and we see a tremendous opportunity for employment. The work force in the area of the western coal fields could double in the next five to eight years if we can effectively get our export coal out of this country. The same applies to the area of Ulan in the electorate of my colleague, the honourble member for Paterson. New mines are being developed at risk and at great capital cost, for example undergound mines like the Clarence Colliery, which is the largest underground mine in Australia. Yet we see that this whole operation is being jeopardised by the short sightedness of the New' South Wales Government and the interactability of a handful of unions. I refer to what the Minister for Mines and Energy, Mr Pat Hills, said, I believe, in 1964. When referring to Lithgow, Mr Hills said:
Forget the coal mines; the Lithgow Valley will become a valley of small factories.
Of course, since then we have seen a major development in the mining industry. We have seen new industries and new infrastructure. We have seen new mimes but unfortunaltely the prophesy ofMr Hills in 1964 now appears to be altogther tootrue. It would seem that whereas I suggested in 1978 that he was wrong I might have to suggest now, in 1981, that he was right because he is presiding over the demise of the coal industry in New South Wales. His prophesy that the Lithgow Valley would become a valley of small factories, and that it would have little to do with the local industry tragically appears to be correct.
Who else is missing out? The coal companies are missing out. Indeed, there seems to be a view that the coal companies in New South Wales are making handsome profits. That is far from the case. Just recently one coal companay, namely Clutha Development Pty Ltd, recorded a loss of $5.4m. Furthermore, Clutha has pointed out that, together with other companies such as Austen and Butta Ltd, Coal and Allied Industries Ltd, and Bellambi Coal Co. Ltd and perhaps Oakbridge and White Industries, they have recorded either losses or very poor trading results in their coal operations. They pointed out very clearly that the reason for these losses is the chronic congestion of transport problems that are plaguing the New South Wales coal industry and also that their capacity of production which is well below their designed capacity has been largely attributable to industrial disputes and strikes. The Chairman of Directors of Clutha said recently that any increases in revenue was'more than offset by higher costs mainly caused by increased industrial action by mining unions and Transport Workers Union

members during the year both at Port Kembla and at Balmain. Who else is missing out? My friend the honourable member for Macarthur has provided some extraordinary interesting documents which, if he agrees, I seek permission to table in the Parliament.
Leave granted.
Mr MacKENZIE-These documents give detailed data on ships that have anchored and berthed at all coal ports in New South Wales. It gives a summary of the delay between berthing and loading. I should like to run through some of these figures because I think they are horrific. At the port of Balmain the average vessel delay period between arrival and commencement of loading during the six month period from October 1980 to March 1981 was 16 days. The delay at Port Kembla was 16t days; at the channel port of Newcastle it was 20 days; and at the Newcastle basin loading facaility it was 21 days. Worse still, let us see why these delays are occurring. The very comprehensive data collected by my friend, the honourable member for Macarthur, shows in detail why some of these delays occurred. In Balmain in October 1980 the reasons were a threatened pilots stoppage, train drivers' overtime bans, a train drivers' stop-work meeting and Christmas and New Year closures-perhaps we can do little about those closures. The closure due to the Maritime Services Board's picnic day was another reason why one boat was held up, not for just one day but for three days. Some bulk carriers have been held up for much longer. I think the worst delay was 58 days. The average vessel delay at Balmain in March 1981 was 25 days.
How on earth can a company endeavour to run a profitable operation carrying coal between Australia and Japan. Australia and Europe or anywhere else, knowing that its bulk carrier may well be held up for 27 days at Port Kembla in October 1980, for example, or for 30 days in November 1980? The list is endless. The best record for Port Kembla was in March 1981 when the average vessel delay was only 6.1 days. That was when the court threatened them if they didn't load. Of all the shipping movements over this period-there were literally dozens if not 100-there were only two when there was no delay between berthing and loading. That is why the industry in New South Wales is in a crisis state. They are not my words; they are the words of the leading editorial and feature writers of the media of New South Wales and Australia.
Perhaps I should conclude by asking who is to blame for this crisis situation. Is it the coal companies? Is it that demand is exceeding and

1578 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Coal Loader Capacity

outstripping our capacity to supply? Is it that we do not have the coal? Of course it is not. We have millions of tonnes of steaming coal in New South Wales that will not get to port. If it gets to port it will not get out of port. The blame has to be fairly and squarely laid at the feet of the Wran Labor Government. It was that Government which sold out the Botany Bay coal loader. It was the Government that, despite the report of the New South Wales State Pollution Control Commission stating that the Botany Bay coal loader should go ahead---,-
Mr Kerin-A shoddy report.
Mr MacKENZIE-Is that correct? I think that the report has been accepted not only by the industry but also by the Miners Federation. The employees in the industry have accepted that report. Why does the New South Wales Government accept the reports of the State Pollution Control Commission on mining under reservoirs or national parks, yet on this occasion, when the Commission said conclusively that Botany Bay was no worse and no better than Port Kembla, for political reasons and in kow-towing to the left wing and its leader, Mr Ferguson, go to water and say that Botany Bay is not on? This is the crisis that we should be concerned about.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Orderl The honourable member's tim: has expired.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (9.13} -The first thing I shall do is record my protest against the tactics that are being used by the Government at present to fill up the time of the Parliament. A barrage of ministerial statements has been brought before the Parliament. We have now reached the ridiculous position where political lightweights on the Government benches such as the honourable member for Calare (Mr MacKenzie) and the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) have taken this opportunity, as they have taken numerous other opportunities, to vilify New South Wales-I am amazed that the two honourable members come from New South Wales-because of their blind hatred of the successful Wran Government and their feelings of inferiority because of the political competence of that Government. I am most ~on cerned that quite clearly there has been a delIberate, consistent and progressive attempt on the part of this Government to sabotage New South Wales. The Government is wasting our time at this stage in debating a nonsense motion of this kind.
Mr MacKenzie-You ask the Miners Federation how they feel about it.

Mr ROBERT BROWN-l will say something about the Miners Federation in a moment. The honourable member would not be aware of the Miners Federation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Orderl The procedure of this House is that the honourable member who has the floor addresses his remarks to the chair. If the din from another section of the House is too great the Chair will give him protection. In the meantime, I ask the honourable member to address his remarks to the Chair.
Mr ROBERT BROWN-The only times I hear any expressions of concern from members ?f the Government about unioni,sts or workers III New South Wales or Australia generally are occasions of this kind when they are trying to make political capital. That is the sort of thing we heard from the honourable member for Calare. I am not surprised we heard it because of the paucity and lack of substance of the arguments he has presented this evening. Most of the things he had to say have borne very little relevance to the motion being debated. The honourable member for Macarthur referred to what he 'called insufficient loading capacity to handle coal exports in the port of Newcastle. He gave that as a reason for the present hold-up of ships outside the Port of Newcastle. I do not know whether the honourable member is as devoid of understanding of this issue as he indicates. The simple fact is that the coal loading capacity. of the port of Newcastle at present is in excess of 16 million tonnes per year but the coal exports going through that port are demanding a loading capacity of only 15 million tonnes. Anyone who suggests that the export of coal from New South Wales is being impeded or disadvantaged as a result of the hick of port facilities simply does not know what he is talking about. The capacity is there.
If the honourable memb~r for Calare and the honourable member for Macarthur knew anything about it or, alternatively, if they were sufficiently honest in the arguments they put to the Parliament to present them correctly, they would acknowledge that fact. They would also acknowledge that the extensions presently un~er way at the Port Waratah loader will lead to an Illcrease in the capacity of the Newcastle port generally to in excess of 25 million tonnes by December of next year. As the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) said, whether the new loader is constructed and controlled by the Maritime Services Board or the Port Waratah coal services or anyone else, it will substantially increase the coal loading capacity of the port of Newcastle by 1984. Coal exports will be well looked after for as long into the future as we

Coal Loader Capacity

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1579

can see, mainly because of the increased capacity resulting from that loader and also because it will have built into it a capacity for further expansion.
I do not believe that the problems being confronted in relation to the expansion of coal loading capacity at Newcastle are being helped in any way by the attitude being adopted by the Federal Government. A great number of issues are involved. One, the blame for which can be sheeted home directly to the Federal Government, is the lack of capacity for loan raisings which it has extended, particularly to the New South Wales Government. The situation has been such, not only in relation to Loan Council provisions but also in relation to the special provisions for infrastructure borrowing, that New South Wales, among all the States, is being very much disadvantaged by the attitude which has been adopted by the Government in the Loan Council consultations. There has been a continuing difficulty on the part of New South Wales to find sufficient funds to undertake the type of infrastructure development and investment necessary to accommodate the resource development being undertaken at present and which will increasingly be undertaken in the future. At this stage I sound a note of caution in connection with this matter. I am concerned about New South Wales and Australia generally having sufficient capacity to export the coal which other countries require. I am not satisfied that a policy of ripping it out as quickly as we possibly can without careful management and planning is necessarily the wisest policy in the long run.
This Government has pinned its energy policy on the statements made by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) prior to the last election in relation to the Rundle shale oil project. That project has now collapsed. It is very likely--
Mr MacKenzie-Nothing to do with coal.
Mr ROBERT BROWN-The honourable member for Calare would not have a clue. He exposes his lack of knowledge and his lack of understanding every time he opens his mouth. He would be better off if he kept his mouth closed. He may, in the process, learn something. He has given no indication of having learned anything about the coal industry at this stage. The only time. I have ever heard him refer to trade unionists or workers, as I said before, has been when he was trying to make some political capital.
It is very likely that as a result of the difficulties that have been established and identified in connection with the Rundle shale oil project, similar difficulties will be found to be related both the Condor and Julia Creek proposals. As I say, this

Government has attached its energy policy very closely to developments which have now collapsed. In future coal will be increasingly more important to Australia. There are hopes that new oil deposits will be found. But there are no guarantees. There are guarantees of the existence . of very significant and substantial deposits of coal in Australia at the present time. Before I leave that matter, I would like to point out that the existence of a lot of the coal and the size of the deposits which are currently being mined in Australia-this is coal which is supposed to have been discovered relatively recently-have been known for decades. Some of the coal fields in New South Wales which contain the best quality coal in the world have been destroyed. As a result, it has been necessary for us to move into coal areas, the existence of which was known before and which, in comparison with the quality of the coal which has been destroyed by private mining operations in the past in New South Wales, are very inferior.

At present, the New South Wales Government proposes a 20 per cent State participation in the new coal loading facilities in Newcastle. This in
itself will help to ensure, probably more than by any other means that could be attempted, that the public sector benefits from a very highlyprofita-
ble coal loading activity. The coal industry, contrary to the nonsense that was spoken by the honourable member for Calare who either cannot
understand the figures he was referring to or is prepared just to accept some newspaper report which quite clearly did not go into all the financial implications of Utah, is profitable. It is just plain nonsense to suggest that the coal mining industry in New South Wales and the coal loading industry in New South Wales and Australia are not profitable.

These matters are, of course, of very great im-

portance to the resource development of New

South Wales. The approach taken by the Govern-

ment in no way will help to solve the problems.

The editorial in the Sydney Morning Herald of

Thursday, 9 April-this morning-when refer-

ring to the Government of New South Wales, had

this to say:

:

No matter which way the Government turns, it is in danger of running foul of one of the groups.

This is a reference to the unfortunate conflict which has developed among the parties concerned in this matter-in Newcastle. The editorial continues:

Each has the power to paralyse coal shipments from the
port and cripple construction of the third loader, and is threatening to use it.

1580 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Coal Loader Capacity

That is the type of unfortunate situation that prevails in Newcastle. It is the type of situation which the New South Wales Government has attempted to overcome, with all the means at its disposal, to bring about a reconciliation of the views of these people involved and to attempt some sort of compromise to ensure that development of the coal loader will go ahead. The editorial also states:
The industrial record of the MSB-run Basin coal loader in Newcastle is sorrowful, whereas the privately owned Port Waratah loader has been free from industrial disputeS.
Mr Baume-That is right.
Mr MacKenzie-That is run by private enterprise.
Mr ROBERT BROWN-That reaction from Government members is typical of their lack of understanding in relation to this matter. Why should not that be the position? For example, conditions at the Port Waratah Coal Services plant at Newcastle include the following: A 35-hour week-in a private operation, by the way; high overtime rates and allowances; a 50 per cent annual leave loading; 13 weeks long service leave after eight years employment; full uniforms; onsite amenities including facilities such as television; an average gross income to those people employed at the coal loader in excess of $20,000 and possibly in excess of $25,000 a year. Conditions at the Basin coal loader are no match. It is an obsolete plant. Everyone recognises that. Here is an opportunity for the Maritime Services Board to participate in the profits that can be made from coal loading and to upgrade the facilities around the port and all of the infrastructure support services that are necessary to keep the coal loader operating.
There are a great number of fundamental and legitimate issues involved in this question. They include the rights of trade unions to protect the interests of their members, the need to ensure an adequate public sector benefit from resource development, the legitimate concerns of the private sector participants in the mining and exporting of coal, the careful programming of coal mining and exporting activities, the need for adequate public control of major public facilities, the provision of adequate funds or access to funds to finance major public investment projects and the need to maximise the benefits of resource development to all Australians. These issues will not be resolved by the position which the Government has adopted. It has been provocative and irresponsible to the point of sabotaging the industrial development of New South Wales in order to achieve its own miserable political objectives.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Before I call the honourable member for Mitchell, I must say that after the honourable member for Hunter received a bit of advice from the Chair his performance was exemplary. I wish the majority of members of the House could take instructions from the Chair in the spirit in which he did. I found no need to protect him in any way although he is a comparatively new member. I point out to the House that this is the way debates should be conducted by honourable members. I call the honourable member for Mitchell.
Mr CADMAN (Mitchell) (9.28)-Coal is the only real economic base for growth that New South Wales has. I think that any New South Welshman or any Australian would recognise that many States, particularly Western Australia and Queensland, are blessed with a great capacity for growth. New South Wales has one base for economic growth that will allow it to share in the great advantages that the mineral resources boom will bring to this nation. The single base and advantage that New South Wales has is coal. Therefore, the debate tonight is relevant because the subject of the export of coal from New South Wales is crucial to that State's future not only in terms of its capacity to provide the sorts of services the people of New South Wales want but also its capacity to supply employment and the levels of infrastructure that will allow the full development of coal and the full development of important public works and facilities.
In the total world scene the emphasis on the export and development of coal has meant that Australia is now competing with the big league for markets. Our main competitors at the moment are the United States of America and South Africa. These two large producing nations are the nations that will endeavour to beat Australia in respect of markets. They will be the nations that will take up markets if Australia does not fill them. I understand that at the moment the United States has difficulties in respect of its massive exports of coal. The problems are related to the depth of ports. I understand that in the ports of Hampton Road and Mobile the maximum tonnage of ships that can take on coal is 18,000 tonnes. However, a port development program has already commenced in the United States and within two years these ports will be capable of handling 100 million tonnes of coal. In fact it is predicted that from the coalfields of America-from already developed sites-it is possible in a very short time to bring on line a total of 100 million tonnes of coal. Within two years, our major competitors can take the markets that Australia is presently fighting for.

Coal Loader Capacity

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1581

To give the House some idea of what these markets may mean, I mention that France has just completed the first of 23 1,000 megawatt coalfired electricity producing facilities; and, when the 23 come on stream, it is estimated that France will need yearly something like 40 million tonnes of coal. This year France is only importing 12 million tonnes. So we see a growth as France develops its coal-fired facilities for the production of electricity with an increase from 12 million tonnes to 40 million tonnes of coal.
Italy, a country that people consider will not advance, is in fact planning to use 60 million tonnes of coal by 1990, a short nine years away. The sums required by the French and the Italians total something like 100 million tonnes, an amount of coal that can be readily supplied by the United States within the short period of two years. That is the sort of competition that Australia faces. Those are the sorts of pressures that New South Wales faces on jobs, infrastructure and our capacity to trade. At the moment, the United States and Canada are very successfully taking part of the Australian-Japanese market. The United States already exports 15 million tonnes of coal to Japan and Canada exports 3 million tonnes. These are sensitive markets that Australians need to safeguard. In each of the last three years, New South Wales has lost $70m through lack of capacity, lack of planning and union activity. In three years, the citizens and industry of the State have been denied $210m. This is the start of a trend that is emphasised by the industrial disputes and difficulties being experienced in Newcastle.
Loaders in New South Wales and the ports of New South Wales are fully committed. They are at capacity when one considers the requirements that have been placed on them by contract& that must be fulfilled. We are looking at a difficult situation in the State where our competitors will fill markets unless we are reliable, and take jobs away unless we can meet our commitments. We are looking at circumstances where, within two years, unless New South Wales gets its act together, its major capacity for economic expansion will be gone. I think that these difficulties are accentuated by the stupidity that we see going on between men seeking to get some small share of this development. I think that a proper consideration of this matter would indicate that the prospects for everyone are substantial.
To give the House some idea of those people who are involved in the dispute at Newcastle, which has tied up 38 ships and which is costing perhaps something like $12,000 a day, I mention that among the unions involved are the Federated

Engine Drivers and Firemen's Association of Australasia, the Federated Iron workers Association of Australia, the Electrical Trades Union of Australia, the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union, the Maritime Services Board Officers Association, the Foremen Stevedores Association of Australia, the Association of Professional Engineers, Australia, the Plumbers and Gasfitters Employees Union of Australia, and some others. What a list of organisations involved on this site, all stopping the people of New South Wales having some advantage from the only source of economic development that that State possesses.
I think that it is interesting also to pursue the attitude of those who are involved. We must look at something of that port's present capacity. Quoting from the Sydney M orning H erald of yesterday's date, the port's present coal loading capacity is now 16 million tonnes a year. Port Waratah's facilities are being extended to expand total capacity to 25 million tonnes by December next year. But exports through the port, now 15 million tonnes a year, are expected to rise to 18 million this year, 23 million tonnes next year and 26 million tonnes in 1983, if the loading capaCity exists. The demand for 1984 could run as high as 30 million tonnes. At a price of $50 a tonne-it could be more-that represents a figure of $1 ,500m a year. That capacity is a threat. That capacity will be lost and, for the citizens of New South Wales, it will be wasted. We can lay the blame fairly at the feet of the New South Wales Government. Twelve months ago it was offered the prospect of a private enterprise consortium constructing a coal loader for $290m. Within recent weeks the Government has said that it can construct something similar for the small sum of $365m, which is a massive increase. That is typical New South Wales Government activity. It involves itself and does the job more slowly but more expensively. The actual cost is somewhere near $500m. The cost predicted by the Secretary of the Newcastle branch of the Transport Workers Union of Australia, Mr Barry Joy, is something like $500m. So we see the job at least one year late and costing somewhere near twice as much.
If honourable members look at the situation in New South Wales, they will see that wherever port facilities are being developed for the export of coal, they have either been cancelled or they are running late, by as much as two years. For instance, the Balmain facility is running two years late. The tragedy of this problem is that the New South Wales Government has decided that it will develop through its own offices a consortium that

1582 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Coal Loader Capacity

will include the Maritime Services Board. The Government has indicated that this will allow a capacity for those unions involved to buy shares and to involve themselves in the management of the site. The State Government's proposal is to purchase 20 per cent of the shares for the facility which will develop the coal loader. However, I understand that the proposal put forward by the New South Wales Government is that it wishes to have 40 per cent membership of the Board. For a 20 per cent equity, that seems quite substantial. The threat to the operators will be-it was expressed in the State House today by the Premier-that, unless the coal proprietors agree, they will lose their capacity to operate. They will lose their capacity to produce coal. That threat was clearly spelt out in the State House today by Mr Wran. That is the way in which this system will work-a 40 per cent union control of the Board for a 20 per cent equity capital. Apart from the 40 per cent control of the Board, the State Government will have the capacity to threaten that Board with the loss of its lease for coal development if it does not co-operate with the needs of the State Government. All of this is public activity at its worst.
We shall see within the next week Mr Wran, the Premier and Treasurer of New South Wales, come to this capital city begging for money, asking for more funds for infrastructure and loans and at the same time saying that he needs these funds for schools and hospitals. The Minister at the table, the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar), has quibbled with the State Minister for Health over a paltry $17m that the State Minister has not drawn upon. Yet we have here a project on which the State Government expects to spend over $300m, possibly $500m. The New South Wales Government will come to Canberra to ask for funds for infrastructure, for schools, hospitals and services; yet money is being wasted in this way in developing coal facilities. The State Government has had the offer made to it. There is no need for public enterprise or public participation in this project in Newcastle. The further the State Government, Mr Wran and Mr Ferguson-the New South Wales Minister for Public Works-stay away from this project, the better it will operate.
In conclusion, I quote comments made by the Secretary of the Transport Workers Union in Newcastle who wrote to Mr Ferguson in these terms:
Mr Minister, there have been suggestions that your Government is in a 'no-win' situation. Be that as it may, such a situation has been caused by your own department's ineptitude.
Those are the comments of the unionists in Newcastle and the rightly deserved criticism of the

Minister in New South Wales. In conclusion, he said:
Mr Ferguson, when will you tell the people the Government will not jeopardise project roadbuilding programs, much needed school building construction and job creation programs for schoolleavers? When will you tell the political ideologists the truth: We cannot afford it and neither can they! (After all, the completed project will cost $500 million, if commenced within the next month).
In response, Mr Wran said that the Cabinet had approved the formation of a new company in which the Government would hold a 20 per cent equity. Mr Joy replied:
'How any free-enterprise operation can exist if controlled by a 20 per cent interest in addition to being told who they will employ and on what terms is beyond comprehension'.
But simply, the Government has taken the first steps in nationalising the coal industry of this State and has put at risk the continuance of overseas export markets and long-term development of Hunter Valley coal interests and associated infrastructure.
It is a sad day when a State of this country has a capacity to advance but will not take it up and when, through inaction and ineptitude, it brings itself to the same level as some of the people that it so rightly criticises for holding the world to ransom over oil supplies. It would seem that Australia is in a marvellous position today with regard to energy. I am most concerned that Australia, particularly the Premier of New South Wales and his Government, may be compared with some of those sheiks in Iran who have sought to hold the world to ransom for energy. In fact, I put it to the House that Mr Wran may well be the new Ayatollah of Australia.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mt' GiJes)- Order! The public gallery on the left hand side of the chamber has not been behaving very well tonight. No conversation and no barracking or siding with political groups is allowed in the publicgallery. If that is not obeyed in spirit, I will ask for the members of the gallery to be removed.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (9.43)-This motion is about a very serious issue. It is one for the sovereign Government of New South Wales to solve. I read the notice of motion after it was given in the House on 2 April-the day after April Fool's Day-by the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume). I know about this issue. I have been putting pressure on the New South Wales Government. From my analysis of the issue, there was plenty of room to get down to the guts of the issue, but I do not think that honourable members opposite have actually got down to the guts of the issue. All of the debate has been on the phrase 'industrial disruption'. There is not much disagreement about the problem caused by industrial disruption in this matter. Tonight we have had

Coal Loader Capacity

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1583

members denigrating an Australian industry, talking down confidence in the New South Wales coal industry and attacking the New South Wales Government. This motion is a fatuous motion that will change nothing. I realise that John Mason cannot help himself or the Liberal Party in New South Wales, but the New South Wales Parliament is the Parliament where this matter should be debated, not here. Honourable members opposite have concentrated on the phrase 'industrial disruption'. They dealt with sub-paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of paragraph 2 concerning coal loading at Newcastle, Botany Bay and Port Kembla. If I have time, I will get on to those specific issues.
Let us look at what honourable members opposite have said. The honourable member for Macarthur started off by saying that the coal situation in New South Wales is a disaster. The Wran Government has said that every tonne of coal produced for export will be exported and the transport facilities will be provided. Every year the amount of coal going out of New South Wales has gone up. The second point he made was that there are two kinds of unionists. There are the hard-working unionists who never strike-the coalminers and the members of the Transport Workers Union-and there are the bad unionists at the ports who strike, people such as the pilots. Somehow, if an extra private coal loader were built the pilots would not go on strike any more. This is a very selective quotation of the various views of the trade~nions involved in this industry.
The honourable member for Mitchell (Mr Cadman) mentioned the multiplicity of the trade unions involved in the coal exporting, mining and transport industries. We all know the problems caused by the proliferation of unions in this country, but who knocked back in the Senate every move for a union amalgamation when the Australian Labor Party was in government? The third main point about the speech of the honourable member for Macarthur is that he really made no case in terms of getting down to the specifics. He never really explained how the building of more loaders would solve industrial unrest. . Mr Baume-Private enterprise loaders.
Mr KERIN~That would' not make any difference.
Mr Baume-The private enterprise loader does not have industrial disruption.
Mr KERIN-Rubbish! Would that stop pilots striking on the ships that take the tugs out? Would that stop various other people striking if it comes to the crunch? Do not be silly! The honourable member for Calare (Mr MacKenzie) did

some selective quoting from newspapers. He said that they were responsible journals. I can quote from all the newspaper editorials in Sydney after the Simblist report on Botany Bay was presented. Those editorials agreed with the conclusions of the New South Wales Government in following the recommendations of that inquiry into Botany Bay. Let us not have too much of this selective quoting.
The honourable member for Calare was given permission to table a lot of figures and data about ships at the ports. I think we also need to make an analysis of the number of ships tied up at anyone time. I am not trying to qualify the argument, but in considering the bold figure of 38 ships one has to take into account a few other things. Some are on global contracts, some are tramps and some are positioned ahead of schedule. A range of things should be taken into account in this respect. Even so, we all know that too many ships are tied up and that industrial disruption is a major problem. There is no disagreement about that. But that is not the key area of the motion before the House. The key area is the question of the coal loaders in the three ports concerned.
The honourable member for Mitchell virtually ignored the motion for the first five minutes of his speech. He told us all about good old king coal. When Rex Connor used to tell us about king coal honourable members opposite used to laugh at him. The honourable member for Mitchell went on to talk about industrial disputes and then he said that the 20 per cent equity in the Newcastle coal loader would be accompanied by a 40 per cent representation on the board. That is just not so. He then made some general points on Commonwealth-State financial arrangements. I would like to get on to that in a moment.
This motion was cooked up by the honourable member for Macarthur. I have always been very kind to him and he to me,but the man who sold shares that did not exist when he was with Patrick Partners now wants to sell us some arguments that do not exist. The electorate of the honourable member for Macarthur borders mine and, to an extent, I am aware of his statements in print. Macarthur is an electorate I once represented and Werriwa also shares the problems he indentifies with his electorate inasmuch as miners and coal truck drivers from Werriwa are engaged in coal mining in the Burragorang Valley and the mines between the Valley and the Illawarra escarpment. I mention the mines of Appin and Westcliff.
The honourable member's motion is partially a gimmick to push the interests of one small segment of the industry. I am quite sure that after

1584 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Coal Loader Capacity

this debate the Press will be full of it. The honourable member spends a lot of his time on public relations ex.cercises and attacking the New South Wales Government. This is another variation of the theme. I am rather disgusted about this. I want to make some general points on the matter. The whole coal strategy of New South Wales cannot be premised in terms of anyone small group. The New South Wales Government is a sovereign government and has every right to make up its own mind as to the best way to handle New South Wales coal without advice from this Parliament. The sovereign Government of New South Wales announced in 1978 that, with the completion of the coal loader at Port Kembla in 1982, only 2 million tonnes of coal will be transported to the loader by road. If it is all right for the sovereign Government of Queensland to transport coal by rail and if it is all right for the West Australian Government to transport iron ore by rail, why is it not all right for the New South Wales Government basically to follow a rail strategy? After all, we heard a lot from the Liberal-National Country parties in opposition about sovereignty and State rights. They spoke about how the States were being forced to do this and do that.
All this Government is doing is fighting the States at every turn on funds for infrastructure. The Fraser Government is trying to get the public relations benefit of the resources boom; yet' it and the Treasury are trying to strangle it at birth by denying funds to the States. The Fraser Government has chopped down on funds for transport. This Government is trying to force the States to impose an income tax and it is harassing and hectoring the States at every opportunity to cut down on their public services. Then it is being critical of the States if any of the services can be alleged to have declined. The motion before the House raises three specific questions relating to Newcastle, Botany Bay and Port Kembla. Honourable members opposite have concentrated on industrial disruption. We all agree that there is far too much of that. The first part of the motion before the House states:
(a) allow private enterprise to build the additional coal loader capacity in Newcastle required to meet substantially rising demand for steaming coal;
The third coal loader will be a private enterprise operation to the degree of 80 per cent. The New South Wales Government will have 20 per cent ownership. It will be built and run on the basis of 80 per cent and 20 per cent ownership. The Government is inviting responses from the industry now. There are plans also for a fourth coal loader. Already intensive studies are going on. As

people well know the Coal Export Strategy Committee-which reported to the New South Wales Parliament in March 1979-led to the setting up of another task force and a bigger committee which is known as the Coal Resources Development Committee on which there are representatives of industry, unions, local government and various departments. I will not go through them all. The second part of the motion before the House states:
(b) re-examine the urgent need for the construction by private enterprise of a coal loader in Botany Bay to cater for western and south western steaming and coking coals.
The Botany Bay issue is a dead letter. It has not been stirred up for years. I am quite amazed. There is no sense in this Parliament making some fatuous declaration about Botany Bay. Everyone in the industry to whom I speak knows that this is not an option any more. If we go back to that issue, the opponents ignore the independent Australian National University study-the one under Professor Noel Butlin-which was sponsored by the Botany Bay Project Management Committee and which included the Australian Academy of Science, the Australian Academy of the Social Sciences and the Australian Academy of the Humanities. It was a totally independent report as those academies do not have vested interests. The report stated:
The loading of coal at Port Botany appears to be undesirable for both economic and environmental reasons. The main case for expanded coal facilities is at Newcastle. The main case for improving the environmental impact of coal loading appears to be in Port Kembla where there is also a case for some expansion of capacity.
The proposal for export of coal from Port Botany should, we believe, be abandoned in its entirety and the port area currently reserved for this use reallocated.
We could go on quoting from reports. After that report we have the Simblist report which stated that the coal loader project should not proceed at this stage. These were not shoddy small reports put our by the State Pollution Control Commission under the New South Wales Liberal Government. These were comprehensive, wide, and properly based reprorts. The environmentalists were not even happy with that. They said that a lot of things still had not been taken into account. The Botany Bay region has been wiped by every responsible authority that has ever looked at it. I said earlier that the Sydney Press also believed, when the Government went along with the Simblist report, that it was dong the right thing. Let us not have selective quotes. Simblist QC. demolished the report of the former State Pollution Control Commission very effectively. He said that he was distressed by what has happened in Botany Bay. He was distressed by the

Coal Loader Capacity

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1585

degradation and found it all very disturbing. will go on through their areas? I see a lot of poten-

Kembla Coal and Coke Pty Ltd and Austen and tial for Ii deal of negotiation in this area. When

Butta Ltd agreed with the Government's decision honourable members raise a serious matter I wish

at that time.

that they would not have a crack at the New

I turn now to the third part of the motion before the House. I would have thought that these
three items would have been discussed the most and not the question of industrial disruption. The expansion that is under way at Port Kembla is a
big expansion. The logistics of getting the coal to the loader is what the argument is all about. This is a rather peculiar way of arguing for an increase in the capacity of the proposed coal loader to re-
ceive coal transported by road in excess of the stated two million tonnes. When the coal loader is built the capacity will be there. There is no need
to expand it in order to get more tonnages into it. This seems to be a peculiar way of dealing with
the problem.

South Wales Government as they cannot alter anything that is going on there. It is up to the industry to keep arguing with the New South Wales Government. It is up to all the people involved in this problem to solve it. We should not have fatuous motions from honourable members in this House.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (9.57)-1 congratulate the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) for bringing on this motion for debate tonight. Honourable members opposite seem to think that the national government has nothing to do with motions. Well, it certainly has. We are interested to see that our coal is exported to bring income into this country, apart from that coal which is being used in our great power stations.

The honourable member for Cunningham (Mr
West) has explained to the House the great prob-
lems being experienced in his city. He has already said that a decision was reached by the New South Wales Government and it was a very hot issue. He said that the Wollongong and Port Kembla

We are interested to see that the mining companies are profitable so that the Federal Government and the nation will receive some revenue. So we have every right to bring forward matters such as this motion and to see that they are debated in this Parliament.

people who basically will not get a buck out of the Of course, the coal industry is our biggest

coal that is going through their city would not tolexport earner. The world wants 200 million

erate all that coal being hauled through it. Whattonnes of export coal. At present we ship 40

ever views honourable members might have on million tonnes. The world wants to double that

that, it was a decision taken by the New South figure by 1990. This will mean 200 million tonnes

Wales sovereign Government. There is no sense in by the year 2000. It can be seen that there is a

having for political gain sovereign Government. world market and a great demand for our coal. In

There is no sense in having fatuous motions for the Paterson electorate at present the greatest de-

political gain being moved by people whose elecvelopment in this industry is taking place. Mines

torates adjoin this area.

are opening up right along the Hunter Valley to

The big problem with which these companies are faced is getting the coal to the coast. Clutha Development Pty Ltd, Kembla Coal and Coke, and Austen and Butta have been discussing this matter continually with the New South Wales
Government. I understand the tensions between them as I know the industry's case. Clutha has two or three proposals before the New Sbuth Wales Government at present. I do not think it is true to say that that company signed a letter of intent with Lend Lease Corporation Ltd but it knows that it has to get the coal off the roads by late next year. One of the suggestions is the tri-
modal proposal of road to the scarp, down by a driftand then by rail to the coal loader. Of course that rail point has to be south of the Scarborough
Tunn~l.

Singleton, Warkworth, Muswellbrook, Denman and further out to the Ulan Colliery which is owned by White Industries. These mines are of great assistance to the industry generally. Then we go over the range to Gunnedah where, apart from the existing mines, we have big open cut mines being opened. We then go to Boggabri where Amax Exploration (Australia) Inc. and Broken Hill Pty Co. Ltd are opening mining
operations.
These mines will cause considerable problems in getting coal to the seaboard. This is where the New South Wales Government has fallen down on its job. No rail facilities are being provided and there is a lack of rolling stock and road transport. A twenty-seven tonne truck loaded with coal passes along the New England highway every minute and a half or two minutes, going to Branx-

Other things are in the pipeline. How can we ton where they are dumping coal, and going to the

ask the people of Port Kembla orWollongong to port of Newcastle. This is causing considerable

put up with the enormous movement of coal that . traffic problems and other problems for local

1586 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Coal Loader Capacity

government in the areas in which this is taking place.
It is absolutely essential that a third coal loader be built at the port of Newcastle immediately to assist in the export of coal from the Hunter Valley-the area I have just mentioned-where great progress has been made. Coal sales and export receipts of more than $300m could be lost if there are any further delays in plans for the construction of the third coal loader at Kooragang Island. Delays in the construction program for the coal loader could cause a shortfall of seven million tonnes to 10 million tonnes in the shipment capacity needed at Newcastle by the mid-1980s.
Such a shortfall in capacity could well result in the permanent loss of export opportunities for Hunter Valley coal. The colliery proprietors have called on the State Government to draw up plans for a loader of conventional size and design, rather than the massive loader that is proposed by the Maritime Services Board. They have also called on the Government to reach prompt agreement on equity structuring and financing in respect of the loader. The deadline for applications by groups wishing to take equity in the third Newcastle coal loader closed on Monday 6 April. Despite the New South Wales Government's inability to provide detailed financial information on the $230m project, and although the Government's long-promised prospectus has not materialised, New South Wales coal producers and shippers have agreed to apply for stakes in the controversial project. As has been mentioned, the New South Wales Government will take a 20 per cent share in the company operating the loader. The remaining equity will be open to the private sector.
The largest seaborne fleet to assemble off an Australian port-35 bulk carriers totalling 1.5 million dead weight tonnes-has been lying for weeks off Newcastle as a result of industrial disputes. The disputes have halted loading at the port, and delayed the export from Newcastle, of some $60m worth of steaming coal. They have added millions to the cost of shipping that coal.
When one travels overseas and has the good fortune to visit Japan, Korea and other countries, the first thing one is asked by men in the coal industry is: 'Why can we not rely on supplies of coal from Australia? Why can we not depend on, and have provided, reliable shipping?' For instance, Colonel Kim of Pohang Steel in Korea-one of our biggest buyers of coal-has said that because of the shipping delays at Australian ports it is necessary to stockpile far more coal than is needed.

The main cause of the hold-up at Newcastle has been the month-long New South Wales railways shunters' strike, which halted rail deliveries of coal to the port. These shunters put a darg of 500 tonnes per train on the coal that could be brought by rail to the port of Newcastle. What a tragedy it is to go up the New England Highway and pass trains with only eight, nine or 10 loaded trucks, instead of trains carrying some 2,000 or 3,000 tonnes of coal.
Another dispute which is building up could have a far more devastating effect upon the booming New South Wales coal export trade. Two groups of unions manning the present coal loaders are locked in a bitter dispute over who should control the proposed third coal loader-the Government or private enterprise-and whose members should man it. The maritime unions installed at the Government-owned Basin loader, and the group dominated by the Transport Workers Union manning the privately-owned Port Waratah loader, are threatening to stop construction of the urgently needed third loader unless they get their way. The maritime unions have already staged a series of rolling strikes which have aggravated shipping hold-ups at the port and a TWU ban has stopped dredging work in preparation for the third loader at Kooragang Island. What is wrong with the unions? Why do they not see that they are destroying the wonderfuUnclustry that this country is endeavouring to buildupr with great benefit to the nation's export income. Some 366 men are involved. The Miners Federation has called in the New South Wales Labour Council to settle the dispute. I say, good on the Miners Federation for taking this stand and endeavouring to bring some sanity to the two unions that are at loggerheads.
The Government is racing against time to expand the coal loading capacity at the port to cope with the rising demand, which could exceed the current loading capacity by 1983. One has only to travel in the Paterson ele'ctorate up the New England Highway to see the tremendous amount of coal that is coming down to the port. With more mines being operated there, the load will be far greater. The Government turned down an offer by the consortium which owns the Port Waratah loader to finance, build imd operate the third loader by December 1983 at a first statge cost of $290m. Some 18 months after receiving that offer the Government proposed instead a consortium in which the Maritime Services Board-that is, the Government-would have a 20 per cent share, but the Government did not spell out who would control it. The Government proposed that the maritime unions would staff it.

( Coal Loader Capacity
i

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1587

The TWU members have denounced the proposal. Colliery proprietors and industry associates have held back from joining it pending the receipt of firmer assurances from the Government. Last Monday was the deadline for replies to the Government's invitation to invest in the project. It is understood that the Government is pleased with the response, but coal mining industry authorities are sceptical that the response has been adequate.
Why cannot this coal loader be built by private enterprise? The coal industry and the colliery owners are prepared to finance it, yet the New South Wales Government wants to delay it as long as possible. That is the policy of the New South Wales Government, which says that it has not the finance to build the loader itself. However, it adds that if it does get sufficient private backing the feuding between the two unions will have to be resolved. Delays must be eliminated or the loss to New South Wales, in terms of coal exports, will be all the greater. It could run into millions and millions of dollars. If it is a loss to New South Wales it also represents a great loss to the Commonwealth, because we are interested in seeing that the mining industries are profitable. However, profit seems to be a dirty word on the other side of the chamber.
The port's present coal loading capacity is now 16 million tonnes a year. Port Watatah's facilities are being extended to give it a capacity, by December of next year, of 25 million tonnes. Exports now total 15 million tonnes, but are expected to rise to 18 million tonnes this year, to 23 million tonnes next year and to 26 million tonnes in 1983-if the loading capacity exists. The provision of the loading facilities at the Port of Newcastle is the important aspect. In 1984 demand could run as high as 30 million tonnes. At a price of $50 a tonne-and it could be higherthat represents an income of $1,500m a year. If New South Wales cannot load the coal it will lose $50m for everyone million tonnes by which its capacity falls short. Delays in the turnround time of ships, which currently stands at 20 days, will erode the competitiveness of New South Wales coal in the export market. While the darg by the shunters was in effect, the time taken to load a coal truck was up to 10 days instead of perhaps two.
It is essential that a coal loader be established in Botany Bay to take south western and western steaming and coking coal. With increased output to take care of export trade, it is essential that the necessary facilities be provided. There is a rail link to Botany Bay and port facilities also are present.

It is disastrous that a coal loader has not been constructed in that area. In view of the inability for at least five years of the New South Wales Railways to provide adequate handling capacity, it is essential to increase the capacity of the proposed Port Kembla loader. At that port, south of Sydney, the Government has prevented Clutha Development Company from building a system of conveyor belts to ship coal to the colliers that are banked up off-shore. Instead, the coal is moved by road, with a disastrous safety record, and transport bottlenecks prevent mines from being developed and brought into production. Coal hauled from the south and west to Sydney, within sight of Botany Bay, is then-after choking out the main southern rail line-dragged back to congest Port Kembla. This also has dumbfounded the industry. According to the coal industry, cancelling the proposed coal loader at Botany Bay was a disaster.
We support the motion that has been brought forward by my colleague, the honourable member for Macarthur. We want to see that our great coal mining industry is assisted and given protection. We have a great opportunity to increase our export trade in other markets around the world but we must have the facilities to load the ships. If we do not do this we will be beaten to this overseas trade by the United States of America, Canada and other countries that are prepared to work around the clock and to give service to the customers that they supply.
Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes) (lO.lO)-The House is treated tonight to a very unusual debate. We are probably fighting out of our class in that we are trying to tell a sovereign State government which has a very great record how to run its affairs. It seems ironic that such an attitude comes from a Government which is so incapable of running its own affairs that it has to pull on this kind of discussion to keep the Parliament in progress. There is no legislation, no objectivity of any kind at all. We have this verbose and garrulous honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) engaging in pre-State election political opportunism which, of course, is of the variety that we can expect from here on to election day in New South Wales. The people of Australia ought not to be fooled into believing that there is any sincere intention on the part of this Government to help any State that might be lagging or flagging in respect of the development of any of its industries.
The fact of the matter is that this Government has virtually abdicated responsibility in almost every area. That is why we are without legislation. This is a laissez-faire government which is prepared to turn the whole development of Australia over to the multinationals and interests of people

1588 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Coal Loader Capacity

overseas who dominate it. I think some impertinence was expressed in this motion that is before the House at the present time. The first paragraph of the motion alleges that there are delays in building coal loaders in New South Wales. The fact of the matter is that we have had a most unprecedented rate of development in the coal industry in that State. It is a fact also that private industry does not find New South Wales unattractive by any means. If there is any problem at all it is because coal mining is developing at such a rapid and successful rate that there is a problem in getting the coal out of the ports.
The honourable member for Macarthur went on to contend that we should have private enterprise build the coal loader at Port Waratah, heaven knowns what for. Obviously a great philosophical consideration is involved in this. The honourable gentleman's attitude and that of many of his colleagues have always been that one turns whatever one can over to people who have no interest in anything other than the exploitation of other people and in making a quid at anybody's expense. But there is an opposite philosophical point of view. It is to this effect: There are resources in the ground that belong to the Australian people. That is the first factor. The second factor is that the prospects are that those resources can be exploited by the Australian people who labour in the mines, on the waterfront and on the loaders. There is a third factor and it happens to be the entrepreneurial factor. This Government takes the view that that should be the dominating factor. Because some smart people come along-sometimes they are extremely competent people-and use the money of ordinary people which they derive from the great financial institutions of Australia or the world, they believe that they are the only ones who should have a say in anything, that they should run the whole concern and that they should reap the massive proceeds rather than the people who should derive considerable welfare and well-being from such activities. It so happens that there are people in this country, typified by members of the Labor Opposition here, who have a different point of view.
Of course, the honourable member went on to make the ungainly and outrageous suggestion that we should stick a coal loader in the middle of Botany Bay. We should take into account just one of the facts, that this is the very birthplace of the nation. Can one ever imagine the Americans putting a coal loader at-what is the place?
Mr Barry J ones-Williamsburg.

Mr LES JOHNSON-Williamsburg; goodness me, what a sacrilege! It is bad enough that events developed before we started to get conscious of our heritage, events that cause oil refineries to be built. at Kurnell. To think we are going to despoil this lovely waterway for the purpose of maybe making just a little more, a marginal additional amount of profit, as against putting the loader somewhere else is obviously a totally outrageous suggestion. I do not think that the honourable gentleman has a feather to fly
with.

I picked out of one of my files today a Cabinet paper. I do not have many papers around Parliament House but this is a Cabinet paper of 7 January 1975. I do not mind telling the House what the first couple of paragraphs state:

The Cabinet-

(a) agreed in principle to the Government's participation in a scheme for upgrading designated coal ports in New South Wales and Queensland; and

(b) agreed that the State governments be advised of the Government's Willingness to provide financial assistance towards these developments on the understa-nding that the Government--

This is the Federal Government,. the Labor Government--c

would share in the ownership and control of the facili-

ties provided and the port in proportion to its financial

contribution; and

(c) authorised the Minister for Transport in consultation

with the Minister for Minerals and Energy to develop

a suitable program in co-operation with the

States . . .

.

That was decision 3,096 of the Whitlam Government. That is a little different from the attitude taken now by this Government which is shifting the whole arrangements and, as I have said, has abdicated any responsibilities so far as it is concerned in respect of the exploitation of our resources and the development of coal loaders. Now it is a question of turning the States over t.o their own resources. If one happens to be in a rich resource State, one can wax fat, one can live well and to hell with the rest of Australia! That is the attitude of this Government. It is now giving approval to the Queensland Government to rip off in some cases the coal mining companies. It is an incredible state of affairs that has developed. It is not a national point of view. But the BjelkePetersen Government can get in there now and can impose all kinds of liabilities on potential coal developers, so that they need to develop not only the railway lines but also they need to pay for the rolling costs. They can derive whatever profit they like. The amount of money that would come to the people of Australia, as against the people in the resource rich area, of course, is minimal. What

Coal Loader Capacity

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1589

the Government is doing in this unprincipled way Mr CHARLES JONES (Newcastle)

is carving up Australia into six different States- (10.21)-1 thank the honourable member for

and a couple of territories. We are losing our Hughes (Mr Les Johnson) for giving me a few

national pride, our national identity, our national minutes. I do not thank my three colleagues who

heritage, our national planning and any semspoke before him. This debate concerns a coal

blance of decent national economic objectivity. loader in the Newcastle electorate. To begin with,

This is an absurd state of affairs. Of course, everyI seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard a

thing that is before us in the form of this motion is legal opinion on the constitutional rights and

unaccountable.

powers of this Parliament to build coal loaders

and ports.

Let us look at the New South Wales situation. The capacity of the coal loaders at Port Kembla is 7.2 million tonnes per annum. This is a bit discon-

Leave granted. The document read as follows-

certing, I must admit. I have received a message that Charlie Jones is to talk now, and I should stop now. I was just about to start making the major part of my speech. I would be very anxious to accommodate my colleague from Newcastle. I will have to conclude my remarks to give the

4. So far as they are relevant for present purposes, paragraphs (i) and (xxxi) of section 51 of the Constitution provide as follows:
'51. The Parliament shall . . . have power to make laws . . . with respect to:
(i) Trade and commerce with other countries

honourable member 10 minutes to speak. I sup-

pose I have a right to speak for the coal mining in- (xxxi) The acquisition of property on just terms from any

dustry. In my electorate I have Coalcliff, Coledale, Scarborough, Bulli, Corrimal and

State or person for any purpose in respect of which the Parliament has power to make laws.'

Helensburgh-some .of the great underground coal mines in Australia-the greatest coal mines in Australia, the ones of long-standing. I know of their problems. But I also represent a great part of

5. These sections clearly enable the Australian Parliament to pass legislation providing for the acquisition of the land in question and for the operation by Australia of the export coalloading facility. Even in the absence of legislation (other than the appropriation of necessary moneys) the Australian

Sydney which is on the foreshores of Botany Bay.

Government could build an export coal-loader or operate acquired export loading facilities. However, in the absence of

I conclude my remarks by drawing attention to the Botany Bay port and environment inquiry. It has knocked out the proposition that there should be a coal loader at Botany Bay on the grounds of

legislation authorizing these operations, action by the State could give rise to problems.
6. In regard to acquisition, unless special legislation were enacted, the acquisition of the site and improvements could only be effected under the Lands Acquisition Act 1955-1973

visual intrusion, dust, noise, water pollution and and would be subject to disallowance by either House of the environmental considerations generally. It is a Parliament of the notice of acquisition.

great document to read. I am astounded that the honourable member for Macarthur has not read it. I say to honourable members that under no circumstances should we consider the ruination of

7. If the property were acquired under the Lands Acquisition Act, compensation would be payable to the New South Wales Government and to the Company in accordance with
that Act. The Act is administered by the Department of Services and Property and I suggest that you obtain advice from

one of Australia's great waterways. We should give assistance to the New South Wales Government to enable it to get on with the great job it already has underway at Port Kembla and Newcastle to facilitate the loading of coal in one of the greatest industrial booms Australia has known. Instead of this negative, disparaging talk which has been initiated by the honourable member for Macarthur, we should think proudly of the fact not only that over decades New South Wales has been a very great and productive State but also

that Department concerning the likely amount of compensation. I shall, of course, be available to advise on any legal problems if they should arise in that respect.
8. If special legislation were to be enacted to authorize the acquisition, it would still have to provide 'just terms' to the State and the Company. I think it unlikely that such legislation could validly provide terms substantially more favourable to the Australian Government than those provided under the Lands Acquisition Act.
9. You have also asked me to advise on the likelihood of a High Court challenge to an acquisition by the Australian Government of the proposed site. In my view there would be no doubt as to the powers of the Government if the acqui-

that it now has a government lead by the most sition were made in accordance with the Lands Acquisition popular parliamentarian and Premier in the Act.

whole of Australia. Regardless of any disparaging Mr CHARLES JONES-I thank the Minister

comments from honourable members opposite, for Housing and Construction (Mf McVeigh).

they can rest assured that, when the next State and I thank the House. This legal opinion clearly

elections come around, that government will be establishes the right and the power of this Parlia-

returned to get on with its job of building coal ment to build and operate a coal loader in any

loaders and developing that great State.

State. Under the Constitution. the Australian

1590 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Coal Loader Capacity

Parliament has the right and power to do just that. When the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) comes into this place and moves a motion such as he did, he should look at why this Parliament, or this Government, has not taken action. On the information that I have been able to obtain-and the Government can get it-why is the blame not placed where it really belongs, that is, on this Parliament and this Government because the Government has the right and the power to operate ports, including coal loaders. The Government should not run away from the issue and blame someone else for the position that exists today.
This Government has an excellent record of handling industrial disputes! I ask honourable members to consider the recent Professional Radio Employees Institute dispute in airports i throughout Australia. It is an excellent record! I suggest to the honourable member for Macarthur that the Government did very well in that dispute. What did the Government do about the recent . Qantas Airways Ltd dispute and about the Telecom Australia and Australia Post disputes? I Do honourable members want me to go on and to refer to the rest of them? This' Government has just as bad a reputation as anyone in its handling of industrial disputes. This Government has never i shone in the field of industrial disputes. The workers involved in the PREI and Telecom disputes got practically everything that they went on strike for, but this Government set out to provoke a dispute and to cause inconvenience to the public. As far as this present dispute in Newcastle is concerned, I would love to have time to show honourable members what is the position as far as planning is concerned.
Reference has been made to the ability of the present coal loaders to handle demand. At present the port has a capacity of 18 million tonnes. Yet, in the last full year it handled 11.76 million tonnes. Why is the honourable member for Macarthur complaining about capacity? It is there. Already a coal loader is planned and the only factor that is holding it up is a demarcation dispute among unions. They are the plain facts. It is a demarcation dispute between Maritime Services Board unions and the Transport Workers Union group. It is most regrettable that they have not been able to resolve it.
Possibly we could look at an industry union. There is already an industry union at the Port Waratah Coal Services complex and there is no reason why that union could not be extended from the coal face to the port. The unions will talk about it but, when this Government talks about the amalgamation of unions, it makes it so

damned difficult that it is well nigh impossible for an amalgamation to be brought about. The amalgamation of unions to form the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union was most difficult to achieve because of this Government's legislation. There is only one way to eliminate demarcation disputes-I am talking as one who has been involved in many a demarcation disputeand that is to bring about amalgamations. There are practically no demarcation disputes today among the unions involvved in the AMSWU; the disputes are settled internally, and there is no body snatching. This Government should make it much easier to bring about amalgamations.
In regard to the dispute involving the Australian Railways Union shunters, as a citizen of Newcastle I regret seeing those 37 ships-I think that was the maximum number-lying off the port of Newcastle, costing something like $2m a week. At the same time, when we find that an industry gives a certain number. of people a salary or wage above everyone else, we cannot complain if the bloke in the middle, who is on a base rate or on a rate much lower than anyone else, receiving a couple of hundred dollars a fortnight less than other people in the industry, puts on a blue. That is what the shunters' strike is about. If the coal industry as a whole had. ailocated or made availabe to all of the people in the industry and industry allowance such as some of them get that shunters' strike would.not have taken place because ,the fellows would have been getting a wage comparable with the wages of other people in the industry. That is what brought it about.
I have been trying to find out all night the result of the court case on this matter heard today. It will be terribly humorous if we pick up the newspapers tomorrow and find that the fellows involved have received a decent increase as a result of that case. There will be egg on the faces of members of the Government. I regret that I do not have the time to raise a number of other issues, such as the Federal Government setting up the coal loader, and setting up an authority to control, operate and manage these things. I gave an assurance that I would sit down in time to permit the bringing forward of other business. I thank the honourable member for Hughes for curtailing his speech to enable me to make this contribution.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE Mr BAUME (Macarthur)-I present the third report from the Publications Committee sitting in conference with the Publications Committee of the Senate. Copies of the report have been circulated in the chamber.

Adjournment

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1591

Report-by leave-adopted.
ADJOURNMENT Tourism-Problems of Isolation-Nitinol: Shape Memory Alloy-Excise Duty on Alcoholic Beverages-States Grants-Air Fares-Gun
Clubs: Noise Controls Motion (by Mr McVeigh) proposed:
That the .House do now adjourn.
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (10.29)-1 thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, for allowing me to continue the few words I began last night. Before I was interrupted last night, I was talking about tourism and how tourism is important to the southern bayside region of Melbourne, especially in and around the Frankston-Mornington Pensinsula area. The Frankston Council, seeing the need to promote tourism in the area; has been vigorously promoting and encouraging many tourist attractions, such as world class sporting events, to Frankston as one way of spreading the tourist dollar to everyone throughout the region. Frankston Council has asked the Victoriim Premier, Mr Hamer, to consider establishing a separate tourist authority for the Frankston and Mornington Peninsula area. In this move that council has my full support as, historically and geographically, there has always been a connection between these areas.- People in the bayside area are also in a different promotional area to the rest of Melbourne, especially the Healsville authority to which Frankston is presently attached. I cohgratulate the Frankston Council for this progressivemove.
The Council spends thousands of dollars each year on beach cleaning and maintenance and ree ceives Ii dollar for dollar subsidy from the State Government. The Council has worked hard at cleaning and beautifying the Frankston beaches and surrounding areas. As I mentioned earlier, several world class sporting events have been held in Frankston and several are to be held over the next few months. For example, the World Bowls Championships were held at the City of Frankston Bowling Club in January of last year. A total of 130 bowlers participated, representing 20 countries. The International Grand Prix Tennis Tournament was held in the Frankston indoor Tennis stadium in October of last year. This tournament was won by Vitas Gerulaitis. It is to be held again this year from 19 to 25 October. In March of next year the International Fireball World Yachting Series will be held off Frankston. This series will cOVer two distinct but major events,over 22 days, and it is anticipated that up to 170 boats from.20 countries will be competing.

Whilst these events have been and, I am sure, will be very popular and have generated a lot of interest and brought tourists and their money to the area-money which is then generated throughtout small business, shops; indeed, the whole community-one thing is missing and it is common to all these promotions; that is, Federal Government funds. Not one cent of Federal funds has been put into any of these projects. The Frankston Council, through the ratepayers, assisted and aided by private enterprise, has had to put up most of the money. It is a fact that local authorities must fund the majority of big tourist projects. The Federal Government, instead of continuing its hot air rhetoric on the subject and words of encouragement, should do something positive. Here we have a council which is willing to promote recreation and tourism in many ways tQ generate money throughout the community and to help with Frankston's shockingly high unemployment rate. Tourism, being a labour intensive industry, must be looked at seriously by the Government-in fact, any government-in an attempt to relieve the unemployment situation by generating many jobs, as it would. No area needs it more at present than Frankston and the surrounding districts. However, what is the Government doing? It is doing nothing.
Another area that needs a drastic boost is transport. Transport is vital to the tourist industry. Yet the Federal Government has reduced funds, in real terms, for rail projects that the people of the bayside area desperately need. They need a fast and reliable service, not one that is slowly dying because of the choking of Federal funds. Frankston, being some 40 kilometres from Melbourne, relies heavily on having lifast and reliable public transport service to get people to the area. This is especially important in the summer months. The Federal Government should consider direct negotiation and direct funding of local municipalities such as Frankston. The Federal Government should assist the Frankston Council in its efforts to make Frankston and the Mornington Peninsula a really wonderful and attractive tourist area. I commend the Frankston Council for its work and efforts and offer my assistance in any way I can. I sincerely hope that the Federal Government will look at the situation, heed my advice and assist local authorities in their efforts to promote tourism and recreation in their areas.
Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory) (10.34)-TQnight I wish to address the House on the problems of isolation. I am pleased to note that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) is in the House. I preface my remarks by reminding honourable

1592 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Adjournment

members that 30 per cent of Australia's population live in the vast area of land outside the boundaries of the' south-east coastal fdnge. To define isolation as merely having to travel long distances to the nearest major population centre is totally inadequate. More correctly, isolation is the social condition brought about by these long distances. This seems to be an obvious statement, but let us consider some of the conditions brought about by isolation.
Communication is often a problem in the Northern Territory. Only people in the major population centres currently receive television coverage. Under the Government's remote area television program many more communities will receive television coverage in the near future. Nonetheless, the program excludes many thousands of Territorians. A similar situation exists with regard to radio. It is hard for many city dwellers to appreCiate that a large number of people in remote Australia in 1981 still rely on Radio Australia as an important communication link.
When we talk of isolation we talk of areas with little or no public transport, few roads and inevitable high costs of air travel. The report of the Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares has correctly indicated injustices in the air fare pricing system. The Government has since moved to redress them. In the Northern Territory people are forced to travel interstate if they wish to pursue tertiary or specialised studies. Isolated Australians do not have access to a full range of health services. Psychiatric and geriatric care, services for the handicapped, radiotherapy, neurosurgery and alcoholism services are all underdeveloped in the Northern Territory.
I have used these examples to emphasise that isolation is more than just being a long way from a major population centre. To illustrate the significance of these remote areas in Northern Australia, suffice is to say that they contain 85 per cent of Australia's iron ore reserves, 85 per cent of our uranium reserves, 80 per cent of our bauxite reserves, 65 per cent of our copper reserves and 60 per cent of our natural gas. To deny the importance and to prevent the development of these areas is clearly nothing short of lunacy.
It is essential that some incentive be given to attract people to live in these areas. The taxation zone allowance rebate could be an effective way of doing this. It is a meagre price to pay for Australia's development. I put it to the House that the current rebate of $216 per annum is insufficient to encourage people to move to these areas. The level of concessions should be

increased. A rebate in the order of $2,000 per annum would prove far more attractive than the present level. It can hardly be argued that $216 per annum adequately compensates for the disparities between living in remote areas and living in southern cities. Raising the rebate to a more realistic level will not overcome the disabilities associated with remoteness for those on pensions or other social security benefits. Accordingly, supplementary relief should be considered for people in this category. The zone allowance tax rebate is currently under review. I believe the forthcoming Budget must provide the appropriate means of adopting any recommendations and redressing the iniquitous financial disadvantages of people living in the Northern Territory and other isolated areas of Australia.
In the brief time left to me, I wish to draw your attention, Mr Deputy Speaker, to the fact that people who are new to this chamber have not yet had their photographs displayed in the exhibition area below Kings Hall. I think that is an irresponsible act on the part of the Joint House Department. Members of our electorates would certainly like to know, after five months, that.we are here.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (10.39)-1 wish to bring the House up to date on the search for the elusive nitinol. Nitinol is an acronym for Nickel Titanium Naval Ordnance Laboratory. On 26 February I asked the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) a question on notice about nitinol. It is an alloy of nickel and titanium with shape memory characteristics. I followed this up with a question without notice of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on 5 March asking about its development potential for Australia. When the Prime Minister asked me for additional information, I presented his office with a threemetre long computer printout with 59 citations about nitinol, none of them Australian. I want to explain something which appeared in the Scientific American in November' 1975 about shape- , memory. The article stated:
In order for an alloy to exhibit the shape-memory effect it must have a crystal structure that can shift into the configuration known as martensite when it is subjected to a certain temperature or stress and then shift out of it. In a simple example a wire of shape-memory alloy might be bent at room temperature into the form of a four-leaf clover. Then the wire is heated until its crystal structure assumes a high-temperature configuration called the beta or parent phrase. Next the wire is rapidly cooled, so that the atoms in the metal rearrange themselves into the crystal form of martensite. One can now bend or twist the wire into any other form. If the wire is later heated to a temperature above that at which the martensite reverts to the parent phase, there is an orderly shift of large groups of atoms that restores the original cloverleaf form. Since the martensite transformation is essential for the shapememory effect, alloys that exhibit memory are also known as marmem alloys.

Adjournment

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1593

In the United States, West Germany and Japan nitinol heat engines have been developed. They appear to be the most efficient form of converting low grade heat to motion with up to 80 per cent efficiency. Nitinol engines can be powered, in effect, by exciting the rotor of the engine by contact with cold and hot water. This is an example of a high technology industry where Australia could get in first if we had the enterprise to do it. Nitinol engines could have significant export potential in Third World countries lacking primary energy resources where pumping, electricity generation, air conditioning and some manufacturing activity could be carried out, powered by waste water and solar heating. In addition nitinol has vital uses in space technology, optical fibres, fasteners, surgery and precision construction techniques. What is the Australian Government doing about nitinol and other shape-memory alloys? It is doing almost nothing. I have still had no answers to the questions to the Minister for Science and Technology and the Prime Minister. In a letter dated 26 March 1981 Associate Professor N. Kennon and Dr D. Dunne from the Department of Metallurgy at the University of Wollongong wrote that they were working on shapememory alloys, not only on nitinol but also on others using aluminium and copper. I should like to refer to the amounts provided by the Commonwealth through the Australian Research Grants Committee. In 1977, $3,334 was provided; in 1978, $7,399; in 1979, $3,370; and in 1980, $2,940. Grants approved for 1981 indicate that $9,000 has been allocated. Together with support from the University of Wollongong, Professor Kennon and Dr Dunne have received a total of $35,000 over five years. They wrote to me stating:
Australia is now so far behind overseas expertise in applying these alloys that it would be a monumental task requiring huge funding to even begin this kind of endeavour. We cannot compete with massively funded overseas research. Our resources are totally inadequate.
I appeal to the Treasurer (Mr Howard), who is sitting at the table, to ensure that this is seen as a matter of very high national priority. Its scientific significance in high technology industries is vital. This Government has done absolutely nothing about it. We supply the raw materials and ignore the sophisticated applied technology. It is in the Treasurer's hands to do something about it and to make sure that it is given the adequate grant that it needs to carry us through the high technological industry throughout the 1980s,
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (10.44)-Media reports raise questions of increases in excise and sales tax on the products of the liquor industry. I also am grateful that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) is with us tonight. Before coming to this House my

principal business was that of the hotel industry. I believe that this gave me the experience necessary to comment on the interests of both the public and the industry. I oppose any increase in the excise duty and/or the application of sales tax on the liquor industry. After massive increases in excise in recent years, twice by a Labor Government and once by a Liberal Government, the 1980-81 Budget predicts collections from excise on beer of $1,OlOm and a further $lOOm from spirits. That is approximately 3 per cent of total government revenue. Sales tax of 15 per cent is also collected on spirits.
State governments levy licensing fees on all alcoholic beverages. Let us consider a 750 millilitres bottle of 43 per cent proof scotch which is in a bonded warehouse. It has a value there of approximately $2. Excise is $18.75 a litre of alcohol or $6.46 on that bottle. This brings the value to $8.46. Before selling it the wholesaler must add his margin which brings the value of the bottle of scotch to $10.15. The wholesaler then must also add 15 per cent sales tax which is $1.52. The price is now $11.67. This is the price, for instance, on which the Western Australian Government adds its liquor tax of 8 per cent or 83c. By this stage that $2 bottle of scotch, having attracted an additional $1.65 of commercial mark-up, is suddenly costing the retailer $12.50. The tax component is $8.81 or approximately 420 per cent of the bonded cost. It is achieved by placing a tax on a tax on a tax. In fact, we might coin a new phrase, compound tax.
Some honourable members present would say on moralistic grounds that alcohol is bad and that higher prices will guarantee less consumption. Statistics prove that to be so. The moral myth of that argument is that the price increases do not stop consumption in the area where it is needed. When the price increases, the large percentage of the market-the moderate drinkers-decide that they can do with less. Liquor sales fall with tragic consequent effects on the liquor industry. A small percentage of drinkers-the heavy drinkers, or ' alcoholics-continue the habit. The extra money they 'need is found by reducing expenditure elsewhere, possibly at the expense of their families.
State Government policy has had another major effect on the hotel industry. State Governments, by their reasonable requirements of the district clauses included in licensing legislation, have created circumstances where hotels constructed in recent years have been large and relatively widely spaced. Large car parking areas were demanded by the licensing authorities. These

1594 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Adjournment

same governments have now discovered the problems of drinking and driving and have taken punitive steps to try to stop it. Yet the licensing legislation precludes the development of small economically viable liquor outlets spaced at approximately walking distance. Strangely, the Western Australian Government liquor tax was instituted originally to compensate hoteliers whose premises were closed in rationalisation processes. I ask whether that Government would again surrender its revenue to compensate owners of these large premises if it granted numerous licences to more closely sited, smaller venues or is it simpler to collect the tax and count the bodies.
The hotel industry is one of few industries in this day and age which remains labour intensive. It also fills a very necessary role in our social environment. It offers the opportunity for people to meet without previous arrangement and in an informal manner. This is particularly important in country areas where other forms of tax-free public entertainment are severely limited. In fact, I believe it can be said that excise discriminates against country people due to their lack of entertainment choice. The liquor industry and the Australian public believe that they have paid their share. No extra burden should be added.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (10.49) -One of the things that I have become very tired of hearing not only since I have been a member of the Federal Parliament but also prior to that is the constant claim that has been made by spokesmen for the Government that the States have to. share some of the burden, that the Commonwealth is doing all it can to cut expenditure and that the States will be expected to do the same. I want to give the lie to those claims that have been made. That claim is one of the greatest frauds that has been perpetrated on the States and on the Australian community by any government at any time. The most recent repetition of that claim was made by the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) at the Liberal Party's New South Wales council meeting at Maitland on , Saturday, 28 March 1981. Sir Phillip Lynch was reported to have said, among other things, that the States cannot and will not escape playing their part in reducing the public sector blight on the national wealth. I would like to indicate the reason why that claim and the claim which has been repeated on so many occasions by this Government is demonstrably false and can be demonstrated to be false.
During the period that this Commonwealth Government has been in office-from 1975-76 until 1980-81-total Commonwealth revenue increased from $18,276m to $34,471m. That is an

increase of 88.6 per cent. Of course, in terms of Commonwealth Government expenditure, the percentage increase has been comparable. Let us assume that for this current year 1980-81 the inflation rate is 10 per cent. That assumption is not necessary for the purpose of the argument. The inflation rate could be 9 per cent or 9.5 per cent. Whatever the inflation rate is, it will not make any substantial difference. But if we assume for this year an inflation rate of 10 per cent, it means that during the period of this Government the consumer price index or costs have increased by 63.4 per cent. To keep pace with inflation Commonwealth Government revenue should have increased during that time by $11 ,587m. But in fact during that time it increased by $16,195m. This means that during the period of this Government, in real terms Commonwealth Government revenue has increased by $4,608m.
Let us have a look at the effect of this Government's policies on the States. I am referring here to the total composition of the States' grants because I do not have time to deal with the breakup of those grants. If I were to do so-I will later on-the. picture would be even worse. But in terms of total grants going to the States in the form of general revenue grants, general purpose capital grants and specific purpose grants this is the position during that period. In 1975-76 the States received total grants of $8,555m. In 1980-81 they received $12.561m, which is .an increase during that time of 46.8 per cent. Bear in mind that the increase in the CPI during the period that I indicated was 63.4 per cent. In order to keep pace with inflation, the increase in Commonwealth grants to the State during that period should have been $5,424m. In fact, it is $4,006m which means that in.this year alone the States in real terms are $1 ,418m worse off than they were in the first year that the Government took office.
I am getting sick and tired of the Treasurer (Mr Howard), the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) and all of these other spokesmen on the front bench of the Government parading themselves around Australia talking about the States taking a greater share of the burden. The situation at the present time is that the States are carrying the entire burden. In addition to that, the States are being forced to enter into all of the areas from which this Government is retreating. This Government has the financial capacity to fill all of the gaps it is leaving. It isforcing the responsibility on to the States which it is increasingly disadvantaging in terms of their financial capacity to do the things that this Government expects them to do. I think it is about time we had a bit of truth from

Adjournment

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1595

Government spokesmen in connection with this because they have been lying all around Australia.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) -Order!
Mr ROBERT BROWN-I withdraw the comment.
Mr JULL (Bowman) (10.54)-Last night following the euphoria of the debate on the Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Bill most members on this side of the House went home feeling quite satisfied that at last the Australian travelling public were on the way to receiving some sort of justice in their air fares. They woke this morning to read a story in most of the major morning dailies. I quote from one story in the Brisbane Courier Mail under the headline: 'Air fare loophole closed'. The article in the newspaper under the dateline Sydney stated:
Budget airfares between Hong Kong and London, used by many Ausralian travellers as a cheap way of flying to Britain, have been banned from sale in Australia by the Federal Transport Department.
The only way that people now can legally buy a budget Hong Kong to London air fare to Australia is if they intend to travel by ship to Hong Kong.
The article also stated:
Three airlines-Cathay Pacific, British Airways and British Caledonian Airways-have been selling the cheap Hong Kong to London fares. Cathay Pacific is most affected by the Transport Department ban, as it is the only one flying direct to Hong Kong from Australia.
I wonder really exactly where we are heading in terms of what the Department is now doing to our international aviation policy in denying the Australian travelling public access to cheaper air fares overseas. This is not the first case in the last few weeks where we have seen this sort of bungling, this sort of bureaucratic interference that makes an absolute laughing stock of Australia in world aviation circles.
Another classic case has been going on in the Department of Transport at the moment concerning Australian travellers who are flying to Europe via Japan. In its wisdom, but for no stated reason, the Department of Transport decided to impose a 20 per cent surcharge on all fares sold to Europe via Japan on Japan Air Lines-JAL. This was rather interesting because Japan Air Lines tried to establish just why this 20 per cent surcharge was imposed. It would seem that the main reason was that the costs of flying via Japan were somewhat higher despite the fact that there is only 30 miles difference in the route mileage flying to London via Japan than flying on the conventional kangaroo route. It was then claimed that the landing charges in Japan were higher and the ground handling charges were higher. In actual fact they

are not. To make a farce of this situation, Japan Air Lines immediately went to the British civil aviation authority and applied for a fare to fly from London to Tokyo to Australia at the same rate as the standard fare that exists on the Kangaroo route. Despite the fact that the Australian Government had imposed a 20 per cent surcharge, the British Government gave immediate approval for the fare to operate. So we now have a situation where people in Britain can buy a fare to Australia via Japan at exactly the same price as they can buy a fare on the conventional route. But Australians cannot travel on that route. This is interesting because, after all, Japan is our major trading partner. But there we see this situation. I would doubt very much-
Mr Armitage-Are you a travel agent or a lobby for a travel agent?
Mr JULL-The only thing I am really interested in is getting a fair deal for the Australian fare travelling public. I repeat that the thing that worries me about the Australian Labor Party is that it did not have one word to say about aviation in the final report of its Adelaide conference. It was indicated at a meeting I had with the former Minister for Transport some two years ago that people buying a point to point air fare certainly had to comply with the rules to Australia but once that point to point air fare was established outside the country, it was then possible for Australians to take advantage of and add-on excursion fare that may be available on any airline to any part of the world. That was the advice that I was given. Now we have a situation where once again the Australian travelling public is being denied access to that fare.
I mentioned last night that Britons who want to come to Australia had the facility to buy a one way fare for  198. That is gross discrimination against the Australian travelling public. I think that the House should be fully aware of the differences in the setting of international air fares and the setting of domestic air fares.
Mr Barry Jones-Did you see Qantas's Pacific ad?
Mr JULL-Qantas Airways Ltd is saying at the moment that all it wants to do is to be able to get in there and compete, and I could not agree more. But why are domestic air fares approved by the Minister and international air fares set by the secretary of the Department of Transport? The sooner we get an independent aviation licencing and fare setting authority, the better. Then we may get some sense into the situation.

1596 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Adjournment

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (10.59)-1 do not have much time so I will get on with my speech. Since 1950 there has been an enormous growth in the number and size of gun clubs in Australia. There are three groups which are most. prominent. These are: The Field and Game Association of Australia, the Sporting Shooters Association of Australia and the Australian Pistol Shooters. Together with the firearms traders, these make up the pro-gun lobby.
Whilst I must stress that I am certainly not opposed to gun clubs and the legitimate training and practice in the correct use of firearms they provide for their members, there are two aspects of the growth in the use and possession of firearms in Australia which concern me. Unfortunately I have time tonight to refer to only one of them. The aspect which concerns me most is the noise control level of gun club activities. Due to the expansion of housing developments, many gun clubs which were originally in out of the way places are now in close proximity to residential areas. This situation has occurred in a part of my electorate-the Belgrave Heights area, where noise from the Lysterfield range is most disturbing to local residents. In recent months the noise on several occasions has been so bad that residents

have been forced to leave their homes and go out for the day.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 11 p.m. the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until Tuesday, 28 April next, at 2.15 p.m.
House adjourned at 11 p.m.
NOTICES The following notices were given: Mr MeVeigh to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on Which the committee has duly reported to Parliament: Development ofRAAF Base. Learrnonth, Western Australia.
Dr Blewett to move-
That the Health Commission (Amendment) Ordinance 1981 (No.6 of 1981). made under the Seat of Government (Administration) Act 1910, be disallowed.
PAPERS The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 9 April 1981 pursuant to statute:
Land Acquisition Act-Lands acquired forAirport purposes-Cribb Island. Lower Nudgee and
Myrtietown, Queensland. Defence purposesBulimba. Queensland. Canungra, Queensland.

Answers to Questions

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1597 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Foreign Investment in Real Estate
(Question No. 260)
Mr Humphreys asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(1) Are follow-up measures taken by the Foreign Investment Review Board to monitor real estate acquisitions by foreign interests, to ensure that projects approved for specified purposes do not subsequently lapse into mere speculative ventures; if so, what are they.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to reports that the 50,531 hectares in north-west Queensland purchased by Brazilian millionaire, Sebastiao Maia, carries no stock and the commitment to the building of a meat works in the area has not materialised.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Follow-up measures are taken by the Foreign Investment Review Board in appropriate cases to monitor compliance with the terms of the Government's approval. The methods employed vary according to particular circumstances but primarily involve correspondence and discussion with the parties. In a significant number of cases, foreign investors are required to report to the Board annually or by a specified time on the state of progress with their proposal. For example, where approval is given for the purchase of real estate by an intending migrant, the approval would normally require that the Board be advised when residence in Australia is taken up or of any significant change in migration plans. It would also normally be conditional on the property being sold to Australian or other eligible interests if the migration plans do not proceed.
(2) I am informed that Mr Sebastiao Maia and two members of his family were granted permanent resident status in Australia in 1976. The purchase of properties subsequent to his acquiring that status would not have been subject to examination under the Government's foreign investment policy.
Cape Class Vessels: Oil Dispersant Facilities on Queensland Coastline
(Question No. 548)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:

The 'Cape Pillar' was in service on the Queensland coastline on 20 January 1981.
(2) The Government recently decided to maintain the Cape Moreton in service.
No decision has yet been taken on unmanning of the lighthouse on Lady Elliott Island. The policy on automation and modernisation of lighthouses is a long standing one. The Government's current program is based on recommendations set out in the Summers Report and reflects operational, technical and economic considerations. Decisions to unman particular lighthouses are made after evaluation of all relevant factors.
The capacity of my Department to respond to incidents in the Great Barrier Reef area has not been affected.
Poverty Line Figures
(Question No. 554)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
When will poverty line figures based on recent Australian household expenditure figures be available.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The Social Welfare Policy Secretariat's report on poverty is expected to be completed during the first half of 1981, and will incorporate information on income relativities.
Discounting of International Air Fares
(Question No. 611)
Mr Jull asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(1) How many (a) prosecutions have been launched and (b) convictions recorded in respect to (i) Qantas, (ii) overseas airlines operating in Australia and (iii) travel agents in Austalia, for illegal discounting of international air fares in each year since 1972.
(2) Which (a) overseas airlines and (b) travel agents have been involved in these cases.

(I) How many 'Cape' Class vessels fitted with bulk oil dispersant facilities were in-service on the Queensland coastline as at 20 January 1981.
(2) In the light of his Department's decision that the M.V. Cape Moreton is now surplus to requirements and of proposals to de-man and automate some lighthouses (e.g. that on Lady Elliott Island) what will be the capability of his Department to respond to either shipping collision or grounding of oil tankers in the event of these incidents occurring along shipping lanes traversing the Great Barrier Reef.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) There are three 'Cape' Class vessels in my Department's fleet-'Cape Don', 'Cape Moreton' and 'Cape Pillar'. All three vessels are fitted with oil dispersant equipment, as is a smaller vessel, the 'M.V. Lumen'.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In responding to the honourable member's question may I firstly point out that although he requested information dating back to 1972, Air Navigation Regulation 106A did not come into effect until 1 April 1976-1 shall therefore confine my response to the period commencing I April 1976.
(1) (i) No prosecutions have been launched or conviction recorded against Qantas for the illegal discounting of international air fares in Australia.
(2) (ii), (iii) and (2) (a) and (b) The following information indicates the persons and companies upon whom summonSel alleging offences against ANR 106A have been served. I might point out that this information is available on the public record of the Sydney, Hobart, Brisbane and Melbourne Courts of Petty Sessions.

1598 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Tasmania-Singapore Airlines Limited, Jetset Tours (Tasmania) Pty Ltd, RACT Travel Service, Tasmanian Television Limited, trading as TVT Travel, Australian National Airline Commission, trading as TAA, Dickinson's Arcade Proprietary Limited.
Total of eight summonses for 36 alleged offences.
Sydney-Georgina Anagnostakis; Parthenon Travel Services Pty Ltd; Nick Loxas; John Xipolitas; Olympic Shipping and Travel Co. Pty Ltd.
Total of six summonses for six alleged offences (two summonses issued to Parthenon Travel Services Pty Ltd). Cases are set down for hearing 22 June 1981.
Brisbane-Dianna Margaret Pages.
One summons for two alleged offences. Case set down for hearing 23, 24, 25 March 1981.
Melbourne-Student Travel Australia Pty Ltd.
One summons for two alleged offences. One action dismissed by court 12 February 1981. Second action found provenfined $500 plus $680 costs.
Italian Earthquake Disaster
(Question No. 637)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 26 February 1981:
What financial arrangements are being provided for refugees from the Italian earthquake disaster who wish to settle in Australia.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Australia's response to the Italian earthquake disaster was immediate. Significant migration concessions were introduced from 25 November 1980.
Sponsorships were accepted from any relative in Australia and the minimum residential requirements for sponsorship (normally three years for non-immediate family members) were waived. Priority was given to applications from the earthquake zone, and normal selection criteria were eased.
Extra immigration officers were stationed in Italy and a temporary office was established in Naples on 26 November to handle visa applications from earthquake victims. In some cases of hardship, visas were issued 'on the spot' and processing was left until the recipients arrived in Australia.
Financial assistance for Italian earthquake victims wishing to settle in Australia has been available both in Italy and in Australia. This assistance has been provided to meet travel costs to Australia and to help with initial settlement on arrival.
The transport costs of those earthquake victims wishing to settle in Australia have largely been met by the Italian government. For some, however, travel costs have been met by sponsoring families in Australia or the Australian Government.
On arrival in Australia all earthquake victims have available to them the full range of assistance and services available to migrants who enter under the sponsorship of relatives. This includes post arrival services provided through the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. It also includes, for those who require it and are eligible, financial assistance through the income maintenance programs of the Department of Social Security.
Although maintenance guarantees were obtained for elderly people above retiring age, partly for their own protection as they would not qualify residentially for pensions, it has been decided that these should not be enforced and

approaches to the Commonwealth for assistance should be dealt with on the basis that maintenance guarantees do not exist.
Additional assistance to help meet immediate financial and emotional needs has been provided by the Italian Government through its Consulates and Consulates-General and by the Australian community. The Italian community in Australia has, in particular, been most generous in its support.
Morwell By-pass Freeway
(Question No. 639)
Mr Cunningham asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 26 February 1981:
(I) Has the Latrobe Valley Ministerial Council applied to the Commonwealth Government for funds to be made available to construct the Morwell By-pass Freeway, Victoria.
(2) Does the Government intend to increase the funds available to the development road.
(3) When will construction of the Morwell By-pass Freeway commence.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No.
(2) As a declared development road, the Commonwealth contribution to projects on this road has increased from $4.484m in 1979-80 to $9.565m in 1980-81. Funding allocations between States and between categories for 1981-82 and subsequent years are yet to be finalised.
(3) At this stage, the construction of the Morwell By-pass is not expected to commence for another five years, however, if the State Government should decide it is necessary to speed up the construction of the by-pass then it is at liberty to allocate State funds to this project towards the cost if it so wished.
Australian Taxation Office: Internal Security
(Question No. 655)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
(I) Was the Sydney office of the Australian Taxation Office broken into at the end of 1980; if so, what section of the Office was involved.
(2) Has it been established if any documents were copied or stolen during the alleged break-in; if so, to what subject did these documents relate.
(3) Have any investigations been made into the internal security of the section involved following the incident; if so, what did the investigations conclude.
(4) Is he able to say whether police officers investigating the break-in failed to search for fingerprints after the break-in.
(5) Has he received a report from the Australian Security Intelligence Organization or the Australian Federal Police concerning the break-in; if so (a) does he intend to take any action over the incident and (b) is he satisfied that a thorough investigation has been undertaken into aspects of the affair.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Commissioner of Taxation has advised that on 29 September 1980 signs were found of unauthorised entry into some unlocked drawers and an unlocked cupboard in the Investigation Branch of the Australian Taxation Office in Sydney. No evidence of breaking and entering of the premises was found.

Answers to Questions

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1599

(2) The Commissioner has' advised that it is not known whether any documents were copied but he has no reason to suspect they were. Whilst at the time nothing appeared to have been stolen, it has been subsequently established that a folder of papers and one personal file appear to be missing. It has not been established that these papers are missing because of the unauthorised entry and their disappearance has not been reported to the Australian Federal Police. The folder contains anonymous letters concerning the affairs of various persons. These letters would have been examined before being placed in the folder. The file,which may have been mislaid in another section of the office, is thought to have been sent to the Investigation Branch for a routine purpose. The matter requiring attention thore is the value for tax purposes of a house supplied by an employer to the particular taxpayer.
(3) The Commissioner has informed me that, following the incident, all internal security arrangements in the area have been tightened.
(4) The Commissioner has advised that the Australian Federal Police made an initial inquiry whether there had been a break and enter. They reported that there was no evidence of forced entry into the particular office and, based on the facts as then known, that nothing appeared to have been stolen or damaged. Because of the secrecy provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act, documents could not be taken away for fingerprint examination by the police.
(5) The Commissioner has informed me that the Australian Federal Police gave an oral report to Taxation Office officials on the result of ~heir inquiries. No report was sought or received from the Australian Security Intelligence Organization concerning the incident. The Commissioner has advised me that he is satisfied that a thorough investigation was conducted into the affair. I do not propose to take any action over the incident.
Nugan Hand Ltd
(Question No. 658)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
(1) Has the Australian Taxation Office ever specially examined the affairs of (a) Yorkville Nominees or (b) Nugan Hand Ltd and its associated companies.
(2) Has the Office investigated the financial affairs of persons who had financial dealings with these companies.
(3) Has the Office been able to establish whether any of those companies or persons have participated in arrangements to (a) avoid or (b) evade taxation whether within Australia or by utilising overseas tax havens or transfer pricing.
(4) Has any action been taken by the Office; if so, what.
Mr Howard-The ariswer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2), (3) and (4) The matters raised by the honourable member have been referred to the Commissioner of Taxation who is responsible for the administration of the income tax law. The Commissioner has advised that the secrecy provisions of that law preclude him from commenting in any way on the taxation affairs of any person or company or on any action that has been or might be taken in respect of any person or company.
Nugan Hand Ltd
(Question No. 659)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:

(1) Has Nugan Hand Ltd ever applied to the Commissioner of Taxation for a tax clearance certificate under section 14c of the Taxation Administration Act for financial dealings with a recognised tax haven country; if so, when was the application or applications made.
(2) Was the application approved; if so, was the Commissioner of Taxation entirely satisfied that any proposed transaction did not assist in, nor was involved in, the avoidance or evasion of Australian tax.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) The matters raised by the honourable member have been referred to the Commissioner of Taxation. The Commissioner has advised that the secrecy provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 and the Taxation Administration Act 1953 preclude him from commenting in any way on the taxation affairs of any person or company.
Australian AviationMuseum
(Question No. 669)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
(1) What representations have been received by him concerning the siting of the Australian Aviation Museum.
(2) In view of Queensland's rich aviation history, has he given consideration to siting the museum in Brisbane; if so, will he consider establishing the museum at Brisbane in time to link itS opening with either (a) the Commonwealth Games in 1982 or (b) completion of the Brisbane Airport redevelopment project in 1986.
(3) If a site other than Brisbane is chosen for the museum, will the plane flown by Sir Charles Kingsford-Smith be moved from its present location at Brisbane Airport to the site of the museum.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I have received eight representations concerning the siting of the National Aviation Museum at different locations in , Australia.
(2) The Interdepartmental Working Group considering the development, timing and location of the proposed National Aviation Museum has examined some 40 possible sites of which Brisbane is one. If a decision should be' taken to establish the National Aviation Museum in Brisbane, the Government would consider the possibility of linking its opening with the events mentioned by the honourable member.
(3) If a decision is taken to establish a National Aviation Museum the question of which aircraft should be included in its collection will be considered.
I should advise the honourable member that responsibility for the proposed Museum rests with my colleague the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment.
Tax Exemptions for Donations
(Question No. 710)
Dr Everingham asked the Treasurer, upon notice,on4March 1981:
What is the estimated value of tax exemptions for donations to private organisations and relief projects (a) overseas and (b) generally.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

1600 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Gifts to private organisations and relief projects are not recorded separately from other gifts that are deductible under section 78 (1) (it) of the Income Tax Assessment Act. The only relevant statistics available relate to gifts allowed in assessments of individuals to school building funds which would almost invariably be private organisations. For the 1978-79 income year all gifts allowed under section 78 (1) (a) to taxable individuals in the main statistics amounted to $62m of which $25m related to gifts to school building funds. The cost to revenue of allowing the latter gifts is put at about $9m.
Gifts to funds with overseas l5eneficiaries were not allowable as deductions for income tax purposes in the 1978-79 income year. However, donations to the IDEC Kampuchean Relief Appeal and the Australian Red Cross East Timor Appeal were allowed in 1979-80 income tax returns if the gifts were made on or after 1 July 1979 and on or before 30 June 1980. Deductions for other donations to funds established by certain overseas aid agencies, including the International Disaster Emergency Committee which operates the Kampuchean Relief Appeal, were announced on 18 September 1980 and will be allowed in 1980-81 income tax returns. The period in which gifts in respect of the African Relief Appeal conducted by IDEC had been deductible was also extended beyond 30 June 1980 up to the close of the Appeal. A further announcement was made on 4 March 1980 that donations to the IDEC Kampuchean Relief Appeal made during the period 1 July 1980 to 18 September 1980 will qualify for deduction. Information on the amounts allowed as deductions in respect of gifts to these funds is not available.
The statistics relating to gifts do not include amounts of donations by business for charitable purposes which can be shown to be in the nature of business outgoings and may be allowed under section 51 of the Income Tax Assessment Act. The extent to which such gifts may be allowed as business expenses is not known.
Australian National Railways Housing at Port Augusta
(Question No. 735)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:
(1) How many older type houses owned by Australian National Railways (ANR) have been demolished at Port Augusta, SA, during recent years.
(2) What are ANR intentions regarding the blocks of land now vacant as a result of the demolitions.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1)-

Year
1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

Total
5 8 13 4 22
53

(2) Subject to Government approval, it is proposed that vacant allotments where houses in (1) were situated together with other vacant allotments will be sold to the South Australian Housing Trust.

Coastal Surveillance
(Question No. 812)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
(1) What action is being taken to select an appropriate aircraft for carrying out surveillance, health, immigration, customs, illegal fishing and anti-drug operations in off-shore Australian waters.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to the reported shortcomings of the Nomad aircraft which is currently in use on a contract basis for surveillance in northern Australia.
(3) Is it a fact that the present model of the Nomad aircraft cannot operate further than 3 miles off-shore; if so, is he satisfied that Australia's territorial integrity is being adequately protected by the continuing use of this aircraft.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) .Assessment of aircraft types in the performance of varying coastal surveillance tasks has been made progressively since the current program was introduced in 1978. Currently RAAF Long Range Maritime aircraft patrol off-shore Australian waters. Light twin-engined civil aircraft are used inshore.
(2) No shortcomings for the tasks specified have been reported with the Nomad aircraft during the relatively short period of evaluation in the coastal surveillance role. Performance is being carefully monitored to assess suitability over a range of surveillance tasks.
(3) No.
Railway Housing at Port Augusta
(Question No. 736)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:
What stage has been reached in negotiations between Australian National Railways and the South Australian Housing Trust with regard to the sale of ANR residences to the Trust at Port Augusta and other centres.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Commission has sought my approval to offer houses in Port Augusta and Stirling North to the railway tenants occupying these houses. Such an offer would be open to the tenant for 12 months. Arrangements that might be made with the South Australian Housing Trust would be considered after that 12 month period had elapsed.
Grants for Australian Inventors
(Question No. 771)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(1) What grants or incentives have been provided for Australian inventors and manufacturers to develop improved medical aids and equipment, such as wheelchairs, for disabled people.
(2) Are such grants or incentives of a special nature because 1981 is the International Year of Disabled Persons or will these programs continue in future years.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1601

(I) Grants have been provided under the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 for Australian manufacturers to develop improved medical aids and equipment, such as wheelchairs, for disabled people. The secrecy provisions of the Act preclude the disclosure of information provided by companies concerning grant-assisted projects. Examination of annual reports of the Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives Board shows that in 1978-79 and 1979-80 grant commitments amounting in aggregate to almost $4m were entered into in respect of industrial research and development projects in the general field of medical and veterinary science and hygiene.
Support has also been provided under the public interest provisions of the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 to enable the carrying out of industrial research projects for the development of improved medical aids and equipment for disabled people. Public interest projects involve major government industry co-operative technology developments aimed at securing the benefits of Australian innovations for Australia. The arrangements for carrying out such projects include industrial research contracts for selected Australian manufacturers to undertake specific development programs. Particular examples of approved projects of relevance to disabled people include:
(a) A project of industrial research for the development of a micro-electronic device to be surgically implanted in patients as a cure for profound or complete deafness which cannot be assisted by conventional hearing aids. The 'bionic ear' is based on pioneering basic research carried out at the University of Melbourne and Australia is a world leader in the field. The project has substantial potential public health benefits and will consolidate Australian bio-engineering and medical implant capability established through the cardiac pacemaker. An amount of $995,000 has been approved to date for the industrial research necessary for commercial development by Australian industry; and
(b) A project of industrial research for the development of a micro-processor based training aid for the education and rehabilitation of handicapped people. The aid was developed to the laboratory prototype stage at the University of Melbourne and comprises a portable low-cost unit that is simply connected to a conventional TV set to generate displays which a handicapped person controls through a 'joystick'. A range of programs tailored to an individual's particular disability will provide training in the use of motor and manipUlative skills, co-ordination of limb movements as well as intellectual learning. An amount of $200,000 has been approved for this project.
Inventors grants have been provided under the Assistance to Inventors Scheme for Australian inventors to develop improved medical aids and equipment for disabled people.' Particular examples of approved grants include:
(a) An inventors grant of $5,000 to Mr G. Ward and Dr K. Forward of Cheltenham, Victoria, for the development of a pulse communicator to enable disabled people to communicate by morse. code through a television screen, typewriter or teletype equipment. The communicator will have application to many severe accident and stroke victims, paraplegics, quadraplegics and spastics who have suffered voice as well as muscle damage;'
(b) An inventors grant of $8,250 to Mr D. B. Nelson of Canberra for the development of an electricallypowered bathing aid for disabled and aged people. The aid allows one person to transfer a patient in and out of a bath and provides benefits in terms of greater privacy and independence;

(c) An inventors grant of$I,400 to Mr K. Caldow of Dandenong, Victoria, for the development of an ambulance trolley-stretcher which can be adjusted into a Hat or covered stretcher or a wheelchair. The trolleystretcher can be adapted to virtually any patient requirement and will provide for greater handling convenience;
(d) Inventors grants of $7,765 to Mr R. E. McDonnell of Canberra for developments associated with improved methods. of collection for Australian colostomy patients. The developments are considered to have significant potential to alleviate suffering amongst such patients.
(2) No. The Industrial Research and Development Incentives Scheme is to continue in future years. The Assistance to Inventors Scheme is to be reviewed in the light of experience gained from pilot innovation programs which have been implemented to evaluate longer-term policy options for the promotion of Australian invention and innovation.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs: Migrant Service Section
(Question No. 858)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to reports in the press that the Migrant Service Section of his Department will be transferred to the Department of Social Security.
(2) Is there any substance to these reports; if so, when will the transfer take place.
(3) Is such a transfer consistent with the Galbally Report.
Mr Macpbee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I have noted a report in the press suggesting that I proposed that my Department's post-arrival services for migrants be transferred to the Department of Social Security. That report was incorrect.
Unnaturalised Migrants
(Question No. 891)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
How many migrants in each Commonwealth Electoral Division by (a) age, (b) sex and (c) Country of origin currently hold residential status in Australia but are unnaturalised.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The precise information sought is not available. However tabulations of 1976 census data showing (a) Age by Sex of Overseas born population, and (b) Birthplace by Citizenship are available from the Australian Bureau of Statistics. These tabulations do not show residential status, nor do they reflect the substantial changes in size and composition of the migrant population that have occurred since 1976.
Housing: Dwelling Constructions Commenced
(Question No. 897)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:

1602 REPRESENTATIVES 9 April 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) How many private dwelling constructions were commenced in the Government sector in each year from 1975-76 to 1979-80

(2) What is the estimated number of private dwelling constructions to be commenced in (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.

(3) What was the percentage increase in the cost of (a) building and (b) buying a house in the local government areas in New South Wales of (i) Sydney, (ii) Leichhardt, (iii) Marrickville and (iv) South Sydney during the period from 1975 to 1980.

Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) The answer to Question No. 5618 (1) given by Mr Groom on 22 May 1980 in the House of Representatives
covers the period 1975-76 to 1978-79. Dwelling commencements in 1979-80 were:

Government 10,565

Private 122,516

Total 133,081

(2) The estimates of the Indicative Planning Council for the Housing Industry (IPC) in its 1979-80 Report, were (a) 1980-81 : 120,900; (b) 1981-82: not available.

The next report of the IPC will be published in approximately three months time and will contain the Council's latest forecasts for 1980-81 and 1981-82. They are likely to show an increase.

(3) The answer to Question No. 5618 (3) given by Mr
Groom on22 May 1980 in the House of Representatives outlines the data available from the Australian Bureau of Statistics up to the end of 1978-79 and the qualifications
attached to the interpretation of the data. No more recent data are available from that source.

Numerical Multifactor Assessment System
(Question No. 899)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(1) Is industrial capacity within the housing industry still decreasing; if so (a) why and (b) what effect is this having on the number of apprenticeships being offered in the industry.
(2) Is the Government now taking any steps to increase industrial capacity within the industry.
(3) What were the figures for (a) completions and (b) commencements of dwelling units for 1979-80.
(4) What was the shortfall between (a) demand and (b) completion in 1979-80 and what is the estimated shortfall for (i) 1980-81 and (ii) 1981-82.
(5) Is it estimated that there will be a shortage of skilled tradesmen in the housing construction industry over the next 10 years; if so, what is the estimated shortage.
(6) How many apprentices have commenced their apprenticeships in the housing construction industry in 1981 to 24 March.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No. At the national level, recent estimates indicate that capacity has been increasing.
(2) The steps taken include
working closely with the States on ways of increasing the supply of skilled labour through the Ministers of Labour Advisory Committee. Arising from this the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs has announced a policy

whereby developers are expected to contribute to the training of labour on major projects. The support of State Governments in this policy has been obtained and industry is being consulted
reintroduction under the CRAFT scheme, of the $1,000 bonus to employers who take on additional building trades apprentices between 1 Dec 1980 and 30 June 1981 relative to the corresponding period twelve months earlier
subsidising a number of group apprenticeships schemes run by industry'organisations.
The Government's policies to increase industry capacity apply to both the non-dwelling and dwelling construction sectors.
(3) (a) total dwelling completions in 1979-80 were 129,267; (b) total dwelling commencements in 1979-80 were 133,081.
(4) In 1979-80 the number of completions closely matched the estimate of deman~ made by the Indicative Planning Council for the Housing Industry (IPC).
The IPC's estimates for 1980-81 and 1981-82 are

1980-81 1981-82

Demand Completions

129,000 131,000

131,000

n.a.

The above figures were presented in the last report published by the IPC in April 1980. The next report of the IPC will be published in approximately three months time. This will contain an estimate for completions in.1981-82.
(5) At the National level it is expected that the availability of skilled labour will be suffiCient to ensure the maintenance of a satisfl;lctory level of home building activity in the foreseeable future. Some shortages may occur, however, in selected areas experiencing particularly high growth due to resort and development projects. The strong increase in activity in the non-building sector is likely to result in an increased demand for labour, and I have detailed above the steps being taken by Government to meet this situation.
(6) It is not possible to identify the number of apprenticeships being offered in. the housing industry. However, unpublished returns show the number of apprentices taken on (but not yet indentured) in the building and construction sector as a whole in the first two months of 1981 was 2,301.

Housing Industry: Apprenticeships
(Question No. 900)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Housing and construction, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(1) How many apprenticeships are expected to be completed in the housing construction industry in 1981.
(2) How many apprenticeships were completed in the housing construction industry in 1980.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Official apprenticeship statistics are only available on a financial year basis. Provisional figures indicate that 6283 building trade apprenticeships were completed in 1979-80. Based on the number of apprentices in training, a somewhat higher number of building trade apprentices will complete theitindendtures in 1980-81.
(2) It is not possible to determine the number of those apprenticeships completed in the housing construction industry in any period as no breakdown of building trade apprenticeship statistics by industry or industry sector is available.

Answers to Questions

9 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1603

Innovative Housing Projects
(Question No. 931)
Mr Mildren asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
(1) What was the amount allocated in the last Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement for Innovative Housing Projects.
(2) Will the 1981 Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement also include an allocation towards Innovative Housing Projects; if not, why not.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No allocation of funds was specifically earmarked for innovative housing projects under the 1978 Commonwealth State Housing Agreement. The 1978 Agreement provides the States with a considerable flexibility to determine the uses to which rental and home purchase assistance funds can be put. These purposes included a full range of innovative approaches to home ownership and rental housing including interest subsidy schemes, spot buying and leasing of rental accommodation, joint ventures with the private sector and the involvement of local government and voluntary organisations..
(2) After careful consideration of State views the Commonwealth has decided that the same approach will be followed in the 1981 Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement.

There will be no specific earmarked allocation of funds for innovative projects. Instead the proposed Agreement will continue to allow each State maximum flexibility and autonomy in working out its own programs. Purposes for which funds may be used will continue the flexibility of the 1978 Agreement and States will be able to fund the full range of innovative projects if they so wish.
Water Resources
(Question No. 972)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
What recommendations of the report by the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources into Australia's Water Resources-The Commonwealth's Role, presented on 24 August 1978 (Senate Hansard, page 369), has the Government acted on and/or accepted.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
A paper summarising the Committee's recommendations and the Government's response was tabled in the House pn 28 March 1979. The recommendatiol1s which were accepted have now all been acted upon. Of those accepted in principle, Nos. 7, 8,18 and 32 have now been acted upon, and action will be taken on others as appropriate.


