House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 123, 1981 Thursday, 28 May 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2735

Thursday, 28 May 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10.30 a.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in-
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Robert Brown, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Milton, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. The hotel industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of the three basic needs of life: a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The hotel industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The hotel industry is almost entirely within the private sector and makes a large contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The hotel industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The hotel industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry's 5811 hotels in Australia.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian hotel industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when

growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the hotel industry to pass on such increases to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
11. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The hotel industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:
(1) Recognise the importance and place of the Australian Hotel industry in the social and economic life of the nation.
(2) Accept that the viability of the hotel industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the hotel needs of the nation in this period of growing popUlation and increasing tourism.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham, Mr Steele Hall and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
HeaIthCare
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care.
2. That the health insurance charges promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage.
3. That the public hospital system and community health programs will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a system of health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys and Dr Theophanous.
Petitions received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by

2736 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Petitions

the threats to woman's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(1) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-classified under Therapeutic Agents (not under "Cosmetics" as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Rosemount Repatriation Hospital
To the Honourable the Speakcr and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of undersigned Australian citizens showeth:
Rosemount Repatriation Hospital has been of inestimable value to eligible repatriation beneficiaries for many years, and the closure or dispersal of the facilities available at the hospital would be a retrograde step.
The proposed decision to close Rosemount Repatriation Hospital through active discouragement by Departmental Administrative officers of any further referrals by medical officers of patients for medically prescribed occupational therapy is objectionable.
Closure of Rosemount Repatriation Hospital would severely disadvantage veterans in Brisbane's northern suburbs, as well as their relatives and friends who would be required to travel a great distance in order to visit hospitalised veterans at either of the two alternative repatriation hospitals.
Closure of Rosemount Repatriation Hospital and transfer of patients to Greenslopes would greatly add to the administrative burden of that repatriation and general hospital.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the government will reverse its announced decision to close the Rosemount Repatriation Hospital.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Telecom Australia
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the decision of the committee of review of Commonwealth Government Functions to establish an inquiry into

Telecom to examine the extent to which private interests might become involved in or take over activities currently performed by Telecom is in itself a waste of taxpayers' money and is of highly questionable value.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will not dismantle Telecom for the benefit of private interests.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Occupational and Vocational Service
To the Honourable the Speaker and Membcrs of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
The decisions of the committee of review of Commonwealth Government functions to discontinue the professional employment offices, to 'rationalise' and reduce occupational information services, to rationalise and reduce vocational psychology services, to discontinue the waterfront employment offices, to terminate the former regular servicemen's vocational training scheme, to discontinue the regular collection and publication of eE.S. statistics of persons registered for unemployment and of unfilled vacancies, because such publication is embarrassing to the Government, are blatantly political and will in the long term prove not to be cost effective.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Government will reverse these decisions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That, as ex-servicemen are eligible to receive a service pension five years earlier than other Australian males are eligible to receive an age pension, subject to certain conditions, so too should the age at which the means test is applied to pension increases be reduced for service pensioners by five years to age 65.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will, in recognition of the service they have performed for their country, and because of reduced life expectancy as a result of that service, reduce the so-called means test free age limit for service pensioners from 70 years to 65.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Great Barrier Reef: Oil Exploration
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens.
That the undersigned are of the opinion that the Great Barrier Reef and region must be protected in entirety from the potentially destructive effects of mining and respectfully demand that you ensure this by declaring a continuous marine park of the reef zone from Fraser Island to the Torres Strait in 1981, for which management plans of the type devised for the

Petitions

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2737

Capricornia Section can be prepared and discussed in due course.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Public Hospital Funding
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) That the Federal Government's shifting of responsibility for funding of public hospitals onto the State Governments has placed a disproportionate and onerous burden onto lower income groups, but particularly on large families; single income families; the chronically ill; those with recurrent illnesses and those on fixed incomes.
(2) That included in the undesirable etTects on the public hospital system in Queensland will be-
(i) long waiting times for non-urgent surgery; (ii) long waiting periods in out-patients; (iii) services, e.g. X-ray and Pathology will be reduced; (iv) staff will be reduced; (v) possible abolition of teaching hospitals and centralis-
ation of training facilities for doctors and nurses; (vi) closing down of small country hospitals.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will request the Government to re-examine its public hospital funding arrangements, the impact of these arrangements on lower income groups mentioned in (I) above and increase funding to the States to ensure that the undesirable effects mentioned in (2) above do not occur.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Use of Live Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That continued usc of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
2. That no central records exist on such inhumane use of live animals for experimentation purposes, yet research institutions in several Australian States engage in such a practice.
3. That there exists no uniform legislation between the States concerning responsible standards of research conduct, indeed, in some States there is a complete lack of legislation altogether.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Lhe House of Representatives will enact legislation to require:
(a) the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics on the numbers of livc animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purpose;
(b) the National Health and Medical Research Council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all Government, industry and educational research laboratories.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Health Insurance
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembed. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(1) That Federal Government proposals to shift the cost of health insurance onto the individual has placed a disproportionate and unfair financial burden on lower income groups, but particularly on large families; single income families; the chronically ill; those with recurrent illnesses and those on fixed incomes.
(2) That an estimated 15-20 per cent of Australians will not be able to afford insurance and will be forced to undertake extensive travel to avail themselves of outpatient services, the quality of which will be drastically reduced because of staff cuts.
(3) That doctors, who at this moment are awaiting a fee increase, will inevitably become more and more expensive.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government (i) will re-examine the effects of health proposals and of the necessity for compulsory health insurance on lower income groups who do not presently meet the description of disadvantaged, and (ii) redefine the criteria determining the genuinely needy and disadvantaged to encompass the categories of persons mentioned in (I) above.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Indirect Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Humble Petilion of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Any proposal for a broad-based indirect tax, value-added tax, etc. would-
(a) have an inflationary effect on the economy, depressing to an even greater degree than at present, the low levels of consumer spending.
(b) involve every stage of the production, distribution and consumption process, i.e. manufacturer-wholesaler; wholesaler-retailer and retailer-consumer levels.
(c) be complicated and expensive to administer, particularly for the small businessman and little shops who will undoubledly suffer cash-flow problems; be forced to set up new systems and to get equipment to do the government's work for them.
(d) be an iniquitous and insidious impost inasmuch as both low and middle-income earners would be hit hardest by its introduction and, by building taxes into prices, the Government would be concealing the source of taxation, unlike taxation based on income, which is a more visible and more Obviously equitable impost.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to reject any proposal for any tax which would apply a surcharge to goods and services in this manner.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

2738 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Petitions

That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were sUbjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(I) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed mining leases against the advice of conservationists and a State Government sponsored Public Enquiry.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will reqnest the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bonnd will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Family Day Care Schemes
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(i) that according to the latest ABS bulletin on child care, based on a June 1980 survey, it is estimated that nearly 50,000 Australian children do not have access to child care centres and may be receiving less than adequate attention in the homes of people other than their parents;
(ii) that the Federal Government has neglected to regularly review and update funding arrangements since the Family Day Care schemes were introduced in 1973;
(iii) that due to rising annual costs and the shortfall in Government funding since 1973, Family Day Care centres are stretched to the limit in even maintaining their usnal amount of child care.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government will review and increase in real terms, its funding of Family Day Care schemes in the 1981-82 Budget to permit

improved child care and to extend this facility to those 50,000 Australian children who do not now have access to child care centres.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembeld. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the proposal to deny unemployment benefits to persons under 18 years-
(a) would seriously undermine the household financial resources of lone parent families who lack the capacity to maintain non-income earning adolescents over a prolonged period; and
(b) would seriously disadvantage lone parent/low income families with respect to their already limited participation in family group activities within the community.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that this House oppose any attempt by the Government to disqualify persons under 18 years from unemployment benefits.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the Honse of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(l) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical benefits as regnlar servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen during World War 2.
And yonr petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Defence Service Home Loans
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the members of the Women's Services of the 1939-45 War not at present considered eligible for Defence Service Home Loans should qualify as "Australian Soldiers" under the Defence Service Homes Act. They volnnteered for service with the Naval, Military and Air Forces, serving wherever they were sent in whatever capacity they were required and yet are refused Defence Service Home Loans.

Petitions

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2739

They took the oath to resist His Majesty's enemies which meant to fight His Majesty's enemies, and although not used in actual combat in war zones, they were available for that use and had a sufficiently grave need arisen would have been used, to serve with distinction as have women of other lands.
In accordance with the Acts and Regulations of the period, the women of the Military Forces had enlisted for service anywhere, some of the Naval women to sail in any waters, others with service on warships optional, while the women of the Airforce could have been sent to Papua New Guinea or other territories under the control or care of Australia.
Ex-servicemen of the Royal Australian Navy, the Australian Imperial Force and the Royal Australian Air Force who volunteered in the 1939-45 War but were not sent to War Zones are granted home loans. Not to grant eligibility to all Ex-servicewomen of 1939-45 War is unjust and unfair.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you favourably consider amending the Defence Service Homes Act by repealing Sub-section 4 (2A) (b) (c) (d) of the Principal Act as amended by No. 137 of 1978, and grant eligibility to all members of the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service, the Australian Women's Army Service, the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force, the Australian Army Medical Women's Service, and the Voluntary Aid Detachment of 1939-45 War.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jarman.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education Fees
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(I) The financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary Institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) The imposition of post-secondary tuition fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1974 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study from doing so.
(iii) Those students and potential students from social groups currently under-represented and disadvantaged in the post-secondary education system would be most severely affected by the reintroduction of fees for post-secondary education.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(i) Post-secondary tuition fees not be reintroduced for any courses or for any category of students.
(ii) The imposition of visa charges upon private overseas students be ceased and desisted from immediately.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever humbly pray.
by Mr Barry Jones.
Petition received.
Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Owing to an overwhelming and continuous demand by the Australian people for a cruise service within the economic

scope of the working man and his family, we request the Government to lift the ban placed on Soviet passenger cruise vessels entering Australian ports.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Trade Unions
To the honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we are gravely disturbed by the actions of militant unions, the A.C.T.U. and the failure of the President of the A.C.T.U. to assist positively in settling the dispute which has caused massive losses to Qantas our national airline, and we applaud the action of the Government in using RAAF planes to rescue Australians stranded abroad.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament and the Government should be of firm resolve not to permit such unions to hold the country to ransom and continue to take a forceful and resolute stand against such union militancy.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research
To the honourable Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The Petition of the Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association of Australia (DEBRA A) and their supporters respectfully shows that funds for medical research into Epidermolysis Bullosa are no longer being made available from the Federal Government to the medical research team at the University of New South Wales, enabling them to continue medical research into Epidermolysis Bullosa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that these signatures contained on these forms will serve to make it known that we expect these funds to be forthcoming in the very near future.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Proposed Sale of Belconnen Mall and Canberra Fruit Markets
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives. The petition of the undersigned citizens of the Australian Capital Territory respectfully showeth:
That opposition exists to the sale by the Government to private enterprise of the shopping complex known as the BelconnenMall;
That the sale of this shopping complex would work to the detriment of the people of the ACT and cause financial hardships to the consumer;
That the sale of this shopping complex is a 'one-off' arrangement and would not assist the Government in expenditure as the Belconnen Mall in its first full year of trading made a financial profit after meeting interest costs in excess of $4,000,000.
That part of its terms states that it be run under commercial
practice~.

2740 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that we believe the sale of the Belconnen Mall to private enterprise should not take place.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFry. Petition received.
Two-Airline Policy
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest strongly against the present two airlinc domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.
That this policy has resulted in expensive airfares and poor service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visiting WA and vice versa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition and formulate an Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.
And your petitioners as in duty bound wiII ever pray.
by Mr McLean. Petition received.
NUCLEAR ACTIVITY IN AUSTRALIA Notice of Motion
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)--I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House condemns the Federal Government's proposal to transfer responsibility for nuclear activities in Australia to State governments, and expresses grave concern at their rejection of this national responsibility.
STRIKES IN MARITIME AND AIRLINE INDUSTRIES Notice of Motion
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House notes with grave concern the disastrous impact of strikes in the maritime and airline industries on the social and economic well-being of the west, north, north-west, east and south of Tasmania and calls on the Government to do more than go 'cap in hand' to the ACTU and ask for partial dispensa tion.
1would like to move this motion now. Perhaps the honourable member for Wills would like to have a crack at Tasmania.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Franklin will resume his seat.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
MIDDLE EAST DEFENCE lVIr LIONEL BOWEN-I refer the Minister for Foreign Affairs to a decision made this week by the Regional Gulf Co-operation Council of the Middle East, comprising six pro-Western Arab

governments and, in particular, the governments of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait which decided to support a regional defence concept in the Middle East which calls for an end to any United States and Soviet military presence in that region. I ask: Does the Government support this concept? Does the decision not signal that there is strong regional opposition to any peacekeeping force led by a super-power?
Mr STREET-I am aware of reports that the inaugural meeting of the Gulf Co-operation Council, I think on 25 May, called for an end to United States and Soviet presence in the region and the Indian Ocean. I have not seen the full text of the communique so I am not able to comment in detail about it. It seems to me that a very clear distinction can be drawn between any proposed multinational peacekeeping force and the situation which apparently was envisaged by the Gulf Co-operation Council. The aim of any multinational peacekeeping force in the Sinai is to facilitate Israeli withdrawal from that part of the occupied territories, and all Arab states are unanimous in seeking Israeli withdrawal from occupied Arab territory. Moreover, the role of the proposed multinational force, it has been made quite clear, is to be limited solely to peacekeeping operations.
WELFARE HOUSING
Mr BURR--Is the Minister for Housing and Construction aware that the Tasmanian Minister for Housing and Construction, Mr Baldock, has claimed that Tasmania will be disadvantaged because Commonwealth housing funds will be distributed on a per capita basis? Is Mr Baldock's claim valid? Can the State use untied tax sharing grants to build welfare houses or is there a restraint under the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement? Is it possible for the State to apply for special funding from the Commonwealth Grants Commission and use such funds for welfare housing? Has the Tasmanian Government made any move to reapply to the Grants Commission as a claimant State?
Mr McVEIGH-The honourable member's question related to the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement. I point out to him that these agreements have been in existence since 1945. Over the years the Commonwealth has made available to the States, either by advances at highly concessional interest rates or by grants, a total sum in excess of $5,OOOm. It is appropriate to remind the House that in the last year of office of the Labor Government, on account of-a reduction in the funds made available by that Government for welfare housing of 3.9 per cent and the very

Questions Without Notice

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2741

high inflation rate, there was unfortunately a considerable fall-off of funds for welfare housing, notwithstanding the fact that at that time the number of rental applications in Australia was the highest on record. There were in excess of 104,000 applications. At present there are about 86,000 applications. The arrangements are to be changed in regard to the distribution of funds from the Commonwealth Government from the historical basis. The per capita distribution to Tasmania under the historical formula at the end of last year, under the current Agreement, was of the order of $37. The per capita contribution for Queensland was of the order of $15. In the long and detailed negotiations with the States On the new proposals, the meeting of Commonwealth and State Housing Ministers believed it was appropriate to dispense the Commonwealth funds in a more equal arrangement.

funds as it sees fit. The last point I wish to raise--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will end his answer.
Mr McVEIGH-The answer to the last point raised by the honourable member in regard to the Grants Commission is brief-I don't know.
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Minister for Com-
munications whether it is a fact, as reported in today's Australian Financial Review, that a draft-not necessarily a final draft-of proposed amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act was supplied to the News group earlier this month and to the Packer interests a few days later. If so, when were those drafts supplied and if possible can he state more specifically the date?

Mr Uren-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. Question Time is for questions with notice. Legislation about this matter will be debated in the House later today. So the reply should be a brief one, not a lengthy one taking up the time of the House.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Reid knows that there is no point of order. However, the honourable member is expressing dissatisfaction with the length of the reply having regard to the debate which is to come and I therefore ask the Minister to draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr McVEIGH-I point out, therefore that under the arrangements made at that meeting, and in correspondence since then, it was agreed that in the interests of justice a move should be made towards a per capita distribution, so much so that for this year-I know the honourable member for Wilmot will appreciate this-there will be no change whatsoever in the method of allocation. It will be the same as it previously was. But over the next four years of the Agreement there will be a movement towards a per capita arrangement on the basis that a total per capita arrangement will applyafter 10 years. Notwithstanding those arrangements, at the end of the 5-year period Tasmania, South Australia and Western Australia will be receiving more per capita than the Australian average and the other States will receive less.
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the Minister to draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr McVEIGH-It is not true that any State has been discriminated against. Any State will have the opportunity under the Agreement to use

Mr SINCLAIR-As I intimated to the House the other day in response to a colleague of the Leader of the Opposition, there have been extensive discussions about the details of changes to be introduced in regard to the legislation. Those discussions have continued over some months. They are continuing.
Mr Hayden--Did you provide drafts? Mr SINCLAIR-In order to discuss details it is necessary that format-Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister for Communications is answering an interjection. I ask him to resume his seat.
TWO-AIRLINE AGREEMENT Mr MORRIS-My question is directed to the Minister for Transport. Is it proposed to abdicate to beneficiaries of other regulatory legislation the power of veto over any new regulatory legislation similar to the 90 day veto he has included in the latest two-airline agreement? Specifically, when is it expected that the proprietors of Ansett Airlines of Australia will approve the latest two-airline agreement? Mr HUNT-It is not proper to pre-empt party room consideration of legislation, but it is true that the parties to the agreement have sought a provision to ensure that contingent legislation which has a bearing on the agreement itself in fact accords with the understandings that were given to the parties to the agreement in respect of certain matters, including the air fare committee. Mr Morris-When will they approve the agreement? Mr HUNT-At the moment I cannot inform the honourable member as to that.

2742 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

BUDGET DEFICIT Mr GROOM-The Treasurer will recall that in his Budget Speech of 19 August last year he advised the Parliament that in this financial year there would be an estimated overall deficit of $1,566m and a domestic surplus of $39m, after allowing for transactions abroad. As we are now fast approaching the end of the financial year, can the Treasurer indicate whether he is confident of achieving the results he predicted in his Budget Speech of last year?
Mr HOWARD-I inform the House that the projections in the Budget about the outcome so far as the overall domestic deficits are concerned are broadly on track. Naturally I cannot commit myself to the last $10m, but all of the indications are that the sort of outcome envisaged in the Budget, which provided for the first time in some seven years for a domestic surplus, will be achieved. There have been some increases in outlays, particularly on account of necessary provisions for drought aid in response to the disastrous drought that most of this country has experienced over the last year. Also there have been some additional provisions to cover the effect of 1980-81 election commitments. On the other side of the ledger there have been some increases in taxation collections as a result of a stronger growth in wages than was projected at the time of the Budget. Also there appears to be some growth in sales tax collections because of a heavier rate of consumer spending than was calculated at the time the Budget was brought down.
As the honourable member will know, the egonomy is growing faster and in a more broadly based fashion than we thought likely even last August. This has a consequence upon the collections' of revenue. Broadly speaking, what we thought would be achieved last August will be achieved. That will be a very welcome outcome because the Government continues to attach very great importance to reducing the size of the Budget deficit. That remains a very high priority so far as the Government is concerned. The only qualification that I must put on what I have just said is that by its very nature the collection of provisional tax is always subject to a greater degree of estimating error than the collection of pay-as-youearn tax. This is not only on account of such considerations as tax minimisation practices but also, more particularly this year, the effect of the drought on provisional tax payments by farmers has been more than usually difficult to calculate for reasons that will be readily apparent to honourable members. Subject to those collections and those of company tax, which are just about all

in, being in line with what we thought the indications were, we will be fairly close but I am unable to commit myself to the last $1Om.
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT Mr HAYDEN-I ask a question of the Minis-
ter for Communications. In fact, it is the same as the one I asked earlier. Whilst accepting his statement that there have been extensive consultations with the industry in relation to the proposed amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act, I ask: Is it correct as reported in today's Australian Financial Review that a draft, not necessarily a final draft, ofthose proposed amendments was supplied to ,the News group earlier this month and to the Packer interests a few days earlier? If so, can the Minister state when the drafts were supplied and, if possible, specifically the dates on which they were supplied?
Mr SINCLAIR-Draft forms of the legislation have been discussed with all parties involved including--
Mr Hayden-When were they supplied? Mr SINCLAIR-There have been no copies other than drafts with which there have been-Mr Hayden-Supplied. Mr SINCLAIR-No drafts have been supplied in the terms used by the Leader of the Opposition. Drafts have been discussed and a number of drafts are still under discussion by the various parties interested. The honourable gentleman seems quite intent on trying to suggest that there is something wrong with consultation with the industry. I hope the honoura~le gentleman realises that what we are trying to do is to make sure that the practicalities of what are fairly significant changes in a critical area affecting the whole of the broadcasting and television industry receive the necessary consultation with all the parties including the two which the honourable gentleman has mentioned in his question. Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. The Minister's answer is not relevant. He is not answering whether he had dealings with the Packer interests and News Ltd and, if so, when. That is the simpl~ question. I ask him to state the facts in relation to that. Mr SPEAKER-I have indicated to the Leader of the Opposition on many occasions that a question can be asked but when the answer is given, provided the answer is relevant, no member of the House can demand that it be in the form he wishes it to be given. What the right honourable gentleman has said is relevant to the question and is in order. Has the right honourable gentleman concluded his answer?

Questions Without Notice

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2743

Mr Sinclair-Yes, Mr Speaker.
AUSTRALIAN FILM INDUSTRY
Dr KLUGMAN-My question is directed to the Treasurer. Does he recall that, in answer to a question asked by me on 10 March and in a correction he gave the following day, he said that the estimated cost to revenue of the taxation concessions for the Australian film industry at the time the commitment was made just before last year's election was about $2m? Does it now appear to be closer to $200m? Will he ensure that future election promises are costed more accurately especially when given by innumerate lawyers, even when awaiting elevation to the position of Chief Justice?
Mr HOWARD-It is true that the figure used in the election campaign was $2m. It was based essentially upon some estimates put together by the Australian Film Commission. It was used in good faith during the election campaign and I will repeat to the House the basis on which it was used. The cost of the concession will be higher than that figure of $2m.
Mr Armitage-How much higher?
Mr HOWARD-The honourable gentleman will know from his knowledge of the industry and interest in it that the final cost to revenue of this concession cannot be determined at this moment. One of the reasons for that is that we have to make some recalculation arising out of the change that has been made in the legislation which was announced last night which will provide that rather than the expenditure being available in the year in which the money is paid into a production account, it will be available only against income earned after a copyright has been granted in the film. The information available to the Government at the time the legislation was introduced last night indicated that about 170 films had been referred to the Department of Home Affairs and Environment for certification. It is equally true that spokesmen for the film industry have indicated that it is beyond the capacity of the industry to produce anything like 170 films in a year. As a consequence, suggestions that the total cost to revenue on an annual basis represents the deductions that might be available in respect of all of those 170 films is a miscalculation. Therefore, the figure that was used by the honourable member for Prospect is one that I cannot accept. During the course of the debate on the legislation-which is the proper occasion on which to do it-I will supply to the honourable member for Prospect and the House the best available estimate that the Taxation Office can

give me based upon the new provisions of the legislation.
Dr Klugman-I raise a point of order. Will the Minister also table the advice he received from the Australian Film Commission last year on which the $2m suggestion was based?
Mr SPEAKER-- There is no point of order.
ECONOMIC STATISTICS
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-I ask the Treasurer these questions: Has he yet been able to read the Round-up ofEconomic Statistics that, I believe, became available last night? Is he aware that there has been a growth of gross non-farm product at an annual rate of 6.5 per cent? Is he aware that unemployment declined sharply in April to be well down on the April figures recorded for each of the last three years? Is the Treasurer aware of the balance of payments surplus of $552m in April? Will the Treasurer be good enough to send the front page of the Round-up of Economic Statistics to every member of the Opposition and every member of the Government? Will he also make it available to every member of the Press Gallery?
Mr HOWARD--I have been aware from other documents in front of me in recent days of those very encouraging economic statistics which give the clear lie to remarks made by the Opposition about the state of the Australian economy. Those statistics are the latest and most authoritative evidence of the type of broad-based recovery which is now under way in the Australian economy. I would be delighted to comply with the request of the right honourable member for Lowe because these statistics, particularly those relating to the strong employment growth, are a direct contradiction of the stories of gloom and disaster which still emanate not only from the Leader of the Opposition but also from other Labor front bench spokesmen, such as the honourable member for Wills.
SUGAR EXPORT QUOTAS
Mr IAN ROBINSON--I ask the Minister for Trade and Resources whether he can advise the House of the decisions on sugar export quotas made last week by the International Sugar Council and of the implications of those decisions for the Australian sugar industry.
Mr ANTHONY-Over a number of years, the sugar producing countries and sugar consuming countries have negotiated a series of international sugar agreements. The last one was negotiated in 1978. It was certainly the most involved and sophisticated agreement that has been achieved. What this did was virtually to regulate the supply of

2744 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

sugar on the open market, in some cases restricting it and providing for stockpiling. However, as the honourable member will know, over the last year or so there have been no restrictions at all because of the high prices of sugar. During that period the Australian industry has responded to the high price shortage situation by expanding the industry and meeting the world demand. However, the level of prices has receded in the course of this year. The International Sugar Council has decided to reimpose quotas because of the low prices. Fortunately, however, because of Australia's performance during the last year we have earned ourselves a larger entitlement of 230,000 tonnes bringing us up to an export quota entitlement now of 2.6 million tonnes.
This international sugar agreement has been of great importance to the stability of the industry. It has enabled the industry to plan and to predict its future on a much sounder basis than in the past. As a result, we have a soundness in the industry today that had not existed previously. I know that the honourable member will be very interested to know that tomorrow, not far from his home where he grew up, the sugar industry will be celebrating the fact that it is 100 years since the factory there was first established. This factory is part of the co-operative movement in New South Wales which bought its mills from CSR Ltd. I think it is fair to say that in the 100 years since that mill was established the industry's prospects and soundness have never been better than they are today. That is largely due to the fact that there is an International Sugar Agreement giving a degree of security which has not existed previously.
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT Mr HAYDEN-I refer the Minister for Com-
munications to his statem~nts this morning that there had been extensive consultation at which drafts of the proposed amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act had been discussed with sections of the industry and to his statement on 9 April in this House that there had been very detailed discussions with every section of the industry. Did that process include consultation and discussion with the News group earlier this month and with the Packer interests a few days later? If so, when?
Mr SINCLAIR-Yes, inter alia, over the past three months.
WAR GRAVES Mr DONALD CAMERON-Has the attention of the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs been drawn to reports that the Maltese Government is considering bulldozing a

war cemetery for the purpose of constructing a housing estate? Is the Minister aware that that cemetery contains the remains of several Australian servicemen? Will the Minister give consideration to an Australian Arlington? Will the Minister cause a costing to be done to ascertain how much money would be needed to transfer home the remains of all of Australia's sons and daughters in war cemeteries overseas? In the interim, will the Minister protest to the Maltese Government about this possible desecration?
Mr THOMSON-I have seen the report. 1 have also visited those war cemeteries in Malta, so I am aware of them.l will take up this matter with the Minister responsible in the other place. I will let the honourable member have a response to his question as soon as possible.
DISALLOWED QUESTION Mr Hayden having addressed a question to the Minister for Communications-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I will not permit the question to be answered.
Mr Hayden-You will not permit all of it or part of it?
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman wishes to rephrase his question to bring it into order, it may be capable of being answered.
Mr Hayden-I am sorry, I did not catch that. I am getting too much advice from my colleagues.
Mr SPEAKER-I have ruled the question out of order. It is a matter for the Leader of the Opposition to put it in order if he chooses to do so. But I will not allow a question put on the basis of the one put by the honourable gentleman. It is asking the Minister for Communications to express an opinion about whether a criminal offence has been committed. It is also asking for a legal opinion. It is also sub judice. I think the question, in the form put, is out of order.
Mr Hayden-I will rephrase it, with your indulgence, sir.
Mr SPEAKER-I have ruled it out of order.
Mr Hayden-I am asking to be allowed to rephrase it.
Mr SPEAKER-I will give the call to a member from the other side of the House.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS Mr GOODLUCK-I direct my question to the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs. Is the Minister aware of dramatic changes of marketing strategy by some major oil companies in the distribution of petroleum products? Is the

Questions Without Notice

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2745

new pricing authority replacing the Prices Justification Tribunal aware of these changes and adequately equipped to fix the wholesale price of petrol in a fair and equitable way for all Australians?
Mr SPEAKER-I call the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs.
Mr Jacobi-You didn't want the PJT.
Mr Good luck-I didn't want the PJT.
Mr Jacobi-If you didn't want it, why didn't you throw it out?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will resume his seat. I ask the honourable member for Hawker and the honourable member for Franklin to cease their loud, private conversation across the chamber.
Mr MOORE-I think the question posed by the honourable member is answered in the legislation that was introduced yesterday afternoon. The Bill proposes that the powers of the Prices Justification Tribunal will be carried forward. I think if the honourable member had faith in that authority he would have faith in the new authority.
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Minister for Communications a question. I remind the Minister of his statement to the Parliament a few minutes ago that there had been consultation over the past three months with organisations, including the News group, in relation to proposed amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act. Is the Minister aware that Mr Rupert Murdoch of the News group told the Administrative Appeals Tribunal on 13 May that there had been no contact between him or his executives and the Government on this matter? I point out to the Minister that this statement is in conflict with the Minister's statement to the Parliament of a few minutes ago. Does the Minister stand by his statement to the Parliament?
Mr SINCLAIR-I have not spoken to Mr Rupert Murdoch over the last three months. Any discussions have taken place with lawyers.
COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING
Mr JULL-My question is directed to the Prime Minister. I refer to the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting and the proposed visitations by Ministers and senior members to the heads of state of Commonwealth countries during the coming weeks. Is it usual for such visits to be made prior to the conference'? What does the Government hope to achieve by

these visits? What is the usual procedure in setting up agendas for CHOGM conferences?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The usual procedure is one of very closc consultation over the preceding six months. This is principally in the hands of the Secretary-General but also very significantly in the hands of the host government. The host government has very particular responsibilities for the success of the conference. Obviously the Secretary-General and the Commonwealth secretariat have overall responsibility, but they need the co-operation of the host government. A great deal of effort is required on the part of the host government to make sure that the visit is a success and that the meetings and arrangements are successful. I think not many people realise that, in the course of this meeting, about 40 heads of government out of a total capacity of 44 or 45 countries, upwards of 2,500 visitors, including members of delegations, the Press and the Commonwealth secretariat itself, will be involved in coming to Melbourne. So this is a very large exercise.
If the conference can make some contribution, even a small contribution, to some of the difficult and vexed questions in north-south economic relations, which 1suspect will be the most important items on the agenda of this conference, I believe the conference will be well justified. I have indicated on other occasions that 40 heads of government are prepared to put aside, with travelling, more than a week of their time. This is a rare occurrence and one to be valued. It is a help to bc able to speak directly to other heads of government if thcre are problems looming and to seek their views. This opens up avenues of communication between governments. I believe the world would be better off if that kind of avenue of communication were more open and used more often amongst othcr countrics.
An incident haVing occurred-
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The only other arena in the world where that kind of communication takes place, that I am aware of, is in the non-aligned movement where a large number of heads of government meet. But they are all members of one group. While they can advancc the cause of the group, it is obviously a very significant advantage to have a meeting such as that of thc Commonwealth Heads of Government where people from different groups, different hemispheres and different continents meet together. This is a very special value of the Commonwealth.
The whole process is one of consensus. If that process is to work effectively, it involves the

2746 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

broadest possible input before the conference actually begins, enabling all countries, large and small, to feel they have a capacity to contribute to the agenda, to the matters listed for discussion and to the way the conference will be held. It has been the practice, at least since 1973-it was followed by Great Britain and Canada-to send emissaries to selected countries to see what views they had to put into the process. I remember a member of the British Government visiting Australia before the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in London to seek the Australian Government's views on the way the conference ought to go, what ought to be on the agenda and what matters were
of importance to us. r certainly valued those
discussions.
One of the things that is different on this occasion is that we decided, again in close consultation with the Secretary-General, that it would be better not to seek the views merely of a selected group of countries because there was a potential for divisiveness within the Commonwealth itself. Therefore we determined to seek the views of all countries, large and small, because they all have equal rights in relation to these matters. It is worth noting that the Commonwealth Secretary General has recently issued a statement following his visit to Australia. I think members of this House might welcome knowing what was in that statement. It read:
The final stage has begun in preparation for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting to be held in Melbourne from 30 September to 7 October. As in the past the Secretariat and the host government are working closely together guided by the common objective--
Honourable members interjecting-
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-This is a very interesting commentary, Mr Speaker, on the interest of some members of this House in the Commonwealth and what it can achieve.
Mr Morris-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. The Prime Minister's answer is tedious and boring. He ignores the needs of the women and children of this country who he is putting into the streets.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
Mr Donald Cameron-It is because of men like you that they need refuges.
Mr SPEAKER--Honourable members on the Government side will remain silent.
Mr Morris-I found that--
Mr SPEAKER--The honourable member for Shortland will resume his seat. The honourable member for Shortland raised as a point of order a matter which was not a point of order. He well knows that. The nature of the point of order was

to make a point not relevant to the question or the answer. I ask him to cease making a point of order which amounts really to an interjection.
Mr Morris-I so undertake, Mr Speaker. I wish to take another point of order.
Mr SPEAKER-I will hear the honourable member for Shortland on a different point of order.
Mr Morris-I found the remark by the honourable member for Fadden offensive and I ask that it be withdrawn. It indicates the level of intelligence of those who sit opposite.
Mr SPEAKER-[ did not hear the remark by the honourable member for Fadden. The honourable member for Shortland found it offensive. I ask the honourable member for Fadden to withdraw.
Mr Donald Cameron-Mr Speaker, will you rule whether the remark is offensive? All I said was that men like him cause the need for refuges. I will withdraw if you find it offensive.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Fadden knows that his behaviour was unparliamentary. I ask him to withdraw unconditionally and immediately.
Mr Donald Cameron-I withdraw.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I intend to inform the House of the Press statement that has recently been issued by the Commonwealth Secretariat following discussions held in Australia. It stated:
The final stage has begun in preparation for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting to be held in Melbourne from 30 September to 7 October. As in the past the Secretariat and the host Government are working closely together, guided by the common objective of ensuring that the Meeting reflects the important and multifarious concerns of member governments and results in the maximum benefit to the Commonwealth and the wider international community.
I have just returned from discussions in Canberra with Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser, and I am also in close touch with all Commonwealth governments. This process of consultation will be assisted by the discussions which the special emissaries of the Australian Prime Minister will have in Commonwealth capitals. I am confident that our collective effort will be of value in refining perceptions and approaches to the Melbourne meeting thereby contributing to its success.
I hope it will be accepted in that light. One other thing ought to be said.
Mr Cunningham-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I do not know whether it is a straight point of order.
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman does not know whether it is a point of order he will resume his seat.

Questions Without Notice

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2747

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There is one other thing I want to say in relation to this meeting. Plainly, it is expensive to mount a meeting involving 40 governments, 40 delegations and more than 2,500 visitors in all.
Mr Uren-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. J recognise that the Prime Minister has a certain latitude, but tedious repetition is out of order. The Prime Minister has made a great deal of tedious repetition.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member takes a point of order which is not soundly based.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-It is plainly expensive to mount a meeting of this kind. I would have hoped that all members of the Parliament and the Australian community would have as their pre-eminent concern the good running of this conference and productive results coming from it, and that they would want Australia to do its very best on this occasion when a wider international community than ever before will come to us. If that means that the cost will be significant, I believe that in Australia's case it is well worth it. In addition, in relation to the Commonwealth itself, the results of a conference such as the one held at Lusaka, Zambia-I do not suggest that the Melbourne conference can repeat those results because the issues are not there-justify the cost of any conference anywhere in the world.

annual rate of 6t per cent in the first half of 1980-81. By world standards, that is a remarkable performance. Australia's economy is moving forward strongly while the economies of other countries are standing still or going backwards. As a result of our successes, more additional jobs have been provided than through any make-work schemes of any governments anywhere in the world. Because we have achieved that, we are getting to the situation where other countries are tending to emulate the economic policies of the Australian Government. I think the honourable gentlemen should judge the performance of the French economy bearing in mind that it has always been highly protected since the days of Colbert, and it is still highly protected. If the honourable gentleman seeks to draw any relevance from what happens in France to what happens in Australia, I think he only diminishes his own Australian nationalism.
BUREAU OF TRANSPORT ECONOMICS
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report published by the Bureau of Transport Economics on the Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme: 'A "Landbridge" approach to the estimation of subsidy rates'.

REDISTRIBUTION OF WORK
Mr BARRY JONES-Is the Prime Minister aware that in the recent French presidential elections there was a major debate on the need to redistribute work to overcome the problems of unemployment and to make appropriate social adjustments for the impact of technology on work? Is it a fact that Monsieur Giscard d'Estaing, as he now is, proposed retention of the 40-hour week, but with the right to retire on full pension at the age of 58 years? Is it also a fact that President Mitterrand, as he now is, campaigned for the 35-hour week with retention of the 60-year retirement age? Does the Prime Minister agree that the policy initiatives of the French conservatives and business interests have been more forward looking and constructive than those of the Australian Government and its business supporters with regard to the redistribution of work?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I hope that the honourable gentleman will agree with me that, over the last two years, employment has grown very strongly in Australia, indeed I believe relatively more strongly than in almost any other advanced industrial country that he could name. It is a fact that gross non-farm product increased at an

COMMITTEE ON OVERSEAS PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS Mr MACPHEE (Balac1ava-Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Committee on Overseas Professional Qualifications twelfth annual report 1980.
ANTARCTIC TREATY AND CONSERVATION-MARINE LIVING
RESOURCES
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report of the Australian delegation Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the Conference on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, together with a text of an explanatory statement.
DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Department of Foreign Affairs Annual Report for 1980.

2748 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report of the Australian delegation Lo the thirty-seventh session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights held in Geneva, 2 February to 13 March 1981.
POKER MACHINE LICENSING BOARD OF THE CAPITAL TERRITORY
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Poker Machine Licensing Board of the Capital Territory Annual Report 1979-80.
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NEW PARLIAMENT HOUSE
Mr SPEAKER-I present the following report of the Joint Standing Committee on the New Parliament House:
A report relating to the proposed work within the parliamentary zone.
Ordered that the report be printed.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOUSE
Ministerial Statement
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-by leave-There has been considerable speculation recently that the cost of the new Parliament House is rising. This is not correct. The building cost of $220m at May 1978 prices approved by Parliament remains, in real terms, the budget for the Parliament House Construction Authority. The Construction Authority is confident that this budget can be maintained. The effects of inflation on wages and materials over the 3 years since the $220m budget was set must, of course, be taken into account in establishing the cost of the building in today's prices. The Construction Authority has estimated that the cost of the building is $296m at June 1981 prices. I again stress that this is not a change in the budget but merely a recognition of the effects of inflation.
As a member of the Joint Standing Committee on the New Parliament House, I am aware, as are you, Mr Speaker, that the Committee in refining and developing the competition submission has identified the need for some minor adjustments to the building brief. If adopted by Parliament these would result in less than a 2 per cent increase in the building cost. During the Budget session, I will be submitting a full report to Parliament on the

development of the design prior to seeking Parliament's approval for the Construction Authority to proceed to the next stage. The report will elaborate on the information contained in this statement and will clearly show that the Government through the Construction Authority is determined to maintain the budget approved by Parliament.
GRIEVANCE DEBATE
Building Societies-New South Wales Government-Funding of Children's Services-Industries Assistance Commission: Australian Car Industry-Western Australian Government-Drug Abuse-Coal Loader Facilities-Government Attitude to Union of Soviet Socialist Republics-United States
Anti-Trust Legislation
Question proposed:
That grievances be noted.
Mr INNES (Melbourne) (11.27)-This morning I wish to raise a matter that relates to the operations of the so-called building societies which represent themselves as societies but which operate as large profit-making commercial finance companies. They make huge profits out of home buyers by ripping them off in an outrageous fashion. Despite the large profits they make they pay less in taxes than any other commercial trader. One criterion for the huge tax concessions that such building societies receive is that they are incorporated for the purpose of making loans to members. In many instances loans are advanced to non-members who are made members in order to qualify. An interesting question is raised at this time as to who, in fact, makes the decisions on behalf of the societies. Is it the management of the societies or is it the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation? What sort of racket are they operating? For instance, who makes the decisions in respect of mortgage foreclosures?
Over the past four or five years there has been a tremendous number of foreclosures, resulting in people losing their homes. This has devastating effects on their families, including marriage break-ups. Bankruptcies are commonplace. As far as the suffering caused to the kids of those families is concerned, it is hard to imagine how deep it goes. Legal proceedings which have been taken against the home owners over the same period have exceeded about 5,000 cases. The major reason why people get into trouble is the shambles that the economy is in and the fact that interest rate charges have gone through the roof. In relation to the administration of the societies themselves, the home buyers are not properly advised by the societies of the times that interest rates are

Grievance Debate

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2749

increasing and when the increased rates will apply.
The Statewide Building Society in Victoria and others, of course, do not inform their borrowers how their loans operate. For instance, there is a clause in the rules of the Statewide Building Society that indicates that borrowers are not allowed to argue with the administration. Until recently a penalty rate of 60 per cent per annum, plus a 2 per cent penalty on the principle, was imposed for late mortgage payments. Legal fees charged by solicitors acting for building societies-I refer specifically to Allan Moore, the solicitor for the Statewide Building Society-are outrageous. Their validity is in grave doubt. Repossessed properties are not sold at their true market value. They are sold by private sale, not by public auction. There is a number of reasons, of course. They are probably embarrassed at the number of properties which are sold under those circumstances. They are sold for much less than their value, which adds insult to injury to the people who have been put into the situation in which they find themselves.
For instance, in 1979-80, in Victoria, 91 per cent of the homes that were sold under those circumstances were sold for less than their value. In Queensland it was 71 per cent; Western Australia 92 per cent and South Australia 87 per cent. I refer the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman), who is at the table, to the fact that Tasmania has a record of 100 per cent. In New South Wales, for some reason-perhaps it is heading to the point that I will make in my final remarks-the figure was 32 per cent. The building societies are entitled to sell only the property. This does not include the chattels, or the value thereof, which belong to the borrower. The borrowers have never been advised of this and they are not compensated for the chattels. The average value of the chattels to which the borrower is entitled would be estimated at between $3,000 and $4,000. Of course, the permanent building societies run a risk-free enterprise.
Statewide Building Society loans are insured with the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation. The borrower pays the premium which is calculated at approximately one per cent of the loan. If the property is repossessed and sold for less than what is owed, the HUC pays the difference to the building society so the building society does not lose any money. However, the HUC has the right to sue the borrower for the loss regardless of the fact that the borrower has paid an insurance premium. In a current annual report of the HUC it stated that it would pursue individuals and would take legal proceedings against defaulting

borrowers. What percentage of the taxpayers' money is involved? How are we transferring huge sums of money from the HUC to the permanent building societies? One of the reasons borrowers find themselves in this situation is that interest rates have gone through the roof. In 1976-77 interest rates rose between 10.5 per cent and II per cent; in 1979-80, about 13.6 per cent and they are rising. In 1976-77, $703m was paid over by HUC. In 1979-80 this figure increased to $3,591m. As far as the Statewide Building Society is concerned it is getting these funds which amounts to the risk-free enterprise about which I have spoken.
The HUC operates in the following way: The building society must report to the HUC when the borrower's account is three to four months in arrears. The borrowers are not advised as the penalties are added, and they do not understand the rules that apply to the operation of their loans. The building society is required to issue legal proceedings against the borrowers. Because of the way in which Statewide Building Society operates its accounting system the borrowers find it difficult to meet the demands of the society. This is as a result of the penalties I have mentioned and the fact that interest rates have gone through the roof. Generally, the borrower is not aware that the Statewide Building Society has capitalised his loan for the arrears payments. Until just recently it made no mention of the fact that more than normal repayment was required. Prior to instituting legal proceedings the society would send the borrower advice that it required four months' payment plus penalties and legal costs. On the average home loan the sum requested would be between $2,500 and $3,500.
If the lump sum is not paid then the society repossesses the house. If honourable members have not seen people who have been placed in a situation of having their houses repossessed by a sheriff they should go and have a look. Those people who have been devastated by the fact that they will lose their all, suddenly are confronted by some character as big as one of the doors leading into this chamber. If they cannot meet their commitment by the given date this individual physically repossesses the house. They move in and put the kids, the wife, the family and their goods and chattels out on the street. In this day and age how can we-or more particularly the Government-live with our consciences on this issue? If a person borrows $27,000 on a $30,000 home he immediately owes, with the arrears, more than he has borrowed. According to the HLIC it jeopardises the security of the mortgage.

2750 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Grievance Debate

When the house is sold what are the procedures that ought to be adopted? Surely a person who is on the way down should not be kicked. Instead of selling a home below its value people should be given every opportunity to pay. The proper market position for the sale of the house should be sought. A proper commercial proposition should be put to the people involved so that they can vacate the premises. The premises can be rented out. Then we would have the proper economic climate in which people, who are about to lose their home and everything that they have, are given an opportunity to recover. But that is not the situation. That is a racket which is being perpetrated on the people of Australia in particular by the Statewide Building Society and other permanent building societies in Victoria.
The Federal Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) has a responsibility to ensure that an investigation is carried out by State members. I understand where the money is channelled in terminating building societies, but that is no excuse. This Government holds the purse strings and it can force upon the building societies I have mentioned this morning a stated code of ethics which will protect home buyers against the policies of this Federal Government. The economy of which this Government talks is in a shambles. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is lauding the performance of the Government, yet these people have been ripped off and are losing their homes.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (11.37)-1 wish to grieve in this debate for the State of New South Wales, led, as it is, inadequately and most incompetently by the Wran Labor Government. It was most disastrous for Australia and the people of New South Wales to see the performance of the Premier of New South Wales when he came back from the Premiers Conference, after the discussions he had had with the Commonwealth Government. He embarked upon a most insincere and callous campaign after those meetings. I wish to draw to the attention of the House some of the comments made by the Premier of New South Wales following that Premiers Conference. I wish also to take a very positive approach in this debate by suggesting to the Premier of New South Wales some alternatives that he might pursue in order to overcome the difficulties that he now suggests he is facing. In the Australian of 5 May Mr Wran predicted that there might be cuts in State services. I would have no objection to a statement along those lines if it were a sincere attempt to

evaluate the services of the State and to come to grips with where proper savings might be effected. Did he do that? No. He adopted a scattergun approach. We see these comments in that newspaper report of 5 May:
Mr Wran said he had no doubt that State charges would have to be increased and some services eliminated.
He predicted that hospital charges for out-patients would be reintroduced in New South Wales.
He went on to say that the Commonwealth Government:
. . . was really pushing financial cuts back on to the hospitals, schools, police forces and fire brigades of the State.
The following day he stated that he ought to attack the needy. He set out to say that those people who were seeking housing commission accommodation would suffer as a result of the cutbacks forced upon New South Wales. These are the most scurrilous statements that one could imagine. They are totally irresponsible in the context of the New South Wales budgetary position; a State that has not seen it necessary, as a result of the generosity of the Federal Government over the five years that we have been in office, to introduce any significant tax increases of its own. It is a State that found a tremendous capacity for the most extravagant expenditure proposals that one could imagine. It is a State that has also found it possible to embark upon numerous duplicating proposals in relation to areas which are clearly the responsibility of the Commonwealth. Yet it has the audacity to say that it is the pensioners, those people seeking housing commission accommodation, the needy, and those in need of protection by the police and fire brigades who will suffer as a result of any cutbacks forced upon the New South Wales Government.
I would like to suggest the following positive areas at which Mr Wran could look. In New South Wales since 1976 some 85 new quasiautonomous government organisations, or qangos as they are called, have been introduced into that State-a 33 per cent increase over the period to the present. There are now some 350 bodies of that type-over 800, if one includes statutory bodies and ministerial committees. I am sure that there is a great deal of scope for rationalisation and proper reductions in expenditure in that area.
In NSW we have seen over $1,OOOm worth of projects in which government expenditure is proposed which, clearly, the private sector could develop. In coal mining and in terms of investments in coal mining activities in NSW, we have seen expenditure which exceeds $800m. In relation to the coal loader in NSW which clearly could have been in operation well before the date which is proposed with State government funding,

Grievance Debate

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2751

we will see the commitment of over $lOOm of be no justification for the $2m of State taxpayers

State funds. Clearly, the private sector, which funds which will be channelled in that way. The

wished to develop the proposal, would have been alternative, as put by the Premier, is in terms of

able to put it in place. We have seen proposals for reductions in the police force, fire brigades and

an oil refinery interest which would take some reduced expenditure on schools. The taxpayers

$55m of State taxpayers' money.

are being asked to pay off the Labor Party's debts,

I do not wish to detail all of these projects. But in relation to matters such as the entertainment centre where clearly the private sector could have been involved and would have wished to have been involved fully, we have seen a commitment of over $lOm of State taxpayers' funds. These are

perhaps because of the unwillingness now of the unions to bankroll Wran as they have done in the past.We have not only the expenditure that one knows will go directly to the State political party but also the significant increase in the State bureaucracy.

clearly areas in which the State had no need to be involved and where clearly savings could be made. Yet, we see this Premier suggesting with audacity that police services ought to be cut. We see him suggesting that fire brigade services ought to be cut and that the number of schools will have to be reduced. I ask honourable members to note the audacity of the man when he has such scope available to him.

I know that the NSW Government has tried to say that the levy will represent only the cost of a postage stamp for each taxpayer in order to make available these funds to the Labor Party. But that does not include the significantly increased costs in so many other areas. Certainly, it does not include the cost of establishing and maintaining the election funding authority. It certainly does not extend to the costs of meetings and payments of

One would not want to finish just there. There members who will be sitting on the boards that

is the expenditure by the Electricity Commission will administer this funding. It does not include

of New South Wales on coal mining projects in the costs of research and publications which were

the Lithgow area and in Muswellbrook where envisaged in section 25 of the Election Funding

effectively over $200m of State taxpayers' funds Act in NSW. It does not include the costs of main-

will be involved. There are the areas that I mentaining registers which Part IV provides for. It

tioned of duplication with the Commonwealth. does not include the administrative costs of allo-

We have seen the development of a State film cating subsidies and recording disclosures. It does

commission. This is clearly duplication because not include the costs of additional by-elections

that is an area in which the Commonwealth has which might well be involved. It does not include

been involved over a long period. We see the dethe legal costs and the accounting and auditing

velopment within the Premiers Department of costs of the authority. It does not include the costs

the Division of Ethnic Affairs. Clearly, that is an of staffing or hiring consultants to the authority.!t

area in which there has been significantly does not include the costs of hiring inspectors to

increased Commonwealth expenditure over the carry out inspections and the indirect costs to in-

years. Yet we have seen the attempt, only because dividual parties, including the Labor Party, which

it is seen, I think, in NSW as a vote buying exerhave to meet the legal, recording and auditing re-

cise, to establish a duplicating State area of authquirements of that Act of Parliament.

ority. We have seen the growth in expenditure in the Premiers Department from an amount of the order of $4m when the Premier came to office to something over $40m. This has happened in the short period since the Wran Government has been in office. Those areas of duplication that I mentioned-ethnic affairs, the film commmission, matters such as senior citizens week and all of the propaganda activities of the State governmentare involved in that significantly increased expenditure.

It is not just the expenditure that is involved in terms of the direct subsidy for the election campaign of the political party in NSW that will receive that subsidy, namely, the Australian Labor Party; it is also the costs of the whole bureaucracy that has been set up to administer it. These are significant areas in which savings might be involved and in which the State Government could well reduce its expenditure and obviate any need for increased charges. Certainly, if the State Government were not involved in those areas it would en-

Now we come to the most scurrilous activity in able the Premier to withdraw these most scurri-

which the State Government might be involvedlous threats that he has made against the needy of

the funding of the activities of a political party in NSW, against the people who recognise that edu-

its election campaigns, activities which are clearly cation is an area of priority spending, those people

involved in getting the State Australian Labor who need protection by a police force and those

Party out of debt, paying off its past election debts people whose homes need to be protected from

and getting the State taxpayers to do it. There can the ravages of fire. I believe it is a most scurrilous

2752 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Grievance Debate

situation for a man who is the Premier of a State to put fear into the constituents in that way. It is not worthy of a Premier of a State when there are such clear areas where expenditure might be reduced, and reduced responsibility. These areas are certainly available to him.
Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (11.47)-1 wish to speak about the Government reductions in funds provided for children's services throughout Australia since 1975. I believe that because of these cutbacks in funds many of our people are aggrie'ved. In a modern society, such as that existing in Australia, there is a need for child care for the young in our midst. The group whose need for child care is most obvious and most urgent consists of those families in which both parents are employed outside the home. Traditionally, child care in Australia has been provided by women caring for their children in their homes. For many reasons this form of care for children is no longer available to, or appropriate for, the needs of many families. An increasing number of women are entering paid employment-a phenomenon at least partly caused by the desirability and sometimes necessity for two incomes to sustain a family economically in times of inflation. This group urgently needs the provision of year-round, reliable, long day care for their pre-school age children and before and after school and vacation care for school age children, preferably at a cost which does not unduly erode the benefits of a secondincome.

Such long day care situations are also needed by the increasingly large group of single parent families in our community. For such people reliable child care is crucial as the single parent is usually employed outside the home and frequently has no person to assist in caring for the children. Traditional sources of child care are also no longer available to families in which one parent, usually the mother, cares for children at home. For such families, the need for continuing day-to-day care does not exist but the necessity for occasional care is increasingly recognised. Such care enables the parent to make necessary visits to doctors, dentists, et cetera, but perhaps even more importantly can provide vital relief from the stresses of continuous child care in an emotionally isolated nuclear family situation. In Australia today social and economic situations exist which make the provision of cheap, accessible, continuous, reliable child care, suited to the needs of the user a vital necessity.
Let me now turn to the funding situation. In the 1975-76 Australian Labor Party Government Budget, $64m was spent on children's services. The 1980-81 Federal allocation for children's services is a little over $69m. I refer to three tables in the 1979-80 annual report of the Department of Social Security. I seek the approval of the House to have incorporated in Hansard these tables which show the expenditure of funds on children's services for the period 1973-74 to 1980-81.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

TOTAL EXPENDITURE ON THE CHILDREN'S SERVICES PROGRAM ($m)

Year

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

ACT

NT Australia

1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 (est.)

2.430 12,772
16.761 19.428 18.294 16.516 17.549 17.549

1.757 10.388 16.723 20.396 21.952 16.884 17.643 17.643

1.722 6.758
10.489 10.380 11.962 11.457 12.384 12.384

1.282 7.196 7.999 7.068 7.196 6.585 7.081 7.081

0.893 4.894 7.043 6.386 7.248 7.506 7.919 7.919

0.618 2.891 4.695 2.976 3.287 2.845 3.172 3.172

0.272 0.326 0.242 0.364 0.708 1.018 1.901 1.901

0.005 0.D18 0.138 0.550 1.025 1.577 1.577

8.974 45.230 63.970 67.076 71.197 63.836 69.226 69.226

Total

121.299 123.386 77.536 51.488 49.808 23.606

6.732

4.89 458.745

Sources: Department of Social Security, Annual Report, 1974-79. Office of Child Care, Children's Services ProgramInformation Kit, 1979. Marie Coleman (Director of Office of Child Care). 'Government Child Care Policy in the 1980s'. Speech to the National Child Care Conference Adelaide.

EXPENDITURE ON PRE-SCHOOLS UNDER THE CHILDREN'S SERVICES PROGRAM ($m)

Year

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

ACT

NT Australia

1973-74 1974-75 1975-76

1.446 9.919 11.824

1.527 9.266 12.605

1.356 5.358 7.831

1.146 6.235 5.831

0.594 4.070 5.477

0.410 2.229 3.461

* **

6.479 37.077 47.029

Grievance Debate

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2753

Year

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

ACT

NT Australia

1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81
Total

13.999 10.987 7.130 7.130 7.130
69.565

15.778 15.744 9.015 9.015 9.015
81.965

7.272 6.958 6.605 6.605 6.605
48:59

5.194 5.194 3.730 3.730 3.730
34.790

4.853 5.189 4.860 4.860 4.860
34.763

1.922 1.922 1.410 1.410 1.410
14.174

**

49.018 45.994

***

32.750 .340 33.090 .340 33.090

.680 284.527

Sources: Department of Social Security, Annual Report, 1974-79. Office of Child Care, Children's Services Program--Information Kit, 1979. Marie Coleman (Director of Office of Child Care). 'Government Child Care Policy in the I980s' Speech to the National Child Care Conference, Adelaide.
* Not available.
EXPENDITURE ON CHILDREN'S SERVICES OTHER THAN PRE-SCHOOL UNDER THE CHILDREN'S SERVICES PROGRAM
($m)

Year

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

ACT

NT Australia

1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77
1977-78 1978-79 1979-80
1980-81

0.984
2.853 4.937
5.429 7.307
9.386 10.419 10.419

0.230
1.122 4.118 4.618
6.208 7.869 8.622
8.628

0.366 1.400 2.658
3.108 5.004 4.852
5.779 5.779

0.136
0.961 2.168
1.874 2.002 2.855 3.451
3.451

0.299
0.824 1.566 1.533
2.059 2.646
3.059
3.059

0.208 0.662 1.234 1.004
1.365 1.435 1.762
1.762

0.272
0.326 0.242
0.364 0.708 1.018
1.901 1.901

0.005 O.oJ8
0.138 0.550 1.025 1.237
1.237

2.495 8.153 16.941
18.068 25.203 31.086 36.136
36.136

Total

51.734 41.421 28.946 16.698 15.045

9.432

6.732

4.210 174.218

Sources: Department of Social Security, Annual Report 1974-1979. Office of Child Car'e, Children's Services Programme-
Information Kit, 1979. Marie Coleman (Director of Office of Child Care). 'Government Child Care Policy in the 1980s,' Speech to the National Child Care Conference, Adelaide.

Mr MOUNTFORD-I thank the House. Although there has been a small increase in dollars for children's services over the past five years, inflation has meant that, in real terms, the amount of Federal Government money available has
fallen by more than 40 per cent in an area where services were minimal to begin with. More than 80 per cent of children under five in New South Wales have no access to any form of registered children's services, whether government funded or privately run. Honourable members of the Government, during the last Federal election, boasted that they had more than doubled spending on child care. However, a closer analysis of the
expenditure items in the children's services program proves otherwise. Briefly, the money that the Federal Government allocates for children's services is spent by the Office of Child Care through the children's services program. There are two major categories in this program. The first is pre-school and the second is called 'other children's services'. The proportion of funds spent on the category of pre-school has, under the Fraser Government, been reduced from just under three-quarters of the total allocation to just under half.
But this does not mean that support of child care centres has increased.

Over the past five years the other children's services component of the children's services fund has been used to finance an ever-widening range of services, some of which are not even related to children. The Fraser Government has widened its target group for so-called children's services to include the whole 0-18 year old age group, instead of just the 0-5s or the 0-12s. Of course, this does not have any impact on pre-school funding because that is a specifically defined service. But it has meant that all kinds of services such as refuges for homeless youth, special services for the handicapped, welfare rights officers and family support schemes, have been financed out of the money that was previously marked for day care services.
As well as the inadequate funds being provided, the means of obtaining funds for children's services are a maze of bureaucratic procedures. In the 1979-80 Department of Social Security annual report, it is stated that the emphasis of the children's services program continues to be one of assisting categories of children and, through them, their families, who are considered to be in special need because of economic circumstances or because of other factors such as handicap, isolation and cultural differences. Yet, by the very funding procedures of many of the children's services available, it is these groups that miss out on

2754 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Grievance Debate

government funding; for example, funding for child care depends on community groups forming and writing a submission. This naturally favours the groups who are more articulate, who are more mobile and who have more time because they do not work. The inequities are reinforced against the poor and against the migrants. This combines with the enormous demographic shift of younger families to areas like the western suburbs of Sydney, as the figures show.
The submissions-based model of funding, which has led to such gross inequality in the provision of services, begins with a group of people who, perceiving a great need for child care in their area, meet together to investigate the options open to them. They approach one or more relevant government departments with a proposal for funding their chosen service. They collect data to show a need exists in their area for the provision of the desired children's service and, with officers of government departments, they refine their submissions to fit the terms of the funding agreement, including guidelines for the administration and development of the service. It is obvious that this process requires an enormous amount of work on the part of the community group, which must remain a stable organisation for anything up to three years to achieve the preliminary tasks. If they survive this period and if the government bodies decide the money is available, they may get funding for their service.
The submissions model of funding was set up on the supposition that such means of determining services facilitated community participation in governmental structures. It was argued that such a model provides the possibility for decentralisation and community control by involving citizens in the political process in a way that gives them more collective power. However, a planning model does not have to mean that Canberra decides what is needed in every little town and neighbourhood throughout Australia. All it needs to mean is that money be allocated to local areas on the basis of need. At present, no matter how needy a group is, it has to compete with other groups throughout Australia. Of course, the most needy groups cannot even enter the race. I believe that local neighbourhoods should have control over the types of services provided in their areas and over the day-to-day management of those services. But they should not have to fight for years to get the money in the first place. What I believe should be done is this: The Government should accept responsibility for the adequate and equitable provision of services for children. Services should be provided where the need for them exists. The onus should not be on community

groups to demonstrate their need, a method which has favoured the least disadvantaged groups in our society and caused endless delays in the delivery of needed services. It is not uncommon to wait two to three years after a submission has been written for funding to be approved. There is one centre-based care and family day care centre for about every 14 children in the city of Bankstownan area which I representcompared with one for every six in North Sydney. The situation is much worse for children under two. One place is available for every 280 children in Liverpool compared with one for every 24 children in Lane Cove. There are no child care centre places in Bankstown for this age group at all.
Expenditure on children's services should be restored forthwith to 1974-75 funding levels which would mean an immediate increase of over 50 per cent. Thereafter, the various needs of all children and their families should be given a high priority. This should be reflected in expenditure on children's services. The Government should move immediately to simplify and to rationalise the funding administrative processes involved in children's services. The present bureaucratic maze is completely inconsistent with the Government's stated policy of encouraging community initiatives and participation. In conclusion, 1 suggest that it is imperative that the Government move, as a matter of urgency and in consultation with the States, to increase the funding of children's services to a realistic level and to introduce a system of simple and rational procedures for the funding and administration of services for children.
Mr MacKENZIE (Calare) (11.57)-1 take this opportunity to make some comments on the draft report of the Industries Assistance Commission on the Australian car industry. The lAC has recommended changes for the Australian motor vehicle manufacturing industry which, the Commission believes, will result in lower prices for vehicle purchasers. Its plan calls for the gradual reduction of tariffs and of other protective measures and the scrapping of import quotas, including the 80-20 market sharing plan under which Australian producers are guaranteed an 80 per cent share of the Australian market. The lAC stated, in its draft report, that the post-l 984 assistance arrangements for the industry will result in an additional $1,OOOm being payable by consumers. Translating that into per vehicle costs, it would appear the average vehicle being produced in Australia costs approximately $3,000 extra to purchase compared with a similar vehicle

Grievance Debate

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2755

manufactured in other countries. The Commission found that, whilst it was difficult to quantify the effects of its recommendations, lower prices would flow from the reduced protection and the increased access to imported vehicles and components and that this would benefit consumers directly and stimulate demand.

as well as to the more expensive European imports. As I have suggested before, this makes Australian vehicles some of the most expensive in the world. This would seem to be ironic when we look at the vast geographic and distance problems in
Australia and the fact that we have to rely so much on motor vehicle transportation.

The Commission pointed out that increased exposure to market forces would encourage the development of a more specialised and efficient Australian industry. The industry in Australia is in a ridiculous situation. Some eight passenger vehicle manufacturers are producing some 19 basic models for a market that, by world standards, is very small indeed. The Commission further suggested that employment opportunities, whilst they may decline in the short term, would benefit from a flow-on to the rest of the economy. It stated that the rest of the economy would gain from lower costs and prices which would improve the competitive position of traditional import competing and exporting industries. In the longer term, increased activity in other industries is likely to offset losses in the passenger motor vehicle industry. The Government has not given a formal response to this draft report. The final report is in the process of compilation by the Australian Industries Assistance Commission. I would suggest, however, that it is high time that we looked very closely at the vehicle manufacturing industry in Australia because it is one of our most highly protected industries.
I have already mentioned that the average motor car purchaser would appear to be paying an additional $3,000 for an average 6-cylinder vehicle in Australia compared to what he would pay if he lived overseas. A number of organisations support the recommendations of the Industries Assistance Commission. The most notable of these is the Australian Automobile Association, which, incidentally, is the largest lobby organisation in Australia. I did not realise that the Australian Automobile Association represents some 3.2 million motoring members. Indeed, it is larger than the Australian Council of Trade Unions. The Australian Automobile Association has come out in support of the lAC's draft findings. It has actively campaigned for a lowering of protection and tariff measures for the industry.
The National Farmers Federation, representing some 170,000 farmers, also supported the draft findings of the lAC. The Federation has pointed out that the average Australian motorist in buying an imported car pays almost half the purchase price in taxes and tariffs. In other words, he is paying almost twice as much as he should pay for a motor car. This applies to Japanese cars

The price of an average 4-cylinder Japanese car is increased by 32 per cent through tariffs and a further to per cent through sales tax paid to the Federal Government. Total government charges, therefore, on an average 4-cylinder imported car total about 42 per cent of the total purchase price. In addition, the high level of protection has sheltered the Australian manufacturing industry from some of the realities of competition. The argument put is that a lowering of protection measures will have consequences for employment. But we have seen employment in the Australian motor vehicle and parts industry fall from some 90,000 employees in 1974 to 76,000 employees in 1979 and to about 65,000 employees at the time of the inquiry last year. No doubt part of that decline in employment is due to the restructuring that has been going on within the industry and to the introduction of new technology. But this certainly does not support the argument that high levels of tariff protection have to be maintained in order to support employment in the industry. Productivity within the industry has fallen as well. In the same period the production of units per year dropped almost 20 per cent from 400,000 units to 325,000 units. All over, some 16,000 jobs have been lost in the Australian motor vehicle industry since 1976.
The Australian Federation of Consumer Organisations, as well as the National Farmers Federation and the Australian Automobile Association, has come out in support of the lAC's recommendations. I just want to express my view that the lAC's report, which changes the direction of protection for the Australian car manufactur-- ing industry, should be considered very seriously. I believe that at some time-as far as I am concerned the sooner the better-we should take a firm decision towards restructuring the industry and lowering the levels of protection that apply to it.
Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlic) (12.5)-I wish to address a few remarks on the state of the Government in Western Australia. Two weeks ago the Liberal Government of Western Australia introduced a Bill to establish a one-party State in Western Australia. This legislation will prevent the Australian Labor Party from ever holding office again in Western Australia. It will establish the dictatorship of the Liberal Party. I have the Bill in my hand. Its long title is: 'A Bill for an Act

2756 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Grievance Debate

to amend the Constitution Acts Amendment Act 1899-1980 and the Electoral Districts Act 1947-1975'.
As honourable members may be aware, Western Australian law has always prevented the Labor Party from holding power in that State. The Labor Party has never in 91 years, despite massive popular majorities, gained a majority of seats in the State's Legislative Council. This new Bill ensures that the Labor Party will never again have a majority of seats in the State's Legislative Assembly. The Bill does not by itself establish a one-party Slate but it does complement two other Acts and, with them, achieves that end. This Bill which is for an Act to gerrymander the electorates of Western Australia, together with the malapportionment Act of Western Australia, the Electoral Districts Act 1947-75, and the Act to disenfranchise certain citizens of Western Australia, the Electoral Act Amendment Act 1979, destroys the last vestiges of parliamentary democracy in Western Australia.
The principal pillar of the Western Australian one-party State is the malapportionment Act. This Act creates the most grotesque electoral system in the whole country. The Queensland situation pales into insignificance alongside it. The Bill currently before the Western Australian legislature further embraces the principle of malapportionment found in the parent Act. Under the new Bill, the malapportionment is slightly altered. In the Legislative Council, the 68.6 per cent of electors who reside in the metropolitan area will get 41.2 per cent of the seats while the 31.4 per cent of electors who live in the country will get 58.8 per cent of the seats. In the Legislative Assembly, the so-called people's House, the 68.6 per cent of the people in the metropolitan area will get 52.6 per cent of the seats while the 31.4 per cent of electors in the country will get 47.4 per cent of the seats. In the Legislative Assembly there is a rural weighting of 2: 1 in favour of the Government, in the Legislative Council there is a weighting of 3:1.
The Act to disenfranchise certain citizens of Western Australia that was passed in 1979 is the second pillar of the one-party State. It was designed to kecp Labor voters off the roll. The State seats of Kimberley and Pilbara, both fairly strong Labor areas, fall within the boundaries of my Federal seat. In Kimberley, only 46.9 per cent of those eligible to vote are on the roll. In Pilbara the figure is 56.3 per cent. The Act makes it difficult for people to enrol by requiring an electoral claim to be witnessed by a police officer, a justice of the peace, a clerk of court or an electoral officer. There is not one electoral officer located in the

north-west of Western Australia. Clerks of court are as scarce as hen's teeth. There are justices of the peace but 95 per cent of them are Liberals. The State Government refuses to appoint Labor justices of the peace. This leaves the police. Many people see the police as an arm of the Court Government and are intimidated. At any rate, many of the northern settlements do not have resident police officers. All this means that voters-mainly Labor voters-are discouraged from enrolling. The Federal rolls are nowhere near up to date but they show the facts. There are 11 per cent more people on the Federal rolls than there are on the State rolls for the same areas.
The new Bill before the Western Australian Parliament ensures that the State electoral boundaries should now be gerrymandered to make sure that there is no way that a Labor government can win another election. Labor votes are devalued and Liberal votes are maximised. In the north of the State, the boundaries of the four statutory seats-Kimberley, Pilbara, Gascoyne and Murchison Eyre-have been redrawn so that the Government will retain control of three of the four seats. Currently, the seat of Pilbara has 15,112 electors, while surrounding seals have substantially lower enrolments: Kimberley has 5,758, Gascoyne 3,781, and Murchison Eyre a mere 1,933. The Government decided that the fairest and most impartial thing to do was to transfer 6,000 Pilbara voters into the Kimberley seat and leave the other two seats as they were. So under the redistribution we will now see Kimberley, Labor with approximately 12,000 electors; Pilbara, Liberal, with 9,000; Gascoyne, Liberal, with 3781; and Murchison Eyre, also Liberal, with a mere 1,933. It so happens that the Pilbara, a very marginal seat and a likely Labor win at the next election, will lose all its strong Labor areas to Kimberley, a seat that the Labor Party already holds. The areas transferred to Kimberley are Shay Gap, with a 72 per cent Labor vote; Newman, 64 per cent Labor; Paraburdoo, 64 per cent Labor; Tom Price, 61 per cent Labor; Jiggalong, 77 per cent Labor; Strelley, 96 per cent Labor; and Yindeyarra, 99.5 per cent Labor. Those are the Labor voting areas that have been transferred to the already safe Kimberley seat.
The Government has also redrawn the metropolitan boundary to advantage itself. A number of outer metropolitan communities currently classified as rural have been reclassified under the new Act. Thus, Rockingham, Armadale, and parts of the northern suburbs, including Wanneroo, will be included in the metropolitan area. Other outer metropolitan suburbs such as Mundaring, Kalamunda, and parts of the Darling

Grievance Debate

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2757

Ranges, although a similar distance from the Genpunishment. One has only to note the massive de-

eral Post Office, are still classified as country. It so tection apparatus that has been set up in, say, the

happens that the areas of Rockingham, United States and the degree of punishment

Armadale, and the outer northern suburbs tend to offered there to realise that that is ineffective as a

vote Labor. The other areas do not. The Liberalsolution to the problem, except in a minor way.

voting suburbs remain officially rural and their We have the added problem that there is an inter-

electors enjoy a weighted vote. That situation cannational aspect to drugs. Unfortunately, in many

not be tolerated, and I notice that, according to of the developing countries the only viable cash

yesterday's West Australian, Mr Withers, the crop for many of the rural dwellers is the opium

Legislative Council member for North Province, poppy or other sources of drugs. The growers are

resigned from the Liberal Party in protest at what supported by corrupt military and police forces,

he considered to be an outrageous situation.

who allow the trade to continue. I guess that one

I call on the Federal Government to overthrow the tinpot dictatorship in Perth by means of a Commonwealth referendum, or whatever other

of the main effects of increased detection and
punishment in Australia is to raise the street pricc of the drugs.

means are necessary. I warn this Parliament that the citizens of the northern mining areas of Western Australia and the eastern goldfields, which I represent in this House, will not tolerate the dic-

This problem affects the electorates of every member in this House. It is not merely an urban problem, it is a rural problem as well. Several weeks ago I conducted an informal field survey of

tatorship in Perth. We will secede from the State my own electorate and portions of the electorates

of Western Australia before we accept a oneparty State. We have an exemplary record as democrats and patriots. Kalgoorlie and the eastern goldfields brought Western Australia into the Australian Federation in 1900. We kept it there when the rest of the State wanted to secede in 1933. We in the goldfields established what element of democracy there is in Western Australia. Precious little remains. We will not live under tyranny, and moves may be expected for the dissolution of the State of Western Australia and the formation of one or more new States.

of the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe), the honourable member for Wills (Mr
Hawke) and the honourable member for Diamond Valley (Mf N. A. Brown). I did this because in the area there is a large number of young
unemployed and of homeless young who sleep
wherever they can find a place. I referred to that matter in this House in 1979, and I notice that the National Times last week contained a very substantial article on the problem. These are malters associated with drug abuse. In addition, in that
area the police force reports that much of the

Dr JENKINS (Scullin) (12.13) Tn the grievcrimes of burglary, stealing, and so on is

ance debate today I wish to take up the matter of associated with the gaining of funds to obtain

the failure of the Government to take adequate
initiatives to solve the national problem of drug abuse. In recent times we have become fairly used

drugs. Accompanied by a person experienced in the field, we visited a number of groups and organisations in the area. We talked to representa-

to picking up the daily newspaper and seeing news tives of youth organisations, including unem-

items concerned with the detection of large hauls ployed youth, the local hospital, the local health

of illicit drugs in Australia, and the detection centres, and local businessmen. We found that all

overseas of those concerned with this trade. There were agreed that a substantial drug abuse problem is no doubt that the problem is substantial. In existed in the area.

March 1980 this House authorised the publication of the very extensive report of the Australian Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs. It was on the Notice Paper for quite a while; many honourable members were interested in the report and the very substantial spread of matters it covered. At best there was perfunctory debate in the House on this matter. There was no chance of getting a bipartisan approach to what is one of our greatest social problems. No attempt has been made to reintroduce discussion on the matter since this new Parliament assembled.

The interesting thing which came out of th(;se inquiries was the profile of drug abuse in the community. Alcoholism led the field. Next, in an almost equal portion, were glue-sniffing and prescribed drugs. Glue-sniffing comes easy because now that our hardware stores act as supermarkets the glues are on display and readily available to youngsters who wish to shoplift. Prescription drugs of the tuinal and mandrax type are obtained by visiting a number of doctors in the one day, receiving adequate supplies, or robbing pharmacies or doctors' surgeries. To a lesser

Admittedly, there has been some Government extent there was a problem with the soft drugs

action arising out of the report, but this action has such as marihuana and the hard drugs such as her-

been predominantly in the field of detection and oin. It amazed me, in talking to the people who

2758 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Grievance Debate

mix with the drug abusers, to find that the sources for obtaining soft and hard drugs are well known. In the main, they are also associated with alcohol. They are in the local hotels.
One of the problems is that there is not a great deal of community awareness of this sort of profile. The Press reports lead only to the general community fearing the problem rather than seeing a duty to overcome it. It is for those reasons that I criticise the Government for taking no action in the area of community drug liaison committees, which have been recommended by the Royal Commission. There is a need for community-based organisations at a local level to monitor local activity; to disseminate locally the information from various information centres; to publicise the local facilities for treatment and counselling; to develop community support for youth at risk; to assist in co-ordinating at local level the different activities of enforcement, treatment and education-that is, if governments will supply effective enforcement, treatment and education; to be able to reply constructively to concerned members of the community; and to provide a forum for discussions or for visiting speakers. This action requires government encouragement. I have had the experience of recommending to a substantial community service organisation that it use its local organisations to set up local liaison committees. Unfortunately, whilst this was approved by the national governing body there has been no action to catalyse this sort of activity. I believe this is because the Government has shown no lead in this area and has made no provision for seeding finance to this sort of activity.

that it cannot afford to initiate such programs against drug abuse but we can afford the cost of crime committed by drug abusers, by the entrepreneurs of the illicit drug trade, the financial disorganisation caused by the vast sums of money involved and the human wastage of degradation and death caused to the community by illicit drug abuse?'
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (12.23)-1 want to talk about a matter that is seriously affecting not only my electorate but also, in fact, the whole of the coal industry of New South Wales. It relates to the inadequate coal loader facilities in existence on the eastern seaboard of that State. Unfortunately, in five years of the Labor State Government there has been no major addition to the capacity to export coal from the major ports of Newcastle, Port Kembla and to a lesser degree, Sydney. It is not as though the increased requirement to export coal were something that suddenly and dramatically has been expanded. Knowledge of the coal industry's expansion programs has been widespread in government and other circles for many years. In fact, the previous New South Wales State governments of Lewis and Willis had been well aware of this expanding demand. As a result the building of a large coal loader financed by private enterprise had been approved for Botany Bay. This followed the approval of that project, by the way, by the environment and planning authorities of the State. The coal loader was to be totally enclosed and would have been serviced by rail. In the view of the Commission it would not have done any major damage to the environment ofthearea.

As time is rather short I will deal briefly with the strong recommendations of the Commission. I think it is recommendation 220 which emphasises the need for drug information centres in the community. A national system of drug information centres should be set up to monitor every aspect of the illegal drug abuse scene so that governments and the public can be informed of its size and of any changing patterns. This requires government action. Despite the urgency of the problem this has not taken place. The other matter concerns treatment programs. The commission recommended a diversity of modalities of treatment in this field. Once again this requires government action. I am concerned with the Odyssey House Drug Rehabilitation Centre program in Victoria. One of the problems here is that the therapeutic community is new in its concept to the Australian scene and the Federal Government is not adequately supporting this. I pose the question: 'Is it the Government's attitude

The coal loader would have had a lot of things going for it particularly, of course, the preservation of the coal expansion programs and therefore the preservation of the jobs of many coalminers who live in my electorate and the electorate of the honourable member for Calare (Mr MacKenzie) and the honourable member for Paterson (Mr O'Keefe). The three of us have expressed continual concern about the fact that after the Labor Party came to power in New South Wales it cancelled the Botany Bay coal loader and that since then there has been no major expansion of coal loader capacity in that State. The consequences of that are not simply that Queensland is now regarded, by the Japanese in particular, as a much more reasonable and reliable supplier. Of course, I imagine that would have happened any way in view of the monstrous and incompetent handling of industrial matters by the Maritime Services Board of New South Wales which surely must have the worst industrial

Grievance Debate

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2759

record of any State instrumentality in any State of said, and I agree, that this pressure and insistence

the Commonwealth.

by the State Government that it should, in fact,

It is also a matter of immense significance to, of course, the coalminers in the Macarthur electorate in particular who depend very heavily on the

participate in the ownership of the new Newcastle coal loader will mean that the State Government is:

capacity of coal loaders in the southern area of the . . . taking the first steps in nationalising the State coal

State to handle their product. As a result of no industry.

major expansion in coal loader capacity in five years the development programs of many of the mines in my electorate have, in fact, been held back. Many more people would be employed in the coal mines of my electorate if there were the capacity to export that coal. What is even more serious is that now there is a continuation of the delay and frustration in building additional capacity. This relates in particular to Newcastle where the State Government is insisting on taking a socialist participation in the new coal loader to be built in the Newcastle area. It is bad enough that the Wran Government complains, inaccurately, about restrictions and restraints resulting from Federal Government cuts. In fact, it has decided that despite those alleged cuts it is determined to spend the money it has been allowed to raise by the Federal Government by buying into areas that the private enterprise sector is only too pleased to fill with private enterprise capital and initiative which is there already.

The Transport Workers Union does not want the Maritime Services Board to run that coal loader. That is very reasonable because the union is well aware of the fact that this will simply lead to more chaos and more confusion and, in fact, the loss of prospective jobs in the coal mining industry. I think that the whole question of coal loaders is far more difficult than the people of New South Wales recognise. Already major coal mining companies are reporting huge losses as a result of their inability to get coal out of the ports. Recently Clutha Development Pty Ltd reported a horrendous loss as a result particularly of industrial disruption involving the Maritime Services Board coal loader, because of inadequate coal loader capacity and the requirement to send coal from the south-western fields all the way to Newcastle for export through a private enterprise coal loader. The newspapers this week report that another major coal producer in New South Wales has attacked the State Government's procrasti-

The only consequences of State intervention nation over coal to ships handling facilities. This

will be to allow an appalling badly run State intime it was the chairman of Costain Australia Ltd,

strumentality to take over the operation of those Mr Ogilvy, who expressed serious concern. He

facilities. If this occurs then I believe we are getsaid:

ting to the situation where the policies and the dogma of the Labor Party in New South Wales

We remain very concerned with the railway and port loading facilities needed to handle the coal exports from NSW

will act to the detriment of the people of that over the next few years.

State. I said earlier that the funding of the Botany We will be continuing to press for necessary decisions to be Bay coal loader was to be provided entirely by pritaken quickly by government-

vate enterprise. That was cancelled by the State Labor Government and the big replacement coal

That is, the State Government-

loader, now under construction at Port Kembla, is to avoid bottlenecks in the infrastructure.

to be entirely funded by taxpayers' money and by borrowings, by the State, for which the taxpayers are responsible particularly in regard to interest payments.

It seems to me that the Labor Party in New South Wales is saying to the producers that if they want an infrastructure more Federal money will have to be made available to New South Wales to

The same thing now is happening, of course, in finance it. I want to say in this House that that is

the Hunter Valley where the State Government utter and deliberate nonsense. A massive amount

has forced itself into the new coal loader project of money in New South Wales is being diverted

and forced control of that project into the hands into financing projects that not only could be bet-

of the Maritime Services Board. Let us look at the ter handled by private enterprise but also which

record of the Maritime Services Board as against would be done cheaper and quicker. Certainly

the private enterprise operators of the channel they would be operated in a far better manner, as

coal loader in Newcastle which is certainly the has been proven by experience, than if they were

most efficient coal loader in the State and which run by the State Government. It is a dreadful situ-

has a magnificent industrial relations record with ation. Because the State Government has inter-

the Transport Workers Union members who fered in the Newcastle project, it is already at

work happily in that loader. In fact, the Transport least a year behind the target that private

Workers Union representative, Mr Barry Joy, has enterprise had seen as a reasonably attainable one.

2760 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Grievance Debate

It seems to me that unless the philosophic obstructionism of the State Government, this commitment to a philosophy that the Government must' involved in these things, is overwhelmed, then we will have not only a waste of taxpayers' money and State money and Federal money but also we will have inefficiency in the running of those projects. People laugh when we say the State Government of New South Wales has a degree of secret socialism that is not evident from its very respectable exterior. The fact is that what is happening in the coal industry represents a serious and basic attack on private enterprise in New South Wales. The unnecessary losses being imposed on that industry as a result of the State Government's philosophic objectives represent an attack on the capacity of coal miners, and particularly the coal mining unions, to achieve better conditions and better pay.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (12.33)-1 want today to raise the question of the hypocrisy of the Government's attitude to the Soviet Union and the totally discriminatory way in which it has treated different groups in its attempts to prove how tough it is in international relations. Honourable members will recall that after the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan last year the Government prohibited normal scientific, cultural and academic exchanges between the two countries.

This was a significant setback and loss to many Australians involved in these areas but the Government asserted that it was essential to prove to the Soviet Union our horror at its action.
Honourable members will recall also that the Government asked our sportsmen and women to carry the main burden of showing our disapproval of Soviet behaviour by boycotting the Olympic Games. Other groups also were told to carry a significant burden. Regular exchanges between Australian trade unions and Soviet trade unions have been prohibited. At the same time, the Government decided to suspend the operation of Soviet cruise vessels from Australian ports. However, that ban did not extend to Soviet merchant vessel~ which carried Australian primary exports. To c__ _ out those services would have cut Australian primary exports and cheap shipping services, and hence angered the Government's rural supporters. This fact exposes the Liberal National Country Party coalition's fake nationalism and half-baked foreign policy considerations. Over five million tonnes of cargo reached Australian ports in flagships of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and in USSR time chartered ships in 1980. 1 seek leave to have the details of the tonnages carried incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted. The table read as follows-

USSR FLAG TONNAGE Plus USSR timechartered tonnage handled in 1980

Line

Tramp

Combined total

Cargo

Cargo

1980

Vessels quantity

Vessels quantity

Vessels Tonnage

New South WalesSydney Newcastle Port Kembla Sydney (Glebe Island)

(tonnage)

24

59,844

3

8,118

3

2,870

16

40,000

(tonnage)

12 325,262

14 410,750

1

22,888

36 385,106 17 418,868 4 25,758 16 40,000

(Total New South Wales)
Queensland Victoria South Australia
Western Australia

46 110,832

36

29,320

57 137,015

20

36,743

24

15,264

27 758,900 34 487,760 81 1,997,645 58 1,200,233 14 237,839

73 869,732 70 517,080 138 2,134,660 78 1,236,976 38 253,103

183 329,174

214 4,682,377

397 5,011,551

Dr THEOPHANOUS-What is the ideological and foreign policy difference between these Soviet ships carrying cargo and a joint AustralianSoviet project such as the Charter Travel Co. Ltd which involved carrying passengers? The Government's decision to prevent the Charter Travel Co. operating simply meant that the Russians looked

elsewhere in order to circumvent the ban. Consequently, Australian workers lost employment and at the same time the ban was being flouted. I am reliably informed that the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) and his Department in recent months have taken an even tougher attitude towards contacts with the Soviet Union. The Government continues to announce with pride

Grievance Debate

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2761

that there is no trade promotion between the two countries and that the trade mix commission has not-met. This is supposed to show the Government's purity and discipline. Yet, since the beginning of 1980, 85 trade representatives from the Soviet Union are known to have visited Australia.
What has happened to Australian trade with the Soviet Union? Has it collapsed? No. Our exports of wheat to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics after the Afghanistan invasion quadrupled, rising from a total value of $141m in 1979 to $524m in 1980. Our exports of barley increased dramatically from a value of $9.8m to $130m. Russia remained our second largest wool purchaser. Our exports of mutton and lamb to Russia, which were worth $1.8m in 1979, rose to $51m in 1980. In 1980 our exports doubled to be worth almost $1 billion. Despite the great embarrassment of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony), the fact is that in the year the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan and attempted to crush another people it became Australia's third largest customer.
These figures alone prove how threadbare this Government's morality and foreign policy are. If there is any doubt, we have only to see how it went about lifting the so-called embargo on grain sales to the Soviet Union. This embargo had been imposed by the United States of America because of the Soviet's intervention in Afghanistan, and we swore eternal loyalty to it. The Australian Labor Party pointed out at the time that that action was merely words; after all, it is hard to be convinced otherwise when grain sales have quadrupled. However, at least we maintained the theory if not the practice. All of a sudden the United States lifted the embargo for the extraordinary reason that the Soviet Union had not invaded Poland. Of course, we immediately followed suit. The question is: Has the Soviet Union left Afghanistan? If it has not, why has the embargo been lifted? What has happened to all of that toughness? As usual, this Government chose to bully the vulnerable while keeping its hands off powerful vested interests, to wit, its National Country Party backers. Australian academics, scientists, trade unionists and artists are prohibited from being contaminated by the Soviet bogy. At least the Government sees it as the Soviet bogy. However, we continue to increase our trade with and selling to the Soviet Union.
Even for this Government this whole episode has been a particularly disgusting combination of greed and hypocrisy. The Labor Party believes that world peace can be achieved only by a constructive attitude to both of the superpowers. We

do not believe in a lot of tough talk for public relations purposes which is not backed up by genuine actions in areas such as trade. We believe it is scandalous that the Government has tried to create an atmosphere of fear in this country with regard to the Soviet Union but has had no qualms about increasing trade four times over. It appears that, to the Liberal-National Country Party coalition, whilst the Russian bear may stink, its skin is quite valuable. This is a further example of the greedy capitalist values to which our opponents are dedicated and which transcend their own false pronouncements on principles of foreign affairs.
Mr Milton-Profit before morality.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-As my colleague has said: 'Profit before morality'. That is entirely true. Finally, I call on the Government to show some consistency and honesty, to cease its hypocritical statements on the Soviet Union and to begin the process of seeking peaceful solutions to world problems, including Afghanistan. To do so is not to approve of the Soviet's actions. Rather it is to deal with that nation on the basis of what is in the overall interests of Australia and all Australians, including those who would enormously benefit from ending the freeze on cultural and educational contacts with that country and the freeze on the Charter Travel Co. I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs to end the hypocritical state of affairs which exists at the moment and to make a statement to this House as soon as possible.
Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) (12.41)-1 have in my hand a document which would ordinarily be called quite extraordinary. It is called a 'verified complaint'. It is issued out of the United States District Court. The plaintiff is a party called the Conservation Council of Western Australia Incorporated. The defendants are two companies, the Aluminium Co. of America and Reynolds Metals Co. One would ordinarily think that this document related to something which would take place in America, but it does not. In it the plaintiff, seeking to represent many of the people in Western Australia, or indeed on one version of this extraordinary document all of the people of that country, seeks declarations as to what are the rights of the two defendants to develop Western Australian bauxite reserves and seeks injunctions preventing those defendants from carrying out developmental work. The point is not whether the developments are thought to be good or bad. The question is whether we should permit a foreign court to arrogate to itself the power to determine what should or should not be done in this country.

2762 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Grievance Debate

I seek leave of the House, for the purpose of giving some sense of the flavour of this document, to incorporate in Hansard paragraphs 10,14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19 of the 'verified complaint' as well as pages 48, 49 and 50 in which relief is sough t. This is not all of the document; it is only a part of it. It will give honourable members a flavour of the relief that is sought and the nature of the action. If the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), who is sitting on the other side of the table, could turn his attention to the question I would be glad to receive his views upon this subject. I seek leave to incorporate those extracts in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The extracts read as follows-
10. The plaintiffs assert this action is maintainable as a 'class action' under the provisions of Rule 23 (b) (1) (b)
'(I) The prosecution of separate actions by or against individual members of the class would create a risk of
(b) adjudications with respect to individual members of the class which would as a practical matter be dispositive of the interests of the other members not parties to the adjudications or substantially impair or impede their ability to protect their interests; . . .'
14. The claims of the representative plaintiff CONSERVATION COUNCIL are representative pf the claims of all the members of the class of all those so unfortunate as to be similarly affected as a result of the continued mining of bauxite, refining of alumina, and smelting of aluminum by the defendant multi-national, trans-national conglomerate corporations.
15. This action is brought by the representative plaintiff CONSERVATION COU1-JCIL on behalf of all those entitled to the full benfit, use, and enjoyment of the unique, nonrenewable, natura) resource treasures of the Darling Regional Ecological Systems of the South-West Botanical Province of Western Australia without degradation and damage attribu, table to bauxite mining, alumina refining, and aluminium smelting by the defendant multi-national, trans-national, conglomerate corporations.
16. The members of the class of all those who have already been affected, or are now, or will be subject to the deleteriou& effects of bauxite mining, alumina refining, and aluminum smelting in the Darling :Regional Ecological System of the South-West Botanical Province of Western Australia are so numerous as to make it impracticable to bring them all individually before this court.
17. The members of the class are fairly and adequately represented by the plaintiff CONSERVATION COUNCIL OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA, INC., and the law firms in the United States and Western Australia serving as counsel for the plaintiffs. Neither the representative plaintiff CONSERVATION COUNCIL nor the attorneys representing said representative plaintiff have any interests adverse to that of any individual member of the class of all those who might be entitled to the relief sought herein. Counsel for the plaintiffs have agreed to prosecute these claims in the public interest generally in the context of this class action and for the specific purpose of obtaining appropriate declaratory, injunctive, and other equitable relief on behalf of the entire class of plaintiffs entitled to such relief.
18. There are substantial questions oflaw and fact common to the class of all those who have already been affected, or

who are now or will be subject to the effects of bauxite mining, alumina refining, and aluminium smelting by the defendant multi-national, trans-national, conglomerate corporations ALUMINIUM COMPANY OF AMERICA (ALCOA) and REYNOLDS METALS CO., their subsidiaries and joint venturers in the Darling Regional Ecological System of the South-West Botanical Province of Western Australia. Common equitable relief on behalf of all members. I?fthe class is sought.
19. The questions of fact common to the class of all those who have already been affected, or who are now, or will be subject to the deleterious effects of bauxite mining, alumina refining and aluminum smelting in the Darling Regional Ecological System of the South-West Botanical Province of Western Australia include, but are not limited to,
. . . identification of the natural, economic, social, and societal specifically:
DECLARING the rights of the people of Western Australia, not only of this generation, but of those generations yet unborn, to the full benefit, use, and enjoyment of the resources of the hydrosphere, atmosphere, lithosphere, and biosphere associated with the Darling Regional Ecological System of the South-West Botanical Province of Western Australia, and the natural, economic, social, and societal systems operative therein and thereupon without degradation and damage attributable to the bauxite mining, alumina refining, and aluminium smelting operations of the defendants ALUMINIUM COMPANY OF AMERICA (ALCOA) and REYNOLDS METALS CO., their subsidiaries and joint venturers.
DECLARING the rights of the people of Western Australia, not only of this generation, but of those generations yet unborn, to the protection of the unique, nonrenewable, natural resource treasures and environmental systems of the Darling Regional Ecological System of the South-West Botanical Province of Western Australia.
PECLARING the rights of the people of Western Australia, not only of this generation, but of those generations yet uQborn, to the highest and best use of the unique, non-renewable, natural resource treasures and environmental systems of the Darling Regional Ecological System of the South-West Botanical Province qf Western Australia.
DECLARING the rights of the people of Western Australia to bauxite mining, alumina refining, and aluminum smelting by the defendants ALUMINUM COMPANY OF AMERICA (ALCOA) and REYNOLDS METALS CO., their subsidiaries and joint venturers, in a manner consistent with the highest and best use of the resources of the hydrosphere, atmosphere, lithosphere, and biosphere associated with the Darling Regional Ecological System of the South-West Botanical Province of Western Australia, and the natural, economic, social and societal systems operative therein and thereupon.
DECLARING that bauxite mining, alumina refining, and aluminum smelting in the Darling Regional Ecological System of the South-West Botanical Province of Western Australia by the defendants ALUMINUM COMPANY OF AMERICA (ALCOA) and REYNOLDS METALS CO., their subsidiaries and joint venturers, fail to adequately consider the impact of such operations upon the unique, non-renewable, natural resource treasures of Western Australia.
Demand for Equitable Relief
and the representative plaintiff demands judgment against the defendants ALUMINUM COMPANY OF AMERICA (ALCOA) and REYNOLDS METALS CO., their subsidiaries and joint venturers,
RESTRAINING the multi-national, trans-national, conglomerate corporate defendants ALUMINUM COMPANY OF AMERICA (ALCOA) and REYNOLDS METALS CO.,

Grievance Debate

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2763

their subsidiaries and joint venturers, from any further bauxite mining, alumina refining, and aluminum smelting operations in the State Forests of Western Australia.
UNLESS AND UNTIL
- . . The defendant multi-national, trans-national, conglomerate corporations provide an inventory of bauxite deposits within their leases in particular those deposits that lie outside of Western Australia State Forest lands.
- . . The defendant multi-national, trans-national, conglomerate corporations present an economic impact analysis of the feasibility of utilizing bauxite from their holdings outside of Western Australia State Forestlands.
RESTRAINING the multi-national, trans-national, conglomerate corporate defendants ALUMINUM COMPANY OF AMERICA (ALCOA) and REYNOLDS METALS CO., their subsidiaries and joint venturers, from any further bauxite mining on or in the water supply catchments associated with the Darling Regional Ecological System of the South-West Botanical Province of Western Australia
UNLESS AND UNTIL
- . . it can be established by a fair preponderance of the substantial credible scientific evidence that such bauxite mining will not increase salinity and otherwise contaminate and degrade the fresh water elements of the Regional Hydrologic System of Western Australia.
Mr SPENDER-I thank the House. This action follows shortly after the settlement in the Westinghouse action. Honourable members will recall that the Westinghouse action was an antitrust action. That was brought against a number of foreign companies, including some Australian companies. It was followed by an out-of-court settlement involving a number of those companies, including some of the Australian ones. In that action, the Australian company defendants were neither carrying on business nor supplying goods or services to the people of the United States. Yet under what is called the effects doctrine of United States anti-trust law, extraterritorial jurisdiction was claimed and given in respect of actions taking place outside of the United States, actions which, in our view, were in our vital interests but which on one view of the American law transgressed America's anti-trust laws. This action is of a different character bilt it is equally dangerous. I refer here to the action brought by the Conservation Council of Western Australia. It is, in the first place, what is caIJed a class action, that is, one party or a number of parties takes action on behalf of a very large group of parties-in this case, as I say, all or many of the people of Western Australia. That in itself is perhaps a very good reason that these actions should not be allowed to be maintained in Australia.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-- Order! It is now 15 minutes to one o'clock. In accordance with Standing Order 106, the debate is interrupted. I put the question:
That grievances be noted.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

TELECOM AUSTRALIA: INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The Government's mishandling of industrial relations in Telecom Australia which has prevented management from negotiating on what it regards as legitimately based salary claims and Which now poses the danger of serious disruption to the Australian community.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places--
Mr HAWKE (Wills) (12.46)-Australia-and particularly the business community of Australia-is on the verge of a drastic communications disruption flowing from decisions made at meetings of members of the Australian Telecommunications Employees Association around Australia yesterday. It is eminently predictable in those circumstances that there will be knee-jerk reaction from many on the Government side of the House to explain this position in terms of pure union perversity. Of course that will be an inaccurate description of the position. I take this opportunity to deal with the facts and to put them before the House so that the Australian community will have a proper opportunity of understanding where responsibility in this matter rests.
Before I go into those details, I would point out that the classifications of people that we are dealing with in this matter are skilled trades people and technical workers. I believe it should be a matter of common understanding on both sides of the House that this country is in fact faced with a very grave crisis which flows from the fact that we as a community-and to some extent all parties and all sections of the community must bear some responsibility for this-are facing a crisis which flows from the fact that we have not faced up to the problem that in this community we have not set levels of remuneration which are sufficiently high to attract and to retain people of skill and technical proficiency in those various classifications in our economy which are important to the proper functioning of that economy. The dispute which is in issue now is a direct manifestation of that problem.
By way of background, Mr Deputy Speaker, let me remind you that in the wage flow that occurred in 1979 regarding the skill classifications

2764 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Telecom Australia: Industrial Relations

that we are talking about, employees Of Telecom Australia merely received the general work value increases which flowed in that year. Out of that flow the actual relativities of those skilled people compared with other areas of employment and private employment remained unchanged. So the basis of the grievance which is now being reflected in this dispute was not in any way helped by the wage flow of 1979. The union was concerned from the end of 1979 about the simple, uncomplicated fact that the skilled people running this high technology, high profit industry-Telecom-were simply being massively underpaid in terms of comparison with people working in other areas of public employment and certainly in areas of private employment.
It is important to understand, when we are talking about this issue and about the fact that we are on the verge of a drastic communications breakdown in Australia, that the union concerned has not rushed into an industrial action situation. The position we are confronting today is something which comes out of more than 12 months of attempted negotiation and fact finding undertaken by the union in conjunction with the management. A period of more than 12 months is involved, as I will proceed to establish. Discussions were held and, as a result of those discussions, the Secretary of the union, Mr Mansfield, wrote to the Chairman and the General Manager of Telecom Australia on 29 May 1980 in respect of the salaries of trades and technical employees.
I do not have time to share with the House all the contents of that letter. Essentially, the Secretary of the union was saying to the senior management of Telecom that there was a very real problem confronting Telecom-not just its employees-in terms of the absurdity of the internal and external relativities. Let me make that point clear. It was a matter of concern to the Australian Teleco:tnrOunications Employees Association that employees who had done a long apprenticeship dealing with sophisticated technology could find at the end of that apprenticeship, at the age of about 21 years, that they were receiving something like $40 a week less than a person of the same age who was employed by Telecom in a relatively junior clerical position. This is not a partisan matter. Obviously a very fundamental problem is created when a person who has gone through a long period of apprenticeship and training to handle highly sophisticated equipment which is essential to the Australian telecommunication industry finds himself in a situation in which he could receive $40 a week less than a person performing a clerical function within Telecom. The Secretary of the union was

not trying to downgrade the people undertaking clerical positions. He was not trying to say that they were not entitled to receive what they were getting. He was pointing out that if one is to make this great and important enterprise operate it is absurd, in terms of the relative training involved, for these skilled tradesmen to be in a position in which they are getting something like $40 a week less than those people in clerical positions. That was the internal relativity problem.
In the same letter the Secretary of the union pointed out that, in respect of similarly trained and qualified people working in other areas of public and private employment, employees working for this intrinsically important enterprise as far as Australia is concerned were receiving significantly less than similarly trained people working in other areas. In that letter of 29 May which was written to the Chairman of Telecom Australia, Mr Somervaille, and to the General Manager, Mr Pollock, the Secretary of the union was not saying: 'Come on, pay up or else we will be out tomorrow'. On the contrary, he was saying: 'The problem for Telecom is not merely one of payment but also of attracting and retaining people who will be able to ensure that Telecom continues to operate'. He concluded his letter, a totally constructive letter, of 29 May, a year ago, in the following terms:
I would suggest that as an initial step a discussion should be arranged between senior management of Telecom and senior officers of ATEA to canvass the possibility of examining the current salary levels of trades and technical staff in Telecom Australia. Your assistance in this regard to establish such a meeting as soon as possible would be appreciated.
So there we have the formal initiation of that meeting. The management replied and meetings were held. It was agreed that a joint survey should be undertaken by management and the union of other areas of public employment and that that survey should form the basis for further discussion between management and the union in an attempt to try to resolve this matter. That survey was undertaken and I wish to refer to it.
It was a survey of the rates payable to first class tradesmen at the base level and it looked at a number of areas of public employment. I wish to emphasise-the list is there-that it was agreed upon. It is not something which the union plucked out of the air and which could be said to be something highly selective. The management agreed that this survey, in which it had been involved, was to be taken as representative of the position concerning the salary level of these highly skilled people who are fundamental to the operation of Telecom compared with that of people with similar qualifications in other areas of public employment.

Telecom Australia: Industrial Relations

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2765

Telecom was virtually at the bottom of that list. Only two other areas of employment could be said to be below Telecom. The Western Australian Public Service was virtually the same. Slightly below that was the State Transport Authority of South Australia and the South Australian Public Service. All the others were above Telecom, some of them significantly above. For instance, the South-East Queensland Electricity Board had a rate of pay for people with the same qualifications of 16 per cent or $34 a week more than was being received by people with the same qualifications employed by Telecom. They are the facts.
Another fact is that on the basis of this survey, jointly arranged and mutually agreed to be representative of the comparative wage situation, the management said that it wanted to negotiate with its employees. The management expressed and asserted the view that these employees were entitled to a significant salary increase. So the management went to the co-ordinating committee established between the Department of Industrial Relations and the Public Service Board and asked for permission to negotiate with its employees so that wage justice could be done to those employees and so that the interests of Telecom could be protected. Telecom has been confronted with an incapacity to attract and maintain people within its service because of the simple fact that other public employers and private employers are attracting them away from Telecom.
The management asked simply that it be given freedom by the Government to negotiate with its employees, to look after its employees and to look after its enterprise. The co-ordinating committee said: 'you cannot have that permission. You will have to write to the Minister'. On 26 April the Acting Chairman of Telecom wrote to the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) seeking permission to be able to negotiate. He received no reply. On Monday of this week the matter came before Commissioner Clarkson of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. The unions and the management found themselves in the situation of having to ask for a negotiated position, and its not being able to be achieved, simply because there was no reply from the Minister. What happened when they went to arbitration? The Commissioner virtually said: 'This is hopeless. You have two alternatives. Firstly, you can try the anomalies conference procedures, which is no avenue for negotiation at all'.
He sufficiently understood the situation to make the quite remarkable statement: 'The unions have a second choice. They can elect, with the support of their members, to give away the indexation scheme in all its parts. They can elect

not to take the money and not to be bound by the guidelines. If this election is made, they may then be able to come to this Commission for money in the traditional way which existed before indexation commenced'. In other words, he said: 'There is really nothing doing under the anomalies route. H you want to give away indexation completely we can get this thing fixed up because we can then do what the management wants to do and the unions want to do, that is, look at a comparative wage justice situation. Under that system, I am sure we can fix this up'.
Of course, there was no hope in that situation. It was recognised that the anomalies route would not fix the situation. If they had attempted to abandon indexation and all its restrictive guidelines, as the Commissioner had said they would need to do to get anywhere in this industrial relations problem area, they might have been able to fix it up. Of course, the parties could have gone into that in good faith, but then we would have had the situation of someone saying: 'No, we have to have an appeal to the Full Bench'. That attempt to resolve the situation has been made in good faith right through this period by the union and the management.
Only yesterday, after all this time and all these problems had been created, the union was forced to say at a meeting with its members: 'Management can negotiate, not directly with the union but under the indexation guidelines, but the Commissioner has indicated that they totally inhibit the opportunity of getting this thing fixed'. Let me point out what happened. The meetings took place-14,200 members met and 13,700 voted in favour of industrial action, that is, 96 per cent. In both New South Wales and Queensland where the vote was by secret ballot 98 per cent were in favour in New South Wales and 95 per cent in Queensland. This is a tragedy. The interests of Australia are at the heart of the matter. Those interests have been prejudiced by the blind application of these ideological catch-cries.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Sitting suspended from 1.1 to 2.15 p.m.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (2.15)-The honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) began his speech on this matter of public importance by asserting that the business community in Australia is facing massive disruption because of threats to the communications system of Australia. Throughout the rest of his speech-I listened to it most carefully-he

2766 REPRESENTATIVFS 28 May 1981

Telecom Australia: Industrial Relations

said that that disruption to the business community was quite legitimate. That is an assertion which I reject immediately. I regret that the honourable member for Wills should think it is quite legitimate for the telecommunications unions involved to inflict that kind of disruption, not simply on the business community of Australia, but on all the people of Australia. I wonder if he forgot during the flourish of his rhetoric that the ordinary people of Australia need their telephones much more than the business people of Australia. The fact is that the disruption which has been threatened to the communications system by these two unions, beginning on 1 June, is a result of the decision and the recommendations of the i<xecutives of those unions to their rank and file members. Thus, responsibility for the disruption lies completely and exclusively in their hands and in no way can it be brought home to the Governmen t.
The danger that Australia is facing at the present time is the result of a deliberate campaign by the two unions to pursue their claims by direct action even if this means-I bring this to the notice of the people of Australia-large scale disruption, repudiation of wage fixing principles so recently established by the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and loss of income, not only to the workers and members of those two unions but also to other employees throughout Australia. The facts are quite clear. If the honourable member for Wills was as perceptive as sometimes he tries to lead the public to believe, he would appreciate that the Australian public, throughout the length and breadth of this country, is becoming less and less tolerant of disruptive industrial action aimed at securing large wage claims and, I might add, a shorter working week. All the opinion polls that have been held recently show that a majority of Australians is not in favour of a reduced working week as is being campaigned for by the Australian Council of Trade Unions and its affiliates.
To say that the stoppages have resulted from the Government preventing Telecom Australia from negotiating is a familiar tactic. I remember that it is the same kind of accusation that the honourable member for Wills made during the disastrous period of his presidency of the ACTU at the time when he wore two hats. He was also the President of the Australian Labor Party. It is a tactic which seeks to divert attention froffi. the real issue that is involved. That issue-it is something that Parliament must face up to squarely-is whether strong and powerful unions are prepared to work within an orderly system of wage determination or whether they will continue

to confront the community to get their own way. That question and the clarification of where the peak union councils, not only the ACTU but also the Public Service unions, stand on the issue are the real matters of public importance that we are debating today. I will go one step further. The other group which must show where it stands on this issue is the Australian Labor Party either represented by the honourable member for Wills or represented by the honourable member for Oxley (Mr Hayden). That is an issue that must be faced squarely by the Opposition in this House.
Let me, in short compass, indicate the background to this matter. In April 1980 the Australian Telecommunications Employees Association, ATEA, and the Australian Postal and Telecommunications Union, APTU, included in a joint log of claims served upon Telecom and Australia Post, pay claims for $25 for workers in the telecommunications industry and postal services allowances respectively. In May 1980, ATEA had discussions with Telecom regarding alleged disparities in the pay rates received by its staff in the technical and trades grades in comparison with remunerations received by other Commonwealth employees and by employees outside the Public Service. A survey was undertaken in the interim until, in February and March 1981-which is not so very far gone-the two unions formalised those very generalised claims that I have referred to and they made their claims upon Telecom and Australia Post. I ask honourable members to remember that this was in February and March. They made their claims in the following terms: The ATEA demanded a $25 a week plus an 8 per cent pay increase for its 26,500 technical and trade stalf and the APTU sought an 8 per cent pay increase in addition to a $25 a week industry allowance, as it was called, for its 44,000 lines and postal grades.
In May-this month-the Association of Drafting Supervisory and Technical Employees served a letter of demand upon Telecom for some 1,500 technical and drafting grades seeking pay increases in identical terms to those demanded by the ATEA. We can see the magnitude of the claim which is being made, not only in money terms, but also the extent to which it is aimed to penetrate Commonwealth employment and employment in statutory authorities of the Commonwealth.
The honourable member for Wills has criticised the co-ordination machinery operating within the Federal Government by which we seek to coordinate wage claims and the handling of those claims within the Public Service or employment by statutory authorities. I inform the honourable member for Wills-I believe from what he said

Telecom Australia: Industrial Relations

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2767

that he does not know the history of the coIt is important to know and to appreciate what

ordinating machinery-that it was first put into the Arbitration Commission said. In answering

place by the Chifley Government in the 1940s. It the claim by CAGEO it stated: 'Without in any

has operated within the Federal Government ever way prejudging the issues underlying the CAGEO

since then including right through the regime of proposal, they would seem capable of being raised

the Whitlam Government. Quite properly, that under Principle 7 (c) Anomalies'-that is, the

co-ordinating machinery is intended to provide anomalies principle which the Arbitration Com-

advice to the Commonwealth authorities on how mission itself laid down. So the importance of that

they should handle wage claims. The simple, statement is simply this: It is completely open to

straightforward and correct advice that was given these Telecom unions to mount a case before the

by that co-ordinating body was that these claims Arbitration Commission under the anomalies

should be handled within the wage determination principles and to establish that there are special

guidelines so recently handled by the Conciliation circumstances which justify their pay claim being

and Arbitration Commission.

granted. If it is a legitimate pay claim, as the

Does the honourable member for Wills say in this House that that advice is wrong? lfhe does he may well line himself up with the ACTU and the affiliate unions which say that wage claims that

honourable member for Wills argues before this House, why are these Telecom unions afraid to go before the Arbitration Commission?
Mr Hawke-Who said they are afraid?

are being made today in the Federal sphere should not be handled within the guidelines recently issued by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. If he says otherwise, he is saying that these unions should have carte blanche to go outside the arbitration system and embark upon so called-that is, euphemistically called-negotiation. That really means bans, limitations, strikes and the like which strike at the very heart of the communications system of Australia. This has been threatened and, to our great regret, is likely to be embarked upon from I June. If the honourable member for Wills is justifying that kind of

Mr VINER-The honourable member for Wills interjects: 'Who says they are afraid?' If the unions are not afraid, why do they not immediately go before the Arbitration Commission under the anomalies principles and argue the merits of their case? They would seem to be unafraid because they are not simply seeking to negotiate but they are asking Telecom and the Government to carry out negotiations at the end of the barrel of an industrial gun.
Mr Hawke-Telecom wants to negotiate with them and you know it. Tell the truth.

action in this House today, he needs to be conMr VINER-Let me inform the honourable

demned along with all those other members of the Opposition who support his stand.
In the light of the recent determination by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, let us look at the force of what 1 say. The Council of

gentleman that what Telecom wants is for these claims to be determined according to the wage indexation principles and within the conciliation and arbitration system.
Mr Hawke-You know that that is not true.

Australian Government Employee Organisations, Mr VINER-It is true because it was Telecom

the peak Public Service union, put a submission to that notified the Arbitration Commission of the

the Arbitration Commission that its member existence of a dispute--

unions should be able to mount claims based on what was and is known as comparative wage justice. The Arbitration Commission rejected that proposition. I find it rather ironic that the ACTU Executive only last week said that it supports the

Mr Hawke-Under instructions from you. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member for Wills must restrain himself.

retention of a centralised wage fixation system Mr VINER-As I say, it is true because

which is based on the determination of the ComTelecom notified the Arbitration Commission of

mission which rejects comparative wage justice as the existance of a dispute and the matter was

a method of handling wage claims. Yet the ACTU heard by Mr Commissioner Clarkson last Mon-

now is condoning, if not actively supporting, with day. Mr Commissioner Clarkson informed the

the aid and assistance of the honourable member unions that they could proceed under the

for Wills, these three Public Service unions-I anomalies principles. Here we are today debating

have referred to two of these unions which operthis matter when the hearing before Com-

ate within Telecom Australia and Australia missioner Clarkson has been resumed. What all

Post-proceeding completely outside the arbithat adds up to is that the Australian Labor Party,

tration system and completely contrary to the led in this instance by the honourable member for

wage determination principles recently laid down. Wills, is asking this House to condone industrial

2768 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Telecom Australia: Industrial Relations

action by those Telecom unions, which is totally unnecessary and totally uncalled for when they have open to them avenues within the Arbitration system.

I conclude on this note: If the Australian union movement continues to embark on action deliberately taken outside the Arbitration system, as I said the other night to a meeting of the Committee of Economic Development of Australia, the community is entitled to ask whether the powers, the rights and the functions which they presently have under the law ought to be kept by the unions of Australia.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Minister's time has expired. He will resume his seat.

Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (2.30)-Mr Deputy Speaker-

Mr Moore-I move:

That the Business of the Day be called on.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The question is that the Business of the Day be called on. Those of that opinion say aye, to the contrary no; I think the ayes have it. Is a division required?

Opposition members-Yes.

Mr Hawke-I rise to take a point of order. I am informed by the Government Whip that an agreement had been made for there to be only one speaker from each side in the discussion of the matter ofpublic importance. If an agreement has been made, I will not be a party to breaking it. If an agreement has not been made, I will press the point.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair is not a party to negotiations between respective parties and cannot impede the business of the Parliament.

Mr Hawke-I have been told by the Government Whip to go ahead. Apparently there is no agreement.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! Is a division required?

Opposition members-Yes.

Question put:

That Government Business be called on.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

60

Noes

45

Majority

15

Adermann,A.E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E.

AYES

Hunt,R.J. D.
Hyde,J.M. Jarman.A. W.

AYES
Birney,R.J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. !lurr,M.A. Cadman,A.G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman,H.G.P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Edwards,H.R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M; Howard, J. W.

Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C.
Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William
McVeigh, D. T.
Macphee, I. M. Maore,l.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C.
Ruddock, P.M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, 1. McC.
Spender,J. M.
Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. I.
White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Armitage, J. L.
Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert
Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S.
Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N.
Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. I.. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Innes, U.E.

NOES

Jacobi,R.
Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Kelly,R.J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les (Teller) Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris, P.~. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. West,S.J. WilIis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. Killen, D. J. Nixon, P. J. Giles, G. O'H.

Wallis, L. G. Keating, P. J. Hurford, C. J.
Humphreys, B. c.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

CUSTOMS TARIFF VALIDATION BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.

Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (2.39)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill provides for the validation until 31 December 1981 of duties collected in pursuance of Customs Tariff Proposals No. 6 (1981)

National University Amendment Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2769

introduced into the Parliament on 14 May and Proposals No.7 (1981) introduced on 26 May. Under section 226 of the Customs Act the collection of duties in pursuance of Customs Tariff Proposals is protected against legal challenge for six months or until the close of the session of Parliament, whichever occurs first. The introduction and passage of a validation Bill is therefore a necessary machinery measure which takes over from section 226 pending the introduction of a Customs Tariff Amendment Bill, anticipated for the Budget sittings, to enact the changes contained in the Proposals.
The tariff changes contained in the Proposals validated by this Bill arise, in the main, from decisions of the Government on recommendations made by the lndustries Assistance Commission in its reports entitled 'Certain Monomers, Prepolymers and Goods of the Silicone Type' and 'Wheelchairs'. Honorable members will recall that details of the changes contained in the Proposals were circulated at the time of their introduction. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Bl'Own) adjourned.

Government has consequently decided that there is a need to amend thc Act to clarify the intention
of the amendments and to ensure, in particular, that compulsory student fees cannot bc used, directly or indirectly, for the purposes other than for the provision of amenities and services. The Bill is directed to clarifying the provisions of the
1979 amendments in three ways. First, it makes income derived from compulsory student fees subject to the same conditions as apply under section 29A of the Act to these fees. Second, it pro-
vides that where income is received by student organisations through the use of both compulsory
fees and other income, it will be necessary to apportion this income in determining the proportions available for amenities and services and for other purposes. The third aspect is that the administrative costs of student organisations, including any allowances paid to office holders, are also
to be apportioned to the extent that these expenses may be attributed to the provision of amenities and services. Only the proportion of such administrative costs that can be dircctly attributable to the provision of amenities and services may be funded from the compulsory fees.

AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Fife, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education) (2.41 )-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The. purpose of this Bill is to amend the Australian National University Act 1946 to clarify the intention of certain provisions in the Act relating to the funding of student organisations at the University. This Act was amended in 1979 to introduce into the Act provisions to implement the Government's policy on the membership and funding of student organisations in universities and colleges. This policy includes the principles that membership of student organisations is to be voluntary, that there is to be no discrimination against students who elect not to join such organisations and that compulsory fees charged by institutions can be used only for the provision of amenities and services. Such fees are not to be used to support socio-political activities.
The 1979 amendments place on the Council of the University the obligation to ensure that these fees are used only in accordance with the requirements of the Act. A number of questions of interpretation have arisen in connection with the implementation of these amendments, and the

The question of the use of income derived from compulsory student fees arises in such cases as where funds obtained from these fees are invested to earn income or where the fees are applied to other purposes, such as the production of a student newspaper, that lead to income. It is the intention of the Government that income obtained in such ways should be subject to the same conditions as apply to the use of compulsory fees through the requirements of section 29A of the Act. The amendments 1 have outlined do not represent an essential change in the framework provided by the 1979 amendments. The principles that underlie the Government's policy towards student organisations will continue to be given effect under arrangements that recognise the legitimate role of the University Council in the management of the University. It will continue to be the obligation of the council to ensure that compUlsory student fees are used only for the provisions of amenities and services. With the clarification that the Bill provides on certain aspects of the 1979 amendments that have led to issues in their implementation, 1 believe that an appropriate framework will exist to regulate the funding of student organisations at the Australian National University. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Kerin) adjourned.

2770 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Koongarra Project Area Bill

KOONGARRA PROJECT AREA BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Wilson, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment) (2.46)~I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to amend the procla~ mation by the Governor-General dated 5 April 1979 made pursuant to sub-section 7 (2) of the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1975. (Quorum formed). In paragraph (b) of Part 1 of the Schedule to the proclamation an area commonly known as the Koongarra special mineral lease application was excluded from the Kakadu National Park declared in that proclamation. This Bill provides that a new area be substituted for the Koongarra special mineral lease application area. Honourable members will be aware that, from the total area of about 5,700 square kilometres comprising the Kakadu National Park, the above proclamation excluded six parcels of land from the park, including the Koongarra special mineral lease application area. The total area of these parcels, which includes mining and commercial interests, is about 15.7 square kilometres.
In 1976 Noranda Australia Ltd applied for a special mineral lease of approximate ly 12.5 square kilometres, which was then considered appropriate for the total project requirements. (Quorum formed). The particular area excluded for the proposed Koongarra project by the proclamation of 5 April 1979 is the same as that applied for by Noranda in 1976 as a special mineral lease. The exclusion of this area from the park, together with the exclusion of the other mining and commercial areas, was made in accordance with the provisions of the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1975. The exclusions were consistent with the view of the Ranger inquiry that areas leased for mining purposes should be excluded from the national park for the period of mining. The Government announced in August 1977 that areas associated with Ranger, Jabiluka and Koongarra would be excluded from the park to accommodate mining activities.
In November 1977 the then Minister for Environment, Housing and Community Development directed Noranda Australia Ltd, pursuant to the administrative procedures under the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act 1974, to prepare and submit to him an environmental impact statement for the development of the proposed mining project. In order to

prepare this statement the company carried out extensive investigations into the topography, soils, surface and groundwater and other environmental aspects over a wide area surrounding the ore body. Noranda, in the draft environmental impact statement, indicated that it had reviewed the original concept and detailed a proposal requiring an adjusted area. The draft statement was made available for public comment and, SUbsequently, a final environmental impact statement was prepared for examination by the then Department of Science and the Environment according to the provisions of the administrative procedures under the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act.
The most important feature of the new mining plan outlined in the impact statement is that it provides for a system of water management which has a no release objective. Honourable members will be aware that the Ranger inquiry expressed concern about the possible damage to wetlands downstream from mining sites. 1 would like to draw the attention of the House to the comprehensive analysis which the proposed Koongarra project has undergone as a result of the requirements of the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act. The proposed variation to the project area boundaries is basic to my Department's assessment that the overall physical consequences of the proposal will fall within acceptable and manageable limits. To accommodate the situation the Government has decided, consistent with the recommendations of the Ranger inquiry and its announcements in 1977, to adjust the boundaries of the Kakadu National Park so as to exclude the revised project area. The effect of this is to increase park values in that the revised project area is smaller than the area now excluded from the park and the area to be added to the park will include an environmentally important area adjacent to the Nourlangie Rock-Mt Brockman massif. I am sure all those familiar with this part of Australia would welcome this addition to the park of the Nourlangie escarpment.
The means by which it is proposed to make these adjustments in the Bill is simply to replace the description of the special mineral lease application area as set out in paragraph (b) of Part I of the Schedule to the proclamation of 5 April 1979, with the description of a project area consistent with that described in the environmental impact statement. This is achieved by sub~clause 3 (1) of the Bill. The same sub~clause also incorporates the area no longer required into the park. Subclause 3 (2) and 3 (3) of the Bill are technical provisions to ensure that the original proclamation establishing the Kakadu National Park is

Great Barrier ReefMarine Park Regulations

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2771

not affected by the proposed changes. In outlining Under the zoning plan for the Capricornia sec-

the requirement to alter the boundaries of the tion, the section is divided into the following

Koongarra project area I wish to assure the House zones: Two general use zones, two marine

that the status of the land as Aboriginal land is not national park zones, a scientific research zone and

affected. All the land involved is held by the a preservation zone. Within the zones, the follow-

Kakadu Aboriginal Land Trust in fee simple. The ing areas of restricted activity are proposed for

interests of the Aboriginal owners are fully promanagement and conservation purposes: Replen-

tected by the commencement provision contained ishment areas, which will be closed from time to

in sub-clause 2 (2) of the Bill which recognises the time to fishing and collecting for a specified period

rights of the Aboriginal people to determine to allow for the recovery of fish and any other re-

whether mining should proceed. The provision source stocks; seasonal closure areas in which all

specifies that the proposed changes will not take activities will be restricted on a seasonal basis to

place unless Aboriginal consent to the project is protect from human intrusion important bird and

forthcoming. This provision is quite unequivocal. turtle nesting sites; and reef appreciation areas,

The establishment and definition of the Koongarra project area provided for in this Bill does not imply approval for mining. This is, of course, a matter for my colleague the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony). Approval for the Koongarra project can only be given after consideration by the Government following the completion of the necessary environmental procedures, compliance with our foreign investment

which are small areas, provided on reefs subject to heavy usage. Fishing and collecting will not be allowed, so that the public can observe and appreciate relatively undisturbed marine life. In effect the zoning plan provides the basis for managing human usage of the Capricornia section of the marine park so that activities do not conflict with each other and the natural qualities of the Great Barrier Reef are conserved.

policy and the conclusion of satisfactory arrange-

ments with the Aboriginal people. No decision has yet been taken by the Government to permit the development of the Koongarra deposit. I commend the Bill to the House.

It may be of interest to honourable members to know that I have recently visited the Great Barrier Reef. During that visit, I was able to see something of the reef itself. I was able not only to see

Debate (on motion by Mr West) adjourned.

the reef and the marine life which exists in it at close quarters, but also to meet scientists, re-

GREAT BARRIER REEF MARINE PARK searchers and resort operators who live and work

(CAPRICORNIA SECTION)

on the'reef. Travelling widely through the reef re-

REGULATIONS

gion, from the northern Lizard Island down to the

Ministerial Statement
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-Pursuant to section 66 of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975, I present the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park (Capricornia Section) Regulations. I seek leave to make a statement in regard to those regulations.

southern Heron Island, I was aware of the cooperation that increasingly is evident between all who live and work on the reef. Commercial users of the reef, especially within the rapidly expanding tourist industry, are realising that conservation of the reef is not only their responsibility, but also essential to their continued operation. No-one will be interested in visiting a reef with no fish or where there is no accessible living coral.

Leave granted.

The marine park concept for the Barrier Reef provides for all commercial and recreational

Mr WILSON-The regulations that have been usages except mining, while ensuring that all

tabled are designed to give effect to the zoning activities are managed through a zoning system

plan for the first part of the Great Barrier Reef which ensures the proper conservation of the

Marine Park-the Capricornia section-which natural qualities of the reef. Through the work of

was proclaimed on 17 October 1979. This section the Marine Park Authority, I am convinced that

covers more than 12,000 square kilometres adjacthat essential balance between use and conser-

ent to Gladstone, Rockhampton, Yeppoon and vation can be maintained and sensibly managed.

Bundaberg, and is the largest marine park in the The approach and attitude of the Authority has

world. (Quorum formed). The section was fostered and encouraged the co-operation be-

chosen for early declaration as it was subject to tween the Commonwealth and Queensland

very heavy use, being close to a heavily populated governments, which ensures an agreed approach

area at the southern end of the Barrier Reef to the conservation of this unique Australian

region.

heritage.

2772 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Great Barrier ReefMarine Park Regulations

As honourable members will be aware, there have been, for a variety of reasons, some delays in convening the next meeting of the Great Barrier Reef Ministerial Council. Since assuming responsibility for this portfolio, I have been most anxious to convene that Council as early as possible to discuss plans for the declaration of a section of the marine park near Cairns. The Council is made up of two Queensland ministers, myself as convenor and my colleague, the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson). The Queensland Government has been asked to nominate its two representatives on the Council and I understand that it will be informing the Commonwealth.of its decision in the very near future. I am very hopeful that, as soon as the Queensland Ministers have been formally nominated, a meeting of the Council can be convened as early as is practicable.
I return now to the zoning plan for the Capricornia section. This plan was developed with the maximum input from users of the area, which included commercial fishing and tourist interests. It was also endorsed by Queensland Ministers sitting jointly with Commonwealth Ministers as members of the Great Barrier Reef Ministerial Council. As such it is further evidence of a spirit of co-operation and concern for correct usage of this section of the Marine Park. The regulations give effect to, and enforce the observance of the zoning plan. They have been designed to make a positive contribution to people's enjoyment and pleasure in the Capricornia section by, for example, preventing pollution from litter or waste or noise disturbance in certain areas.
The regulations do not introduce any new charges or fees for users. In some of the six zones of the section permits will be required, for activities such as netting, shell or fish collecting, scientific, transport or resor~ operations. Generally speaking, permits will not be required by tourists undertaking normal recreational activities. There are no charges for permits. Besides enforcing the conditions of entry into the six zones, the regulations .also give effect to the zoning plan's requirements relating to replenishment areas, seasonal closure areas and reef appreciation areas.
Unlike most parks on land, a wide range of commercial, recreational and scientific activities will be permitted within the Capricornia section. Mineral exploration, except for research purposes, is prohibited and commercial spearfishing has been completely banned.
Whilst the regulations provide the means for enforcing the provisions of the zoning plan, it should be made very clear from the outset that the

Government regards them neither as the only nor the most important method of ensuring that the Marine Park is used correctly. The regulations are a legal support for the conditions introduced to usage of the Capricornia section by the zoning plan. They do not in themselves provide the assurance that the section will be used correctly. That can only come from people being aware of the park and its provisions, why it is there, and how they can help it survive for future generations by being value-conscious about the usage of the reers attractions and resources. To this end, the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority is launching a comprehensive information and educational campaign in order to make people aware of the provisions of the zoning plan and the regulations.

The zoning plan for the Capricornia section has been accepted without amendment by this Parliament and is to come into operation on 1 July 1981. I am hopeful that honourable members find these regulations, which are to operate from the same date, equally as acceptable as the zoning plan. I present the following paper:

Great Barrier Reef Marine Park (Cllpricornia Section) Regulatic;ms, Ministerial Statement, 28 May 1981.

. Motion (by Mr Hodgman) proposed:

That the House take note of the paper.

Mr WEST (Cunningham) (3.7)-The Oppo-

sition a long last has the opportunity to welcome

the.statement of the Minister for Home Affairs

and Envi,onment (Mr ,Wilson) outlining the

regulations under which the Capricornia section

of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park will be

managed. We point out that this first, and still the

only, section of the Park was declared in October

1979. We welcome the belated statement regard-

ing itsmanagement but deplore the Government's

and the Minister's inexcusable delay ih declaring

the Cairns section and, indeed, the entire Great

Barrier Reef region-that is, from Lady Elliot

Island in the south to the Torres Strait, as outlined

in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act which

was passed in 1975. The Government has been

and continues to be intimidated by the beligerent

obf~scating tactics of the Queensland Premier,

Mr Bjelke-Petersen, and the Queensland

Government.

''

In the brief time given to the Opposition to look at the statement and the regulations, I can say that it appears to be a very good plaI1 to manage activities in the Capricornia section. The zones range from general use-zone A-which allows virtually all activities apart from the extraction of minerals and spearfishing, to a preservation zone where all activities, except strictly controlled research, are banned. They give flexibility to the

Great Barrier ReefMarine Park Regulations

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2773

Park so that maximum enjoyment can be achieved along with the conservation of the Park ecosystems. Important points are contained in sections 8 and 9 of the regulations which prohibit the discharge of waste from ships or on islands without a permit. Once the Government's Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill comes into effect, the Capricornia section of the Park will be the only area in the seas of Australia where the discharge of wastes from ships can be regulated. The reef replenishment areas which are proposed hopefully will help to relieve some of the heavy fishing pressure on reef fish and allow populations to recover.
The Opposition applauds the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority for the hard work which it has put in to produce the zoning plan and in pressing for further declaration of the Park, in spite of the delaying tactics of the Queensland Government and, I am afraid, the gutless performance of the Federal Government. I am glad that the Capricornia section has been declared and that these zoning regulations have. been announced. Will the Minister-the third environmental Minister in five months-please tell us--
Mr Hodgman-A very good one at that.

against the ravages planned by the Queensland Government and the oil companies. Will the Minister tell us the reason for the delay in declaring the Cairns section? Last year the then Minister, the present Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson), promised a declaration. On 19 August 1980 he said:
It is anticipated that this section will be declared before the end of this year.
The Minister for Home Affairs and Environment is silent. Why has not the Cairns section been declared? Why does not the Ministerial Council meet? The Minister says that he is anxious that it does meet soon but then says that the Queensland Government has not even nominated its representatives. Mr Bjelke-Petersen is playing this Government for a fool. He does not want the Park to be declared to the low water mark or even to the territorial sea limits. He will fight against the declaration of any more sections of the Park. When will the Minister and the Government stand up to the Queensland Premier? The reef is in danger as never before. It was proven yesterday that it is under assault from the landward side by the State Government and from the eastern parameters by the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) and the oil companies.

Mr WEST-He would want to be better than the last two. Can he please tell us specifically what is going on in relation to the rest of the reef? I am not satisfied with a vague statement today to the effect that for a variety of reasons some delays in convening the Great Barrier Reef Ministerial Council have occurred. The Minister is not kidding. The Ministerial Council itself is an aberration, a capitulation to Queensland intransigence and the National Party's desire to mine and drill the reef and adjacent waters. When will the Minister stand up to the Queensland National Party? No Ministerial Council'was provided for in the original Act. The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act set up the Great Barrier Reef Madne Park Authority as the basic park management authority. The Ministerial Council has no force of law and is only a means of allowing the Queensland Premier to interfere with the Authority and the Federal Government's decisions which he and his State cronies have done very effectively since 1979.
Since that time numeroUs meetings of the Authority and the three meetings of the Ministerial Council-the last one being nine months ago-have yet to agree to declare the Cairns section, let alone the whole Barrier Reef, as a marine park. Declaration of the whole region as a marine park is the only sure way to protect, the reef

Honourable members will remember the Government's disgraceful off-shore package of May 1980-the historical sellout to the Stateswhich gave Queensland power over coastal waters of the territorial sea, that is, from three miles to a given shore base line. It also installed that State as the day to day managers of the area to the outermost edge of the continental shelf in joint authority with the Commonwealth with the power of Commonwealth veto. As I said, yesterday further amendments to the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act deClared Commonwealth sovereignty over a million square kilometres of the Coral Sea for the express purpose of issuing oil exploration licences. Of course,if oil exploration licences are issued and oil is discovered, we can be very sure that drilling will proceed. So the Queensland Government will issue permits for exploration along the coast and the Commonwealth will issue permits for exploration in deep water. That will be the effect of giving control of the territorial sea in coastal waters to the State of Queensland, and control of the continental shelf to a joint authority with the power of veto going to the Federal Government.
In these circumstances the Australian Labor Party and caring people and environmentalists throughout Australia, including those hundreds of thousands of people who see the reef as a prime

2774 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Great Barrier ReefMarine Park Regulations

tourist attraction, besides being a sensitive environmental area, will not accept the Government's assurances that the reef will be protected.
How can the reef be protected when the Minister responsible for issuing drilling licences-that is, the Minister for Trade and Resources-will not even commit himself to reject drilling within 30 miles of the reef in the adjacent area under Commonwealth-State control. Even with a minor blowout, oil could drift hundreds of kilometres. Drilling could occur in water a thousand metres deep to the outermost limits of the reef, to the continental shelf, and to the outermost limits of known technology. The Halifax Basin, the most prospective area, comes to within 10 or 20 miles of the reef.
This Government will allow oil exploration and, if that exploration is successful, drilling, where spillage can, and would, do irreparable harm. It is absolutely ridiculous for the Minister for Trade and Resources to'come into this place and to say: 'We will protect the reef from possible spillages which might result from oil drilling by not giving a commitment to allow drilling to occur within 30 miles or 48 kilometres of the reef'. It is obvious that that is not a protection in the event of a major spillage, let alone a blowout. Honourable members know what happened in Mexico and in Niger. Massive blowouts occurred and oil drifted to and fouled beaches over hundreds of kilometres of coastline.. How can we talk about allowing drilling within 30 miles of the reef when the Minister did not even give an assurance that he would allow that? He just said that he would not give a commitment to allow that to occur. The reef ought to be the very last place in Australia where we allow oil exploration permits to be issued and drilling to occur.
I am not confident that the Federal Government will use its veto powers over the Queensland Government in the off-shore adjacent area. I have no confidence in its will to declare an area, subject to exploration licence issued by the Queensland Government, as part of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park, to thwart the intention of the Queensland Government. Nor do I believe this Government will ever set up another inquiry under the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act. In this area, the Government's track record is not poor; it is just non-existent. It has never set up a public inquiry. We welcome the zoning plan and regulation but it affects only 2.4 per cent of the Great Barrier Reef region. The Great Barrier Reef is arguably our greatest environmental heritage, yet this Government has
declared only 2.4 per cent of the reef area. It simply stands by and lets the belligerent old man,

the Premier of Queensland, obfuscate and obstruct in regard to the boundaries. The Government knows very well what they ought to be, yet it will not declare them. Why does not the Minister say: 'Get that ministerial authority to meet immediately because we have a plan from the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority that we want to implement. If we do not implement it-if Queensland obstructs us-we are not bound by law to continue with the ministerial council under the Act. We will simply dissolve it and go ahead and declare the park'? That is what this Government should do. Last year the Great Barrier Reef was placed on the register of our National Esta~e. It was nominated also for world heritage listing by this Government. The Minister must now declare the Cairns section to the low water mark and proceed immediately to the declaration of the entire reef as a marine parle
Debate (on motion by Mr Carlton) adjourned.
INCOME TAX (DIVERTED INCOME) BILL 1981
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 7 May, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Wilson) read a third time.
PAY-ROLL TAX (TERRITORIES) ASSESSMENT AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 May, on motion by MrHoward:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
(Quorum formed}.
Mr FRY (Fraser) (3.19)-I support the PayroIl Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Bill simply because it gives some relief to small business in Canberra. That relief is badly needed. This Bill will raise the level of general exemption from payroll tax in the Australian Capital Territory from $72,000 to $80,400 per annum. For that reason the Opposition agrees that the Bill should be supported. However, I take the opportunity to point out in the strongest possible terms that the practical impact of this Bill in no way matches the

Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2775

Government's rhetoric about improving economic conditions in the Capital Territory, which are at an all-time low. Although it is claimed that payroll tax exemption is an incentive for people to employ more staff, quite often it works in the opposite direction. The exemption is an incentive to the people who are around the $1,500 a week payroll level to keep below thai level. Unfortunately, there are dishonest people in the commercial community who take advantage of that situation and deliberately hide some of their payroll.
1 had a quite distasteful case brought to my attention only last week concerning a young lady who answered an advertisement to apply for a job at an award wage of something like $135 a week. She was receiving unemployment benefit. The prospective employer asked her whether she was receiving unemployment benefit. When she said that she was he said: 'Stay on unemployment benefit and I will pay you $15 a day out of the till. You will be better off and, of course, I will be better off.' Unfortunately, there are people in the community who exploit these situations. There are quite a few of them about who rob the Commissioner of Taxation by taking advantage of shortages of employment opportunities. In another case a young lady answered an advertisement for a job at award wages and the people offering the job said: 'Yes, that is the pay but it is a seven-day week. Take it or leave it.' Unfortunately, that is the attitude of some employers. It is rather a contrast that dishonest employers get away with this while quite often the young people who are being exploited are described as dole bludgers.
The Bill purports to improve the lot of the small businessman. In fact, all that it does is slow down the rate of economic deterioration of small enterprises. It brings the payroll tax in the Australian Capital Territory into line with that of New South Wales, but, in fact, the exemption level has merely been raised in line with the rate of inflation. It really does not constitute an improvement for small businessmen; it simply slows down the rate at which many of them are going backwards. It is worth noting that in answer to question No. 663 on 3 March 1981 the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) said in response to a question about small businesses:
Each of the States provides some form of Jlnancial assistance either by Joan or guarantee, or in some cases both. to encourage development in the State. In some States this is restricted to decentralised industries. The assistance is available bilt not restricted to small firms. In addition in New South Wales and Victoria there are loan guarantee schemes in operation which are restricted to small firms only.

I think it should be pointed out that no such facility is available to small businessmen in the Australian Capital Territory, despite etTorts by my colleague the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) to have such a scheme introduced in the Territory. Her pleas have fallen on deaf ears. This simply means that businessmen interstate can receive assistance in the form of additional payroll tax exemption which is denied to similar individual enterprise in the Territory.
The situation is even worse when linked with the current credit squeeze caused by deliberate Government policy. The el1'ect of this is to restrict severely the supply of credit, making it very difficult for many home buyers, small businesses and consumer borrowers to obtain the credit that they need. In February the number of loans from building societies for the purchase of housing was 36 per cent lower than it was in February 1980. As well, home buyers are paying up to 2 per cent more on their loans than they were only six months ago. Businesses with large overdrafts are now paying up to 15 per cent or more for their borrowing. They are examples of the sort of encouragement which this Government is giving to small business in Canberra. Certainly, this assistance is a mere crumb compared with the difficulties that those businesses have to face.
fn November 1977 the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) promised to reduce interest rates by 2 per cent, but now we find that interest rates have risen by between 2 per cent and 5 per cent. These increases have very wide ranging effects 011 business. They restrain expansion. They bring about an increasing number of bankruptcies. The Australian Capital Territory has had a record number of bankruptcies in recent years. The high interest rates cause severe hardship to many people paying otT a loan. Many potential home buyers are prevented from borrowing to purchase a house. The glaring contradiction between the Government's rhetoric and its actions are clearly shown by the razor gang's proposal to sell the Belconnen Mall. The Government proudly claims, incorrectly, that the amendment to the payroll tax will aid small businessmen. At the same time it proposes selling the MalL
The sale of this complex will be a further blow to small traders in the Capital Territory; there is no doubt about that. We have already seen in the Australian Capital Territory that when shopping complexes are run by private enterprise this leads to pressure on small shop owners to shift out. Large corporations are driven by the desire to maximise their profits. As a result, they are keen to discourage small volume traders. We have seen

2776 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Bill

this occurring with the Monaro Mall, whose landlord is keen on encouraging only the large turnover outlets. This tendency to monopolise seems to run through the Government's economic aims. It pays only lip service to the ethic of competition.

There has been a proposal to allow the tenants

in the Belconnen Mall to purchase on'strata title. I

would support this proposal if it can be done. It

should be realised that this would require all those

people raising very large sums of money with

which to buy the strata title. I can assure the

House that many of them would have difficulty in

raising this money. Indeed, if the Mall were not

being operated by a commercial development

authority that is publicly owned, many of them

may not be in the situation they are in today. If

they had been under the same sort of conditions as

some people in the Monaro Mall they might have

been pressured out long ago. The fact that they

have stayed there is to the credit of the Canberra

Commercial Development Authority for the way

it runs the Mall.

.

The sale of the Mall would not only harm business. The Belconnen Shopping Mall is not just a shopping centre; it is a very valuable community centre resource. It is the home of the umbrella organisation Belconnen Community Services, which provides administrative cover for a number of charitable and service organisations which are located in the Mall, which are not charged any rent and whose overhead are paid for by the Authority. This includes the family day care centre and the occasional day care centre, which are subsidised to the extent of $52,000 a year by the Authority. Anybody who imagines that this will happen under private enterprise must be stupid. We know what happened at the Woden Plaza. Private enterprise, in fact, closed down the child care centre and this area had to be taken up by other sources. These services are subsidised and supported by funds generated from the profits of the Mall. In new hands they would all be at risk. The legal aid office and the marriage guidance council services have been housed within the Mall at no cost to the groups providing the services.

The decision of the Lynch committee in relation to the Belconnen Mall is even more surprising when one considers the excellent long term investment that the complex represents. This financial year the Mall will earn in excess of $lm profit. That is on top of the $4.2m that has been used to pay off interest on the amount borrowed from banks and other loan funds to finance the original construction of the building. Contrary to
what is believed by many people, there has been only $lm from the Government in the whole of

the development of this Mall. That money could be repaid tomorrow if the Government insisted on it, but it has not. So there is no question of government funds lying around there. A very small amount of government money was involved. It can be paid back at any time. The amount that the Mall contributed to revenue would increase over the years, as would the retail value of the building; yet the Government wants to sell this very successful, very profitable, very worthwhile and unique enterprise. Authority is now in a position to repay the small debt it owes to the Government and is about to embark upon the. very ambitious scheme of providing recreation facilities which the Government has failed to provide in the Belconnen area. The plans which were drawn up for projects to be put on the top floor of the Mall include an ice skating rink, a small heated pool and a cinema. There is not one cinema in the Belconnen area for the 80,000 people who live there. All these things were to be investment from the profit of the Mall. Of course, this will now all be under threat if the Mall is sold to private enterprise. The chance of these plans proceeding under private enterprise, of course, is very slim. If the enterprise is sold, Canberra citizens will be deprived of these facilities. So, this Belconnen Mall, rather than costing money, has been saving the Government money. It was providing facilities which the Government had failed to provide. Now the Government is preventing these facilities from being provided.
Earlier this year it was triumphantly announced that the giant American-based multinational called National Semiconductor would establish a silicon chip plant in the Australian Capital Territory. This corporation had to be bribed with a promise of a $30m carrot before it would even agree to conduct a feasibility study into the possibility of setting up this organisation in Canberra. I hope it comes to Canberra. I have grave doubts that it will because I think other areas have just as good a claim to it as Canberra. I hope that they do succeed in bringing it here. I have doubts that it will happen because so many of the plans that the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) has talked about for Canberra and so many of the promises that the Canberra Commercial Development Authority have made have never borne fruit. I do not have a great deal of confidence in this one either. But I hope it succeeds. Is it any wonder that the Government has to try to sell off profitable concerns like the Belconnen Mall in order to bribe companies like National Semiconductor to come to Canberra? This policy is particularly reprehensible when one considers that small businesses in the Australian

Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2777

Capital Territory are facing bankruptcy because the past few years. That, of course, is an under-

they cannot borrow sums of money that are a statement. The employment situation in Canberra

fraction of that which has been promised to under the present Government seems to be get-

National Semiconductor. One wonders at the ting worse, minor flucuations to the contrary. Mr

standards of the Government when it is prepared, Powell pointed out that since 1976, private sector

on the one hand, to claim that it is for free employment had declined by about 1,000 jobs a

enterprise and, at the same time, it undertakes year, which is about 3 per cent, but between 3,000

moves that harm the interests of small competiand 3,500 new jobs were needed each year for

tive traders.

schoolleavers and for graduates from the univer-

The confused and ad hoc nature of government policies when applied to the Australian Capital Territory are further highlighted by the Lynch committee's decision to hand motor vehicle test-
ing for registration purposes over to private enterprise. This move is, indeed, likely to be a bonanza for garage owners but at a tremendous social cost. There is no doubt that amongst other things this proposal will lead to a decline in motor vehicle safety standards and so add to road injuries, deaths and costly litigation. It will also, of course, cost the jobs of people employed in the vehicle testing stations. The present vehicle retesting
system is the envy, quite rightly, of other States. It

sity, the College of Advanced Education and the colleges of technical and further education. The Public Service will still absorb some of these people, but the bulk are likely to face unemployment and may be required to move out of Canberra to seek employment elsewhere. The Government's policies, including the present Bill, do nothing to ensure that private enterprise will make up this gap. I think we must acknowledge that Canberra is a government town and private enterprise depends on the growth of the government sector. If that does not occur and it stagnates, there is not much future for private enterprise in the Australian Capital Territory.

has been the subject of much favourable comment The hollowness of the rhetoric accompanying

by the House of Representatives Standing Comthe present Bill is highlighted by the decision to

mittee on Road Safety. It will now be possible for cut the Public Service by 17,000 people. The

owners of defective vehicles to shop around until claim from the Government that it is concerned

they find a garage which is prepared to pass the about unemployment is obviously a facade. Even

vehicle as being fit for registration. I have no the claim that the Government is concerned

doubt that most garages will take their responabout inflation is contradicted by the decision to

sibilities seriously and will do a good job. But we turn the Belconnen Mall, the Canberra Markets,

will always have those which will not. This will the Mugga Quarry and the Hot Mix complex over

point up the need for a team of government into private enterprise. All of these developments

spectors to check and see whether the garages do will, no doubt, lead to increased costs to con-

do a good job on motor vehicles.

sumers while a smaller Public Service will make it

We can only presume that such a policing sysmore difficult for small business to survive.

tem will require a large amount of money to funcThe idea that the real estate profession is

tion properly. Since the Government has not been capable of self-management is manifestly absurd.

forthcoming with its ideas on this subject, we can Market forces will ensure that prices for real es-

speculate that any saving made by closing the testtate will go as high as the well-heeled people can

ing stations may be lost in having to set up and run pay while those at the.lower end of the scale will

such a policing system. It seems quite possible be neglected. Thus the market needs will be

that, in the long run, the Government will be no satisfied, the social needs of the community will

better off financially and the community will cerbe neglected, the social inequalities will ,be

tainly be worse off because of the increased increased and the rich will get richer and the poor

number of accidents on our roads due to an inwill get poorer in a free market situation. That has

crease in the number of substandard vehicles. The always been so and it will be so in Canberra. We .

only beneficiaries are likely to be some garage have already seen evidence of that.

owners, the legal profession, and possibly the medical profession.

Between 1975-76 and 1979-80, 'the average level of the consumer price index rose by 48.5 per

The amendment to the Pay-roll Tax (Terricent. The present policies of the' Government

tories) Assessment Act will in no way ease the appear likely to worsen this situation. The

economic malaise from which the Australian Government's policy of encouraging big business,

Capital Territory is suffering. Just yesterday the rather than competitive business, is evidenced by

Commissioner for the National Capital Developthe fact that the increase in the level of general

ment Commission, Mr Tony Powell, stated that exemption from pay-roll exemptiol) only re-

the Canberra economy has not performed well in adjusts it to a level equivalent to that in New

2778 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Bill

South Wales. In fact, in some other States, the level of exemption is more than twice as high as that in the Australian Capital Territory. For example, in Queensland, it stands at $165,000 which is one of the few good things which are happening in Queensland. If the Government were serious about helping small business it would increase the cut-off to a level much higher than the proposed $80,400. Because of the policies of this Government, the economy of the Australian Capital Territory has stagnated with the obvious exception of some sections of big business. None of the enunciated policies will alter this tr~nd. In fact, they will only succeed in worsening the situation for the vast majority of Canberra people.
Once the Belconnen Mall has been sold and as soon as the Canberra Markets have been sold to the highest bidder-notwithstanding the Minister for the Capital Territory's glib assurances-the lot of small businessmen in particular, and the community in general, will deteriorate. The myth that private enterprise can run things more efficiently and more fairly than the public sector will be shown up by these developments. Again I say that small government has become a dangerous dogma of this Government. It should be looking at efficient and effective government irrespective of whether it is big or small government. One only hopes that some of the more absurd proposals of the Government like the selling of our airport to private enterprise end up in the rubbish bin where they belong. The Government should not think that the guarded approval for this Bill is in any wayan expression of satisfaction with overall economic policies or policies applied in the Australian Capital Territory which have been disastrous.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (3.39)-The Australian Labor Party supports this Bill which brings the Australian Capital Territory pay-roll t;:>x exemption levels into line with those applying in New South Wales. It is clearly desirable and necessary, as a result of our contiguous position, that laws affecting business in the Australian Capital Territory should be comparable with those applying in New South Wales. However, it is very unfortunate that in many other respects small business in the Australian Capital Territory has been singled out for discriminatory treatment. I refer briefly to some of those aspects. The first one that has affected us as a result of the recent razor gang decision has been the decision of the Government to deregulate shopping hours. This decision has been imposed on the retail industry in the Australian Capital Territory without consultation with the traders, the employees or the community. There was no obvious consumer demand

for this move and there was certainly no support for this decision from the small retail traders.
Many small businesses are owner-operated, often with family involvement. Now these traders will be forced to open six or maybe seven days a week and, perhaps, for longer hours in order to compete with larger retail chains. The result for consumers will mean increased prices as traders are forced to seek larger margins to cover increased overheads. The lobby group for the small business group, the Australian Association of Independent Businesses, has opposed deregulation of shopping hours. The most likely outcome of deregulation of trading hours is that more small traders, already operating on small profit margins, will go broke. The only businesses which will benefit are the large department stores. The large traders can afford increased operating costs resulting from longer hours of trading. No doubt they hope to recoup those costs as they gain a monopoly position. It would appear also that the Australian Capital Territory may be being used as a back door means to introduce deregulation of trading hours in New South Wales. It seems obvious that Queanbeyan shops would find it very difficult to compete effectively if the Australian Capital Territory had seven days a week
shopping.
There has been enormous pressure on the Australian Capital Territory retail traders in recent years. Retail expenditure has remained constant while expenditure per square metre of retail space has declined. As well, the domination of the industry by Lend Lease Corporation Ltd and its associated companies, and their well known pressure tactics against small traders, have placed further strains on this industry. This latest burden is merely another example of a long string of ad hoc arrangements for the conduct of business in the Australian Capital Territory. There is an urgent need for a coherent and distinct policy on small business in the Australian Capital Territory to restore business confidence and provide a sound basis for a prosperous private sector in
Canberra.
Another major industry that has been affected of late by Government decisions is the tourist industry. It has been affected by two major factors. The first is the increase in air fares. As residents of Canberra are aware, there has been a 38 per cent increase in the air fare between Canberra and Sydney, and that is bound to have an effect on tourism in Canberra. Even the Australian Capital Territory tourist commissioner in a statement in April this year estimated that some 30 per cent of air travellers could be affe.oted by the increases. Since then I have been contacted by many travel

Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2779

agents, who have confirmed that statement, and thousands of ordinary citizens in Canberra have signed petitions protesting against the increases. It is very clear that the high cost of air travel may well deter both domestic and international tourists from extending their travel to include Canberra. The Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) wrote to me this week in relation to Canberra's air fares and indicated that they may rise yet again. The Minister stated that there would be a further refinement of the air fare formula and that this may further atTect Canberra's air fares. Any further increases would be catastrophic to the tourist industry, and I hope that any refinement of the air fare formula will be downwards in relation to Canberra.
Business in Canberra has also been saddled with the burden of many other razor gang cuts. For example, and I think this one will have a very detrimental etTect on the tourist industry here, a decision has been made to postpone indefinitely construction of the convention centre. I know that the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) has talked about the possibility of a convention centre going ahead, but it was stated quite categorically in the Lynch razor gang report that the projecl would be deferred indefinitely. I hope that the Minister for the Capital Territory is right and that in fact we will get a convention centre here. But many other promises for the Australian Capital Territory have not been kept, and I will believe it when I see it. Business interests directly involved with the convention centre project and the people of Canberra can have no confidence that the Government takes its responsibility in the Australian Capital Territory at all seriously. By ministerial whim alone this major development, which would have stimulated growth in the tourist and construction industries and provided an important attraction for the national capital, has been cancelled.
The razor gang has also deferred or cancelled eight capital works projects in the Australian Capital Territory. Some contracts have already been let for these projects. For example, the management contract for the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation headquarters has already been let. I think this decision will have a dampening effect on the builders in the Australian Capital Territory. Canberra's building and construction industry is particularly vulnerable to sudden Government decisions. In the past we have seen a stop-go policy for Canberra create havoc in the local economy. These latest Government decisions eliminating functions and staff will also have a flow-on etTect in many areas of business activity in Canberra, and I hope that any changes

will be implemented gradually, with due consideration for the etTects on business and proper consultation with the community. One area of construction activity in Canberra which requires urgent consideration is the government housing program. My office has been inundated with complaints about housing in Canberra, and I urge the Minister for the Capital Territory to argue very strongly in Cabinet for a resumption of the government housing program. It is essential for Canberra, not only for the construction industry but also for the welfare of people in this Territory.
The Government has stated its commitment to the private sector, and this will be a good opportunity to put that philosophy into action. What is needed now is an end to this stop-start development of Canberra. We need a long term plan for Canberra's growth and development. This Government is directly responsible for the administration of the Australian Capital Territory as there is no local or State government to which business groups can appeal. The shopkeeper or builder in Canberra is directly affected by any Government policy change. There is no buffer of any sort to shield the small business person from these sudden decisions. We need a long term plan, a long term policy. I hope that the Government will give serious consideration to that because it is the only way to guarantee the future of small business in Canberra.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to he moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.
SUPPLY BILL (No. I) 1981-82
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 May, on motion by MrHoward:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House has a general debate covering this Bill and Supply Bill (No.2) 1981-82, as they are associated measures. Separate questions will of course be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Honourable Charles Jones)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate on these two measures?

2780 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Supply Bill (No.1) 1981-82

There being no opposition, I will allow that course .to be followed.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (3.53)-After the events of yesterday and today in New South Wales and Victoria, with Messrs Mason and Hamer respectively resigning without any pressure being applied in either case, as I understand it, I suppose that this afternoon we can expect the treble to get up. There certainly seems to be a fair bit of pressure on this House, Liberal members have been meeting on and off in caucus, obviously disagreeing witl1 Government policy. However, will see what happens. At least it is good to see two of them go.
The Supply Bills are the normal Bills brought forward at this time of the year to provide the Government with the authority to appropriate funds for its various expenditures up to November 1 of the financial year, by which time the Appropriation Bills introduced with the Budget will have passed by the Parliament. The most notable feature of the Bills this year is that they exclude appropriations for payments to the States in respect of hospital cost-sharing, the school dental program, and the community health program. Funding for those programs will now be included in the States tax-sharing funds. The decisions regarding health funding are only one aspect of a concerted attempt by the Government to cut governmen t expenditure in general, or so it states, and its own expenditure in particular, as part of its increasing adherence at least to the rhetoric of a monetarist economic doctrine. That doctrine is totally unproved and, if it were ever fully implemented, which I believe is not politically possible in a democracy, it would probably fail to achieve the economic recovery its adherents claim must inevitably result. Thus, for instance, in the United Kingdom where the Thatcher Government has at least used a monetary rhetoric and pursued a fairly strong monetarist policy for the past few years, the result has been soaring unemployment and negative economic growth. If we in this country are to pursue a more monetarist approach now, we may expect that despite our enormous advantages through vast natural resources, particularly in the energy area, we will similarly fail to generate a sustained economic recovery.
At this stage, on behalf of the Opposition, I move:
That all words after "That" be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing this Bill, the House notes with alarm the increasing commitment of the Government to monetarist policies, which policies have, wherever fully implemented, resulted in low economic growth, high unemployment, soaring interest rates, increased inequality and

widespread poverty, and therefore calls on the Government to abandon these damaging and divisive policies'.
The amendment will be seconded by the honourable member for Macquarie (Mr Free).
This afternoon I would like to deal mainly with the recent changes that have been made to health policy. In the first instance, I would like to receive from the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar)-to help the House judge the fairness and benefits, if any, of the recently announced changes to hospital financing-figures of total expected savings to the Commonwealth in 1981-82 from the changed payments to the States for hospitals and the amounts by which each State's receipts from the Commonwealth will be less than their value if the cost-sharing agreements had continued and no other changes were made to the present hospital arrangement. There is a lot of talk in the States about how much they will lose under the arrangements. The total figure certainly is not the same as that which the Minister has apparently provided in passing. I certainly think that the House is entitled to the actual figures from the Minister.
Let me put some propositions and try to explain them. A letter which I have written is published in the current issue of the Bulletin. 1 would like to read the relevant parts of the letter and then go into more detail on some aspects. I comment in my letter on recent government changes in health arrangements. The letter states:
Why does the Fraser Government keep changing the direction of its health funding policy? Because it allows extraneous political considerations to intrude. The policy reversal in the 1978 budget occurred because it was trying to fiddle the Consumer Price Index.
The most recent reversal occurred because the government was using the health insurance tax rebate to allow it to bury indexation.
The government speaks of saving money but I have calculated the cost of the proposed changes to the Commonwealth Treasury to be over $440m in a full year at current prices.
Additionally there will be a very significant extra cost to the Commonwealth due to the fact that all the 'new' patients losing their standard (public) ward status will now have to pay medical fees and the Commonwealth will pay 30 percent cifthem.
The cost to the Commonwealth and funds of newly labelled 'doctor of choice' patients-
The old intermediate patients-
having a battery of pathology tests, will be huge but will enable shrewd hospital administrators to balance their budgets.
Each change in the health insurance system is portrayed as a solution to problems (arising from previous 'solutions').
The Fraser Government defends the most recent changes on the basis of 'user pays' and therefore leading to lower costs.
But making insurance contributions tax rebatable is not 'user-pays', increasing the health fund pay-out on a doctor's

Supply Bill (No. J) J981-82

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2781

bill from 75 to 85 percent is not 'user-pays'; nor is increasing the private hospital subsidy.
In any case, the rationale for 'user-pays' loses much of its meaning when what you're really doing is forcing everyone to take out private health insurance. You don't discourage the over-use of doctors by forcing people to be insured, any more than you discourage arson by forcing people to insure their homes.
The changes will do nothing to discourage the over-use of doctors, nor will they discourage the insured from staying too long in hospital. In any case, these decisions are much more in the hands of doctors than patients.
Let me go into some detail in respect of some of the propositions I put in my letter. The first matter concerns policy reversals. We had a policy reversal in the 1978 Budget which, in effect, even though the Government had spoken at great length about abolishing Medibank, for practical purposes brought us back to Medibank. The only difference between the original Medibank and Medibank as introduced in about November 1978 was that instead of receiving under the original Medibank a refund for all medical expenditure above $5 or $10, the refunds were for all claims above $20. The reason for that was because the Government was trying to reduce the consumer price index increases for that quarter. It was successful on that point. The cost to the Government was about $600m for the full year but it was able to reduce the consumer price index in the so called December quarter of 1978 by 2.3 per cent. That may have been a worthwhile proposition from the general economic point of view but it had nothing to do with health policy.
The most recent reversal occurred because the Government is using the health insurance tax rebate to allow it to bury tax indexation. It is important to remember that on the same day, for no possible connected reason, the Minister for Health announced that there would be tax rebates for basic health insurance costing about $600m and the Treasurer (Mr Howard) announced the abolition of what remained of tax indexation, which meant that some $500m was lost to the people and would go to the Government. I say there is a cost to the Commonwealth Treasury of something of the order of $41Om in the full year under the health changes which were introduced. I certainly have not heard anyone deny my argument. I have put it on a number of occasions including when I have put it to this House. I will repeat it.
I will first deal with the loss to the Commonwealth Treasury. The Treasurer claims that the tax rebate for basic health insurance will cost the Treasury $600m in a full year. Nursing home

benefits for insured persons represent a $120m donation to the health funds. Certain very small improvements in home nursing will amount to $lm. The Government estimates that the increased cost to the Commonwealth of increasing the payment for surgical patients in private hospitals from $16 a day to $28 a day will be $21m. This means a loss of $742m to the Government at current prices in a full year.
The gain to the Commonwealth is a change in the re-insurance pool contribution of $25m. The Government will restrict the definition of disadvantaged patients. There will be an increased payment to doctors for the new category of disadvantaged patients from 75 per cent to 85 per cent of the common fee. The result of this will be a saving to the Commonwealth of $9m. Also there will be a change from paying medical bills over $20 to paying 30 per cent of all medicals for insured patients only. Allegedly, the saving to the Commonwealth will be $10m. Also there will be a gain of $288m in a full year as a result of the proposed reduction in payments to the States for hospitals. I will go into that in some detail.
The proposed reduction in payments to the States for hospitals is justified by the Government on this basis: A means test will be introduced and the States, whilst not being forced to introduce that means test, will for practical purposes be forced to do so because they will not receive extra money from the Commonwealth. The reimbursement to the States will be based on the proposition that, firstly, such a means test will be introduced and, secondly, that charges in hospitals will be increased by 60 per cent from 1 September. Currently under the so-called shared ward arrangement in hospitals, the old intermediate or doctor of choice patient pays $50 a day. He will now have to pay $80 a day. That situation applies only to the insured at the present time. But under the new scheme it will apply to the uninsured. Therefore everybody will have to pay more hospital insurance because the health insurance companies will pay a benefit of $80 a day instead of $50 a day. Similarly, there will be an increase on the $75 a day by 60 per cent for private room patients. Of course, there are very few such patients although lots of people take out the extra insurance.
As I have already said, there will be a loss of some $41Om to the Treasury because of the announced changes. It is impossible at this stage to quantify the loss but what worries me much more is that the Commonwealth Government, the Department of Health, the Treasury and the people who will have to pay have not quantified the additional cost created by changing a significant

2782 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Supply Bill (No.1) 1981-82

number of Australian hospital patients from standard ward to private ward. Whilst the hospitals will get $80 a day for each new private patient instead of nothing, as applies without a means test, there will be a significant extra cost to the Commonwealth. If a patient is a standard ward patient in any hospital in Australia at present no medical fee is charged. The medical practitioner is not allowed to charge on a fee for service basis for public ward patients. Some arrangements apply in small country hospitals where in fact the doctor receives a fee similar to that charge but he cannot charge public ward patients. Certainly, in all the city hospitals the medical practitioner is not allowed to charge public ward patients but is paid on a sessional or salary basis.
There will be a significant transfer of patients with the abolition of the means test. From now on, unless patients are disadvantaged or means tested pensioners they will have to pay a fee for their medical services. The fees for the medical services can be quite significant, though obviously they vary. Honourable members can imagine the medical fee involved for a patient who is admitted with a coronary occlusion to an intensive care ward. The cost of diagnosis and treatment on tests and ECG monitors would be substantial, as would for example the costs involved in some accident cases or surgical treatments. Previously, the Commonwealth paid nothing in respect of the medical fees of those patients. From now on the Commonwealth will pay 30c in the dollar for every service rendered to those patients. That will amount to hundreds and even thousands of dollars in the case of many patients receiving intensive care.
The way the Government runs its finances is depressing to me. It has no idea whatsoever of the costs involved. This morning at Question Time the Treasurer (Mr Howard) agreed with me that the Government had estimated that the cost to the Treasury last year of proposed taxation concessions in respect of investment in the film industry was $2m. Now after five months in this year we find people looking at tax benefits of approximately $200m in this industry. The Government is out by a factor of 100. We have not even an estimate of the cost of the health changes. In talking to significant people in the Department of Health and in the Parliamentary Liberal Party on matters of health one finds that they have not even thought of the costs and are not aware of the extra charges involved. That is what depresses me. The Commonwealth is undertaking to pay 30 per cent of all those medical charges.
As I stated in my letter to the Bulletin, it will be temptingfor hospital administrators to balance

their budgets by ordering a large number of unnecessary expensive tests on all private patients. Between the funds and the Commonwealth, the hospitals will be paid large amounts of money for doing all kinds of things, some necessary, some not strictly necessary, on every private patient. For example, complete blood biochemistry and other pathology tests can be done on every patient admitted to hospital. I am not suggesting that every administrator will do this but, as 1said in my letter, shrewd hospital administrators will be able to balance their books in that way. There is no attempt made by this Government to find out the likely costs.
The next point 1 mention concerns the announcements made about a month ago. The State Premiers and State Ministers for Health, all with some justification, screamed. The loudest apparently was the Premier of Queensland and his Minister for Health. A very short time afterwards~I think a week or so~the Commonwealth decided to give Queensland an extra $16m towards its hospital system. I put the argument that of all the States Queensland and Tasmania will, in ract, lose least financially by the system, unless I am wrong in my estimate how the Government will refund money to the States for their hospitals. As far as we know, under the proposed agreement there will be an across the board decision. This seemed to be confirmed by the answer given by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) to a question I asked in the House two weeks ago. It seems there will be an across the board decision by the Commonwealth Government as it expects, let us say, an extra 20 per cent of patients to be private patients from 1 September. Therefore the Commonwealth will pay less money to all of the States on the same basis because the States will collect the extra finance.
I will cite some figures from an answer given to Question No. 235 which I asked last December and which was answered by the Minister for Health in February. It was apparent that there was a large variation in the proportion of private patients in public hospitals in the different States of Australia. For example, in New South Wales 53 per cent of all patient bed days during that year were private. In Victoria, the figure was 46 per cent, in Western Australia 40 per cent, in South Australia 34 per cent, in Queensland 20 per cent, in Tasmania 14 per cent, and in the Northern Territory 11 per cent. We have a variation between the States of 53 per cent in New South Wales down to 14 per cent in Tasmania. If we assume, for all practical purposes, that patients are equally able in all States to afford hospital treatment~that is probably true to within one

Supply Bill (No.1) 1981-82

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2783

per cent or 2 per cent-the same proportion of all Australians in all the States will, under a means test, be forced to pay from 1 September for accommodation in hospital, if the States agree to the scheme. Let us assume that 60 per cent of patients in all States will fall into that category. To put it another way, of all the hospital bed days used, 40 per cent will be used up by pensioners covered by the pensioner medical service or by the extra one million disadvantaged people. In fact, such people make up about three million out of a population of 14 million, which is of course, far less than the 40 per cent of people estimated but because they include a much older age group than the general population it would be fair to say that the percentage of bed days used would be about 40 per cent. In New South Wales if everybody who is able, under a fairly strict means test, to be treated as a private patient in a hospital is so treated the increase will be from 53 per cent to 60 per cent, which is a very small increase of 7 per cent. In Queensland if the same basis applies, the increase will be from 20 per cent to 60 per cent which is a trebling of the figures. Queensland will collect for an extra 40 per cent of all bed days $80 a day. In New South Wales the extra $80 will only be collected for 7 per cent of all bed days. If anything, New South Wales will be very greatly disadvantaged as will Victoria and Western Australia compared with Queensland, Tasmania and the Northern Territory.
These terribly important questions need to be considered by the House if we are to make an intelligent decision. Let us accept the proposition propounded by the other side of the House-the Australlan Labor Party does not accept it-that there ought to be a means test for people going to hospital. There still ought to be a decision on the part of this House, expressed by the Government of this country, on how the funding of those hospitals should occur. It is quite clear that an across the board decision such as this Government has made, after which it caved in to certain pressures in the case of Queensland and in which it was allegedly involved in some typographical error costing $4.5m in the case of Victoria, is not the way to do it. There ought to be an intelligent discussion and estimates ought to be provided on how many extra people in each State will have to become private patients. We need to know of the extra money that will be raised by the States so that the States can receive from the Commonwealth that much less.
Every taxpaying family will be worse off if we take into account the abolition of tax indexation, which will coincide at the end of the next financial year with the 'benefit' of having compulsory

health insurance with a tax rebate for the basic part of that health insurance. For all those presently insured the abolition of tax indexation will mean a loss of approximately $6 a week for every taxpayer in the family, with a gain of about $2.50 a week as a maximum tax rebate for family health insurance. It is important to emphasise that if there are two taxpayers, or two people earning money, in a family then that family gains only one benefit as far as the tax rebate for health insurance is concerned. So the loss for two-income families is much greater still because they receive no benefit in the case of one of the income earners. The Government may be able to justify that, but I have not heard it attempt to do so. I would be interested to hear such an attempt. In the case of those presently uninsured $9 per week must be added to the cost. It is important to note that the changes will benefit only private hospitals, private health insurance funds and some-relatively few-specialists. It is fair to say that, although the Australian Medical Association has welcomed the changes, general practitioners will not be better off. In fact, in many cases they may be significantly worse off. I do not have time to go into the details of that but I think that is an intelligent understanding or summation of the effect of this change as far as the medical profession is concerned. I am prepared to argue that at another time.
The Government talks a lot about saving money. I have shown on two accounts today-in regard to tax exemptions for the making of films and the extra expense involved to Commonwealth revenue arising from changes to hospital funding-that extra revenue will be required. I draw the attention of honourable members to an answer to a question of mine on page 2625 of Hansard of 26 May. It shows that the Commonwealth revenue has increased by 62.3 per cent, from $18.3 billion in 1975-76 to $29.7 billion in 1979-80. It is estimated that the total receipts this year of Commonwealth revenue will be $34.5 billion, a further increase of $16.2 per cent over 1979-80. During the time Commonwealth revenue increased by 62.3 per cent, the consumer price index increased by only 48.5 per cent. So much for a government which says it is a low tax government. I would hate to have a high tax government here under those conditions. During the current 12 months I think the consumer price index has increased by about 10 per cent and yet Commonwealth revenue is increasing by about 16.2 per cent.
Mr Morrison-It is a high tax government.
Dr KLUGMAN-It is an extremely high tax government. Yet it is not concerned about this. As

2784 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Supply Bill (No.1) 1981-82

I pointed out this morning, Commonwealth revenue will be reduced by about $150m to $200m by the concessions in relation to film production. This applies only to films which have been notified. In the final minute I have to speak I wish to refer to another point which I have raised privately with the Treasurer but not publicly. It involves commercial television stations. At present, the costs of the films they produce are written off against their incomes. There is a 100 per cent cost deduction. Under the new legislation some of the commercial television stations propose to set up dummy companies to produce films. I am sure all the stations will do that in the future. Those films will then be sold to the parent stations, and so they will be able to deduct 150 per cent of the capital expenditure on the filins produced for their own commercial television stations. In addition to that they will be able to juggle the profits of the films between the commercial television station and the dummy company because the company producing the film will have to pay tax on only 50 per cent of the profits. From producing films for themselves and paying 100 per cent, which is the normal rate for a product on which they will later raise money as they are selling time on the station, the stations will he able to claim 150 per cent and pay only 50 per cent tax on the profits they have raised. I suggest to the House that this Government is failing the people of Australia because it is not able to deal with the economic problems which face Australia and, at the same time, it is not able to be fair and just in the distribution of the burden of the economic problems as far as the Australian population is concerned. It is an extremely high tax government and I hope that, as I said at the beginning of my speech, we can achieve the treble. The resignations of Messrs Mason and Hamer have already been achieved and the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) will be going fairly soon..
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. Is the amendment seconded?
Mr Free-'-I second the amendment and reserve my right to speak.
MI' Sl'EELE HALL (Boothby) (4.23)-Irise to support the original question and to oppose the amendment moved by the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman). In so doing I want briefly to mention that much discussed question of the River Murray, its tributaries and its watershed. I will do so by referring to a series of articles which recently appeared in the Australian about this very complex matter. Those articles gave a description of the States involved, their problems and of the many problems that stand in the way of

settling the technical difficulties besetting that national resource. The beginning of one of those
articles states:

The River Murray, Australia's most important ~nd contentious waterway, is ruled by four governments whIch must reach unanimity on every decision they ma~e about the river despite the fact that their interests conflIct almost all
the time.

That is basic to much of the modern day problems besetting the river that four and possibly five governments, with the inclusion of
Queensland-it is a significant .area o~ watershed for the River Darling-must face. FIve governments must agree in the future as to how the s?,stern will be treated and how the resources which come from it will be allocated. The articles dealt rather dramatically, in journalistic terms, with their headlines, according to the various issues. I quote the following headings: '. . . grey trunks rising gaunt and ghastly'; 'Old Man with nothing but salt in the bank'; 'Driest State helps poison its ,,:ater'; '~i".er Darling is. a drop ,~~ the notion of fair play'; River fathers hit a snag? Our greatest river falls foul of our greed and Ignorance" and 'Politicians watch as the Murray dies'. Man; problems are enumerated within this which perhaps the South Australians are dramatising. At the moment the River Murray mouth contains drift sand. It has been sealed by the lack of flow and by the action of the Sou~hern Ocean which enters what is usually an openmg to the sea. That greatest system which Australia has at. the m()- ment has no exit to the sea. As I have SaId, South Australians see photographs in their local
newspapers of vehicles being driv~n .across ~he Murray mouth and this is a dramatIc l11~stratlOn of the problem which faces so many of us III south-eastern Australia. I quote from several paragraphs of articles which describe the imme~sity of the river system and what must be done to It. One article states that the river comprises 730,000 hec-
tares of land as a valley, producing wealth valued at close to $350m. The article goes on to state:

An entire State-South Australia-depends for its very

existence on the Murray. There are bigger rivers in the world,

but few carry the burden of the Murray.

.

Upstream of Hume for the first time, howe:ver, .is t~e $1~O million Dartmouth Dam on the Mitta MItta RIver In VICtO;Ia. It is holding 1.624 million megalitres. 40 per cent of capaCIty, equal to about half Hume's capacity. As of thi~ momen~, !he total storage held along the River MurraY.ls 2.1 mIllIon megalitres, or 24 per cent of total storage capacIty.
Again it is interesting to refer to the fact that the Dartmouth Dam is only about half full. For over 18 months this dam was held up for political reasons in South Australia by the Dunstan Government. I remember saying at the time, at

Supply Bill (No.1) 1981-82

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2785

the height of that dissension when that Government would not proceed with something which was vital to the State's future, that if there were a series of dry years before the dam filled South Australia could conceivably pay an extremely heavy penalty for the action of that Dunstan Labor Government. It remains to be seen whether this year will be a good catchment year in the alps or whether it will be a poor one. If, however, it is a poor one the greatest monument or legacy that the Dunstan Government will have left will be the destruction along the River Murray in South Australia of orchards and a deterioration in the drinking water for Adelaide to below the standard recognised by the health authorities. That is a prospect which faces us now. We hope that it will not come about and that there will be a good catchment year in the alps and therefore a feeding of the Dartmouth Dam. I quote a further newspaper article:
According to the River Murray Commission, supply at entitlement level should guarantee South Australia potable water. In reality, this is not so. Salinity readings at Morgan, where water is extracted for domestic and industrial use, show that since September the water has been recording higher than 800 E.C. units, the salinity measure recommended by the World Health Organisation for drinking water.
That was the position last September. Since then there has been no further improvement in the system. That is the measure of the threat that we face because of the political action of a South Australian Labor Government which decided that the fortunes of its political party should be put before the fortunes of the South Australian people. It is an indictment on that government. I am sure that it is one of the reasons the South Australian people eventually threw it out. The protracted passage of legislation through the South Australian Parliament and the aftermath of the argument concerning the Dartmouth Dam was a very bad period in which to discuss the future of the whole river system. It was overlain by State politics centred on the subject of quantity of water in the system. It is good now that that dam has been built and completed and that the entitlement of South Australia has been increased.
We can now get on and talk about the subject of quality in the system because quality is an overwhelming matter for those people who live along the river and who must drink its water to survive. It is that challenge which we must now meet. It has been the subject of very great debate in this House and right across the south-eastern part of Australia, particularly in my State of South Australia. It is a matter of much frustration in South Australia. The South Australian Government has agreed to give up its absolute power of veto on the River Murray Commission and will

abide by a majority decision. This is something which the other two States of Victoria and New South Wales have not yet agreed with. I must say that if that can be a matter of agreement it will bring a great deal more effectiveness into the management of the system by the further and more effective decisions that can come from a majority decision.
In South Australia there has been a sort of appointment, an agglomeration of a committee called the Save the Murray Committee. The committee is in its inaugural stages. It encompasses all sorts of people from across the community and from all sides of politics in South Australia. It is an example of the intention of our State to go about its business of survival to make sure that the Murray is treated as a delicate source of resource and to make sure that Australians understand its importance and take action about it. However, I see very little hope of the four main governments which are involved in the River Murray Commission of agreeing, of their own volition, to surrender any of their powers. I suppose that one could go into detail and read a great many volumes about it, but it would simply lead up to the point that somebody and some organisation have to take a powerful position of leadership in relation to the establishment of a new set of management techniques for the system. The only body that I can see which could do that is the Commonwealth Government of Australia.
Despite the fact that the Commonwealth Government has only one vote on the River Murray Commission and is unable constitutionally to enforce the decisions of that body upon the various constituent States, I believe the Commonwealth Government can and must take a strong view as to what should be done about the river system's future management. Unless that is done, we can look forward to a future of very great problems and a future when all of the resources of water in the system are allocated or overallocated to existing irrigation uses. When that is done we will be unable, in the future, to have available to us the water which we may need to remedy the problems which are inherent in irrigation. Unfortunately, the politics of water supply rests mainly with irrigators. They do not necessarily rest with the overall good of the river system and its survival. They rest with supplying water to people who happen to be voters and part of an economic community. That is an essential part of the use of the river but it is still subsidiary to the long term survival of the system itself.
] have no really specific suggestion to make to the Commonwealth Government about this except to say that it ought to be busy thinking

2786 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Supply Bill (No.1) 1981-82

about it. It should be establishing a policy as to how it can move. One thing which I believe it can do is set up a royal commission in its own right to look at the system. I am led to believe by the South Australian Government that the Commonwealth Government has the authority at least to look at the position and to examine it. Indeed, it would be an improvement on what we have today if we could ascertain in the greatest technical detail what is necessary by way of management. Having ascertained that, I believe there are ways in which the Commonwealth Government could encourage the States to take necessary action. It might very well mean that we have to buy that action with Commonwealth resources simply to support State works which are necessary to save the river. I would like to quote from an article which gives the amounts which, at the moment, are intended to be expended by the various States for salinity alleviation works. The article states:
South Australia is spending $82.7 million on the Murray and its land-related problems, illustrating beyond doubt that where there is a political will fed by the threat of a hostile constituency, the money can be found to tackle the problem.
The Commonwealth, New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia are planning to spend $126.4 million on the Murray and its problems. These schemes will eventually extract 316,000 tonnes of salt from the Murray's average annual salt load of 1.57 million tonnes.
There are no other plans on the drawing board. None of these schemes looks beyond the year 2010.
That simply is not good enough. Some lead has to be given. One cannot see that that lead coming from a body such as the River Murray Commission, as good as it is. I give it full credit for many of the things it has done--for the construction of storages, the management of the system and for the arrangements which have been made through it which have particularly benefited South Australia in the past. Looking to the future, there is no other conceivable body which can give the lead with the authority of the public purse and with the validity of a moral judgment on what can and should be done to save the system, other than the Commonwealth Government of Australia.
I urge the Government, whatever delicate negotiations may be in train at the moment, to lift its gaze beyond the immediate future and what must be done in the next five, 10 or 20 years and urgently look ahead to the permanent preservation and allocation of the resources of the river through one overall central developmental and preservation policy. I strongly urge the Government to adopt at least an attitude which would identify the needs that can then be a base for that policy.
Mr MORRISON (St George) (4.37)-The honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele

Hall) has stated that he has no plan to undertake a study of the problems of the Murray River system. I remind him that one of the Labor members, the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi), has drafted a private member's Bill relating to the establishment of an institute of fresh water studies. I trust that, when that matter comes to the vote, the honourable member for Boothby will find himself able to give it the very strong support that is necessary. This afternoon I would like to look, within the context of Supply Bill (No.1) and Supply Bill (No.2), at coastal surveillance. The costs of coastal surveillance range over a number of departments-the Department of Defence, the Department of Business and Consumers Affairs, in particular the Bureau of Customs, the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Department of Health, particularly in matters of quarantine and the Department of Primary Industry as far as fisheries are concerned. I wish to make the preliminary comment that despite the supposed value and interest that this Government gives to coastal surveillance, and the expenditure of millions of dollars of taxpayers' funds each year on coastal surveillance, I have not been able to get from each of the departments a breakdown of the funds allocated to coastal surveillance. This is despite my placing a large number of questions on the Notice Paper seeking that information. Yesterday, for instance, I received a reply to a question on notice dated 24 February from the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore). It took that Minister three months to make the following statement:
The main items of expenditure and the costs attributed to each item have not been determined as the cost of coastal surveillance is not a specific item of Departmental expenditure.
This statement comes from a department that contains the Bureau of Customs which spends millions of dollars each year on anti-smuggling activities. It operates aircraft and boats in a coastal surveillance program, but it cannot give this House a breakdown of the costs of coastal surveillance. This is just one example of a number of examples I will give during the course of my observations of the total incompetence of this Government in its management of the security of the Australian coastline. The Department of Transport is the co-ordinating agency and is responsible, under a ministerial arrangement, for coastal surveillance. Yet when I put a similar sort of question to the Minister concerning the costs of coastal surveillance I received the following answer:
Except for Division 655/2/21-
This division contains an appropriation for the testing of Nomad aircraft-

Supply Bill (No.1) 1981-82

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2787

expenditure under each item attributable to coastal surveillance has not been determined because of the relatively minor nature of the coastal surveillance program . . .
I ask honourable members to note the words 'the relatively minor nature of the coastal surveillance program'. This is a program about which the Australian Government made a substantial statement three years ago. Yet in July 1978, three years later, the Government does not know what the program cost. The Department responsible for the co-ordination of the program cannot tell this House the costing of the coastal surveillance program.

surveillance program. In that statement it was promised~another promise~that there would be a substantial increase in surveillance and enforcement programs. It was proclaimed that regular Royal Air Force surveillance within the 200 economic resource zone or the fishing zone would be increased. It was promised that defence flying hours dedicated to civil surveillance would be increased. The statement pointed out that two additional Attack class patrol boats which would have brought the total to nine would be available for the enforcement effort. I think it is important that this House looks at the performance of the

The other areas that I think should be debated Government in this field as distinct from its

in the context of a supply Bill relate to how conpromises.

tracts are arranged, the cost to the taxpayer, and The first matter I mentioned was the regular the benefits bestowed upon the clients of the RAAF surveillance of the 200 nautical mile

Government. I find some details in the contracts fishing zone. Since July 1978, the figures have entered into by the Government with private gone this way: In 1977-78, 2,450 hours were coastal surveillance operators who hire aircraft flown; in 1978-79, 2,311 hours were flown; and, in

and participate in the coastal surveillance 1979-80,2,260 hours were flown. This means that,

program to be very unsatisfactory. On 9 April I far from their being an increase in the number of

asked the following question:

hours flown since the civil surveillance program

Do the contracts allow the contractor to amortise the fuli was introduced, there has been a significant de-

cost of the aircraft he uses over the period of the contract?

cease in the surveillance hours flown by the long

These Nomad aircraft used for this work are subrange marine patrol aircraft. What is additionally stantial aircraft, fully equipped with radar and significant is that the drop in hours has continued

other instrumentation. I got the following answer to that question which I thought was a fairly simple sort of question:
The rate of amortisation of capital cost varies from contract to contract being a commercial judgment by the tenderers at

following this Government's declaration of the Australian fishing zone in November 1979. With respect to littoral patrols, that is, patrols along the close-in shore line, in 1978-79, 1,481 hours were flown from RAAF aircraft; in 1979-80, the

time of submission of their offers.

number of hours was cut severely to 946 hours.

That was all the information I was given. I had asked for details of the contracts with each pri-

There was also a drop in the activities of the Royal Australian Navy tracker aircraft.

vate contractor. That information was refused. I also mentioned the patrol boats. There was a

On the basis of the investigations I have made, this much publicised deployment of an additional two

really means that this benevolent Government Attack class patrol boats to the coastal surveil-

hands over to the contractors high cost equiplance program. What has happened is that in that

ment, such as planes and various other forms of period when the patrol boat deployment was

equipment attached to the planes. This covers the increased from seven to nine there was, in fact,

cost of a new aircraft for the term of the contract. very little difference in the number of boat days

Included in these contracts~I might point out carried out by those patrol boats. In fact, the

that the ubiquitous Ansett Airlines of Australia number rose by 77 extra patrol boat days-from a

happens to have a contract~is the possibility that total of 1,600 patrol boat days in 1977-78 to 1,677

each of the private contractors can, over the patrol boat days last year. So, we have a mere 77

period of the contract, amortise completely the extra boat days from the additional input of two

cost of an aircraft. Here is a government providpatrol boats. In short, the Defence Force contri-

ing to the private sector the total cost of aircraft bution to civil surveillance has fallen far short of

over the period of a contract. Meanwhile, the dethe promised performance.

fence forces find it very difficult to get funds to provide the sort of equipment that they need. Yet companies like Ansett Airlines are being handed as a gift, over the course of a contract, the amortisation cost of an aircraft.

I mentioned the Nomad aircraft. One of the reasons for the long delay in their implementation in the coastal surveillance program has been the Government's mishandling of the contracts and its requirement that Nomad aircraft should be

As I mentioned, back in July 1978 this Governused. The Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) on

ment introduced with a great flourish a coastal 31 March 1980 said that seven Nomad aircraft

2788 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Supply Bill (No. 1) 1981-82

would be in service by mid-1980. The facts are that the Nomad aircraft were not even ordered by mid-1980. The first of these aircraft did not come into service until September 1980; another came into operation in November 1980; two more were introduced in December 1980; and, as of March 1981, according to a reply I received to Question No. 569, three were still not operational.
One of the features of the Government's civil coastal surveillance program is that it has not even lived up to its own half-baked scheme. The scheme has been a monumental mess. What this Government has done is make a mockery of Australia's security by franchising out to private operators the responsibility for coastal surveillance. It is as though the Government thought that coastal surveillance was a pizza hut franchise that could be flogged off to the private sector. What has happened under the Government's program is that private operators are given full responsibility for guarding large parts of the north Australian coastline. One of these operators is not even an Australian-owned company. I think the Fraser Government must go down in history as the only Australian Government and perhaps the only government anywhere that in its philosophical foolishness is prepared to merchandise the defence of Australia to the private sector and even to the foreign private sector.
Apart from very real defence considerations in using private operators for this very important purpose, the doubt will always be present, no matter how reputable a private contractor might be, that organised crime could infiltrate the surveillance operation. We are talking about antismuggling, anti-drug operations. This is not an academic question. In a reply to a question in the Senate in February 1980, Senator Chaney on behalf of the Minister for Transport said:
I am advised that McDougall Airways was named in the Queensland Parliament on 20 November 1979 as being possibly involved in drug trade. I understand this company does hire an aircraft to Executive Air Charter (North Queensland) which has a limited contract for aerial coastal surveillance between Cairns and Cape Grenville . . .
The report of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs had something to say about this too, nearly a year and a half after the Government's program started. The report of the Royal Commission stated:
It is the view of the Commission that the present effort in respect of coastal surveillance as to drugs is inadequate and misdirected. The majority of detections have been fortuitous or as a consequence of a source of information unrelated to coastal surveillance.
This is not the only commission that has commented on the gross inadequacy of the Government's coastal surveillance program.

The Senate Standing Committee on National Resources dealing with the adequacy of quarantine measures pointed out in Parliamentary Paper 287 of 1979:
During tthe Committee's visit to Darwin, Thursday Island and Cairns it was clearly demonstrated that no adequate quarantine back-up facilities existed and the current policy of depending on private contract arrangements is completely inadequate. The Committee notes with concern that the use of regular and therefore predictable flight times and the use of untrained observers lessen the effectiveness of the surveillance program.
The report continued:
The present situation in northern Australia concerns the Committee as no effective back-up exists for the coastal area from Cairns to Geraldton.
I think we can take up some of those points, for example, the question of the set pattern of flight schedules. The Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence held hearings in Darwin on 13 August 1980. In response to a question on flight scheduling one of the witnesses said:
Fishermen can set their clocks by the time the aeroplane comes over because the aeroplane comes over so regularly.
We have a coastal surveillance program run by private operators and the very time schedule is so regular that anybody wanting to smuggle drugs into Australia and to make ilicit landings could quite easily do it because of the regularity of the flights.
The Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs also made an observation about the observers. When one looks at the evidence on this issue it seems like an episode out of Dads Army. Again I revert to the Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee hearings of 13 August 1980. One of the questions asked was:
Can it happen that a pilot has his wife at home doing nothing and he thinks he may as well pick up a few dollars and says you had better come for a flight today?
The answer to that rather bucolic question was 'yes'. There is a very high turnover of observers. The representative of the Department of Transport in Darwin is on record as saying:
One month would be a long time for an observer to stay.
There is also evidence that observers turn up drunk. We are talking about a serious subjectthe coastal surveillance of Australia, the security of the Australian coastline. We have occasions when wives go along as observers. I refer again to the record of the Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee hearings which state that we have occasions when observers have turned up drunk or not at all and that many flights have gone out with only one observer or none at all. This information comes from a committee of this Parliament.

Supply Bill (No.1) 1981-82

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2789

This Government has turned coastal surveildomestic product which Australia has been allo-

lance into a vaudeville act. I condemn the cating for overseas development assistance pur-

Government for a grave dereliction of duty. It has poses in recent years; that is, despite some in-

failed, and it has been seen to fail, to maintain crease in the actual money amounts in terms of a

Australia's security. It has made a farce of a very proportion of our gross domestic product, there

solemn responsibility. It should have reported to has been a slight downward drift. That should be

this House in mid-1980 on a review of its shabby at least arrested, I believe. I trust that the Govern-

procedures. That review was postponed for a ment will be able to provide, in the coming

further year. [ have not yet observed any signs Budget, some small increase, at least enough to ar-

that the Government intends to bring down that rest that drift and, perhaps, to increase the pro-

report by mid-1981. We have almost arrived at portion of GDP going to development assistance.

that time of the year. J think the evidence shows that the Government has not managed this program at all effectively, that it has not ensured the security of the Australian coastline against illegal entry and it has not ensured the coastline against drug running. Yet the Government will
not bring a review of its procedures to this House.
The first principle about the Government's
program is that it is totally irresponsible and completely unacceptable for the Australian Govern-
ment to sell Australia's security to the lowest private bidder. That is precisely what it has been doing.

As I have mentioned, I want to talk basically about the quality of aid that Australia is providing. It appears that there are many arguments developing now about overseas aid. I have heard some comments that we ought not to be providing as much development assistance as we do. In particular, I was very surprised to hear the Premier of Queensland making such suggestions recently. I
suggest that in so doing the Premier of Queensland is supporting communism in a very real way. He prides himself on being a great champion of the anti-communist cause. By urging that we withdraw from our responsibilities in the aid

field, I believe he is creating circumstances

I believe, and the Australian Labor Party bewhereby communism can gain greater support in

lieves, that the Government should immediately our region. I believe that our aid program, quite

terminate the current program and place the reapart from the effect it has in terms of solving

sponsibility for coastal surveillance where it problems in other countries and contributing to

rightly belongs-on the defence forces of this the development of those countries, enables

country. The Minister for Defence, not the MinisAustralia to involve itself in a very constructive

ter for Transport, should be the Minister responway with other countries in developing joint

sible for these matters. We should establish a programs, in working together and in having Aus-

maritime command comprising units of the Navy tralian consultants and training experts working

and the Air Force to assume responsibility for with people in other countries in a way that pro-

coastal surveillance, including surveillance of the vides for a greater exchange of information and a

economic resource zone. I know that the Fraser greater development of understanding between

Government does not take the security of countries in the region.

Australia seriously. It certainly does not take, Australia's coastal surveillance seriously. It has been responsible for a farce that has continued for the last three years. The Fraser Government may not take it seriously but the Opposition does.

I believe that we do gain very good value in terms of oUf' national interest from the international development assistance that we provide. By and large the assistance which Australia provides is not by way of handing over large items of

capital equipment. That sort of assistance is gen-

Mr FALCONER (Casey) (4.57)-1 refer to , erally provided by some of the major powers

that part of the Supply Bills which provides an apwhich have more to spend in this area and can,

propriation for the Department of Foreign therefore, provide significant items of capital

Affairs for ov'erseas development assistance purequipment. Australian development assistance is

poses. Under the heading 'Australian Developheavily concentrated in the building up of skills, in

ment Assistance Bureau' a total amount of the development of middle level technology in the

$239.505m is provided for overseas development recipient countries and in the provision of trained

assistance under various categories. I want to and expert people who can give advice at the grass

make some reference to the quality of the aid roots level on how various programs ought to be

which Australia is providing but I should, perimplemented. I have been enormously impressed

haps, make some references, firstly, to the absolby the Australians I have met who have been in-

ute amount. There has been a slight downward volved in various international development as-

drift, unfortunately, in the proportion of the gross sistance programs. I know that it might seem an

2790 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Supply Bill (No.1) 1981-8,2

old-fashioned turn of phrase but it does make one proud to be an Australian to meet some of the people who have put a great deal of dedication into their work in other countries and who have, I believe, left a very good impression of Australia and Australians. That, I believe, has been to the benefit of us all in terms of the relationships that have been developed in our region.
As I have mentioned, we are not involved in merely handing over major items of capital equipment. Almost all of the bilateral aid programs in which Australia becomes involved are concerned with programs which are worked out in cooperation with the countries concerned and which require an ongoing involvement of Australian personnel rather than just the mere handing over of cash or equipment. For example, I understand that the Australian bilateral aid contribution to Indonesia constitutes only about 2 per cent of its total aid intake. So if we did try to extend that aid by way of items of equipment, it probably would not make much impact; it would not be very visible. It would be lost in terms of the amount of equipment provided by major donor countries. But since that 2 per cent is provided very much at the grass roots level in terms of agricultural extension programs, technical education programs, consulting projects, road building projects and many programs of that nature which do get through to people at the grass roots level, our aid is more visible than it would otherwise be. As I have said, it also has that very great advantage that it involves a number of Australians in very direct day-to-day contact with people in Indonesia and, I hope, builds up a body of understanding between the two countries which is very desperately needed, particularly in these times of some terseness, I think, in the relationship between Indonesia and Australia.
Another reason why I do not think we should be involved in the mere handing over of money or equipment to any extent is that many of the countries in our region are now developing a very healthy foreign exchange situation. In Malaysia, for example, the extreme increases in oil prices in recent years have produced some problems but they have also produced benefits in that some of Malaysia's traditional products have come back into their own. People are looking at the advantages of natural rubber once again, in a way that was not the case eight or 10 years ago. Palm oil, which is another major product of Malaysia, is also gaining more prominence because of the increase in price of petroleum products in recent years. This means that countries in the region such as Malaysia, have some reason to be satisfied that,

while the oil crisis has in a sense produced problems, it has also in another sense provided them with a better income from some of their traditional products. They have the foreign exchange to pay for the items of equipment that they need in many cases. They need the upgrading of skills that we can provide with the sort of background and expertise that we have, particularly in middle level technology, which is badly needed in these
countries.
I will now deal with one suggestion that has come forward recently about the way in which our aid should be administered. It has been suggested that more of our aid should be tied so that, when Australia provides development assistance to other countries, Australian industries also will be beneficiaries of that assistance in terms of any equipment that needs to be supplied as part of an aid program. Comparisons are made with other donor countries which tie their aid to their products, much more than we do officially. One danger of this, of course, is that if we tie the aid too closely to requirements that we find to be appropriate to our national interests, that will cause resentment in the recipient countries. A very good example of that is the aid which is extended by France to Vanuatu. The aid is very much tied to a set of conditions relating particularly to the maintenance of French education in Vanuatu. That country may not necessarily want the aid to continue on that basis for a long period.
Putting that aside, I point out to the House that, in fact, the aid which Australia provides by way of bilateral assistance effectively returns to this country in very many ways, largely because the sorts of projects in which we become involved after consultation with the recipient countries are those which we can best undertake. For example, we provide agricultural exte~sion programs and civil engineering contracting programs because they are areas of expertise which we can offer. Without any very stringent conditions attached to our aid programs, because of the way in which we administer them and select projects and contractors and consultants to administer them, Australian businessmen, consultants and teachers are employed to do the work. In many cases Australian suppliers are asked to supply any necessary products for the work that is being done.
I suggest that while there may be some scope and some benefit to Australia in tying our aid more closely to the sorts of products that, Australia can provide, in the way in which our existing program is being administered there is only marginal scope to do that and we may, in fact, be suggesting something which would make very little practical difference to the number of

Supply Bill (No.1) 1981-82

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2791

Australian personnel and the quantity of Australian goods supplied for such projects. As I said,
that is particularly the case with the bilateral aid
program. I understand that approximately 80 per cent of the value of our bilateral assistance comes
back to us in the form of payments to Australian
personnel or companies. We probably cannot do very much better than that. In fact, in some of the
other areas where perhaps the money does not come back directly to Australia, it goes to other
countries in the region. There is, for example, a
provision that enables countries which are in the Association of South East Asian Nations and
which are the recipients of bilateral aid from
Australia to spend some of those aid funds in purchasing necessary equipment from other ASEAN
countries. In that way we are helping to promote a greater sense of regional identity and co-
operation. Surely that is in our national interests in a very direct way and something which we
ought to promote.

face the situation that there would not be as much popular support for directing Australian tax-
payers' funds to Africa as there would be for aid
extended in Australia's part of the world. I suggest that one very real role that the non-government
organisations involved in international aid can perform is that of filling in some of the gaps in
other areas, which perhaps cannot be supported
to the maximum extent desirable by public efforts through the Australian Government. Many non-
government organisations in the aid field would
do well to shift their attention more to Africa in the way in which they apply their own donations,
without, of course, neglecting some of the tra-
ditional areas in which they have been involved. I suggest that in any increases in their activities,
perhaps by taking up programs in Africa and
some other more distant parts from Australia, they can provide a good spread to the whole of the Australian aid contribution, both public and private.

Even when we provide funds for various multinational aid organisations connected with the United Nations, the Asian Development Bank, and so on, a proportion of that money comes back to us as a matter of course. Many of the projects in which such organisations become involved in recipient countries offer great opportunities for Australian consultants and experts. Agricultural extension, productivity improvement and various civil engineering contracting operations, such as road and bridge building, are all areas of expertise. I urge the Government to be somewhat careful
about suggestions that we ought to tie our overseas aid more directly to Australian products and personnel because I believe the practical effect of that would be very little different from the results that are occurring at present. It might have the added disadvantage of causing some resentment in recipient countries. I believe that recipient countries in the South East Asian and South West Pacific regions appreciate the open and cooperative nature with which Australia extends its overseas development assistance program.
Tturn now to the areas of the world to which we supply our development assistance. Most of it goes to the region in which Australia is placed. I suppose that is natural. There is much more electoral support in Australia for international development assistance going to the South East Asian and Pacific regions, which obviously impinge very directly on Australia's sphere of interest, than there is for aid going to countries on the other side of the world. I believe that we must recognise that there is nevertheless, in many respects, a greater
need in Africa, for example, than there is in the South East Asian region. However, we have to

In the last Budget the Commonwealth made contributions to recognised international aid organisations tax deductible and I hope that that might promote a little more generosity on the part of a number of private and corporate donors. I was pleased to note in some literature that I received recently from Austcare, a well known international aid organisation, that attention had been drawn particularly to the plight of African refugees. Similarly, in some other literature which crossed my desk recently from the Foster Parents Plan an opportunity was offered to support families in Africa as well as in some other areas closer to Australia, such as Indonesia, which have always been part of its program. I think that many of the non-government aid organisations would be well advised to consider this as a way of ensuring that the total Australian aid program, both government and non-government, makes an impact in every part of the world to which it is possible to extend it.
MI' FREE (Macquarie) (5.17)~I support the amendment moved by the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman). I want to pay particular attention to that part of the amendment that highlights the increased inequality that has resulted from the policies of this Government. I want to deal with the appropriation for the Department of Social Security and in particular with the activities of that Department in the field of children's services. Funding for children's services from the Federal Government has suffered over the last five years as have, of course, many other areas. But in this important area of children's ser-
vices the funding peaked in the last Labor Budget of 1975-76 the Hayden Budget. It has been cut

2792 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Supply Bill (No.1) 1981-82

in successive ycars to a point where funds for children's services are now down by over 40 per cent in real terms.
I would like to examine the consequences of this funding cut, especially as it affects regions of high population growth. I will direct my remarks to areas of high population growth in Sydney. I draw the attention of honourable members to the Department of Social Security document which classifies recipients of pensions, benefits and family allowances according to electoral divisions, published in June 1980. The New South Wales figures show that the five electorates with the largest number of children are Werriwa, Chifley, Macquarie, Mitchell and Prospect. Together they contain just over a quarter of a million children. These electorates form an arc in Sydney's west where young families are coming to settle in ever increasing numbers. They come to Sydney's west because they cannot find housing in Sydney proper at a price which they can afford. Housing prices in Sydney have more than doubled in the last three years. Figures published in the National Times last month show that the average price of an established house in Sydney in 1978 was some $41,000 and that this year the price is up to over $82,000. The housing market has forced these people to move to the western fringe of Sydney. That in itself is not necessarily a bad thing. There is the potential in these districts for families to enjoy a better lifestyle. But they can enjoy a better lifestyle only as long as the provision of government services keeps pace with population growth. That provision of government services has not kept pace with population growth.
I would like to take a closer look at the growth patterns and the gap in children's services in one city in this arc of western Sydney electorates, that is, the city of Penrith. Penrith now leads Sydney in home building approvals. There were 2,695 approvals last year in the city of Penrith, an increase of 1,188 on the 1977 figure. More than 10,000 blocks are in the pipeline for release and development in the next few years. The population of the city of Penrith has now passed 100,000. There was an estimated influx of 120 people every week during 1980 and this is continuing. I would like to have a closer look at the age structure of this population. For this purpose I would like to refer to tables sourced from the Australian Bureau of Statistics and the Council of Social Service of New South Wales. I seek leave to have those tables incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

COMPARISON OF PER CENT IN EACH AGE GROUP OF POPULATION: YORK ESTATE, CITY
OF PENR [TH AND SYDNEY

Age
04 5.14 15-19 20-64 65+

York estate South Penrith
17.3 16.1 5.2 59.6 1.8

City of Penrith
12.7 21.2
8.8 53.3 3.9

Whole of Sydney
8.5 16.7 8.5 57.0 9.4

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics.

Description of service

Ratio of
children to
places

Number of LGA'sin NSW
which have this
service

Penrith's position
in the State

Long and family day

care

29.9

160

37

Long + full + fam-

ily day care

20.0

160

67

All centres + family

day care

15.2

160

103

Under2's

324

27

18

Under 3's

209.3

63

42

Source: Council of Social Service of NSW.
Mr FREE-I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street). First, 1 would like to refer to the age structure of the population in Penrith. The first table compares the percentage of various age group brackets in three areas. Those areas are the York Estate, which is a new housing estate in South Penrith, the city of Penrith and the whole of Sydney. As an illustration, 8.5 per cent of the population of the whole of Sydney is in the under five years of age group. However, the percentage of population in the under five category in the city of Penrith is 12.7 per cent. The percentage in the York Estate, which is a new area, is 17.3 per cent which is more than double the average for the city of Sydney. The number of children in the under five group will certainly increase. Over 2,000 babies are now born in Penrith annually which is the highest birth rate in western Sydney. There is an estimated population of some 16,000 children under the age of five. When one looks at a group of that size, particularly on new estates, it is reasonable to ask what has been done for these children, what facilities are available to look after them and what is likely to be done as the numbers in this group and the local popUlation increase.
It is interesting to look at the present level of services available to families with young children in this district. A survey conducted last year found that there were 659 equivalent full time places for.

Supply Bill (No.1) 1981-82

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2793

16,000 children under five years of age. The second table which I have incorporated presents, amongst other information, figures on the ratio of children to places. It shows a very high pattern of demand. For example, in the under three group there are 209 children in the population for every place available for child care. For the under two group there are 324 children for every place available. The table also rates Penrith's position in comparison with other local government areas across the State. It shows that Penrith is relatively poorly off in terms of child care services when compared with other local government areas. Penrith ranks 103 out of 160 overalL
Of course, there are other ways of measuring the demand as well. One way is to look at the waiting lists at the various institutions which presently exist in the city. That also has been done. A recent survey of eight centres with some 250 places available revealed a waiting list of 640. Of course, that does not give the total picture because many centres do not maintain complete waiting lists. Many people are not interested in waiting lists because by the time their child qualifies for a place he is too old and off to school anyway. Whichever way one looks at the figures, there is clearly a great need for additional places in the city of Penrith and I am sure in cities like it across Australia. This need is based on the pressure that many of these families, particularly new families face. Many families need a second income because of their commitment as first home buyers. They do not necessarily earn second incomes because they like doing so but because they have to. That second income is vital for that family to obtain a home and to be able to afford to continue to pay it off. Census figures indicate that 67.9 per cent of the female. work force in Penrith is married, compared with 59.4 per cent of the female work force for the whole of Sydney. Also, 45.7 per cent of working women in Penrith are of child bearing age compared with 40.8 per cent for the whole of Sydney. These figures together suggest that a high proportion of working women in Penrith also have responsibility for children. Therefore, the provision of child care facilities for them is an absolute necessity.
A door-to-door survey was conducted in the new estate area of St Clair represented by my colleague, the honourable member for Prospect. This survey, carried out in July of last year, was funded by the Commonwealth. It showed that of 103 families interviewed, in 47 the wives worked. A further 28 wives said they would like to work. I am sure that a similar pattern would exist in other new housing estates. The need in these estates is

very acute indeed. I submit that the need for children's services goes beyond mere economic pressure, as severe as that pressure certainly is. We should also consider families where the mother does not work, either because the work is not available or because she perfers to stay at home anyway. Child care services have a role to play here. Women who do not work and who are at home with young families are frequently isolated by a lack of transport and often have relatively few social contracts. They have moved out of the older established areas of Sydney into the new estates away from relatives, friends and established social contacts. Frequently they are very lonely. Their loneliness is often aggravated by a lack of public transport. As well, this affects the socialisation of the children in the young and growing family. This is a need which could and should be met by more neighbourhood child centres.
Of course, there has been much activity in the Penrith district to obtain a greater share of children's services because the district needs them so badly. There have been requests, meetings and submissions for action on a whole range of fronts. For example, there have been requests for the provision of funds to establish child care facilities in the new estate of St Clair where the survey I mentioned was carried out. Requests and repeated submissions have been made for the provosion of a neighbourhood children's centre in South Penrith~in the York Estate--where 17 per cent of the population is under five years of age. There have been requests and submissions for the provision of services at the new housing commission settlement of Cranebrook. This is a particularlyinteresting case because the Housing Commission of New South Wales has in fact provided the building but the funding is not yet available from the Department of Social Security to equip and staff this children's centre at the housing commission settlement at Cranebrook.
There are three areas in a city which obviously I know a lot about, but I am sure that this situation could be duplicated in growing areas right across the country. It means that areas of need are being ignored. The responses to these submissions and requests have been polite but quite negative. The answer that has come back each time has simply stated that funds available for the current financial year have already been committed and that nothing can be done about the situation before the next financial year. I submit to the House that this is not good enough. The needs are there and are quite evident. The facilities ought to be provided because in one way or another society will pay the price. The society, through Government, can either meet its responsibilities to young families in

2794 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Roads Grants Bill

these new and growing areas or sooner or later pay the price for the problems that will arise. The solutions are quite obvious.
The Department of Social Security first of all should indulge in some proper planning, through survey work or material already available in raw form, to assess the needs across the whole community. It should not necessarily pay attention to the most vocal group or the group that produces the fanciest submission but really make an attempt to assess the needs of local communities and provide the funds to meet these needs. The Governmertt should then rank the areas in order of priority and allocate the funds on a needs basis. That seems to me to be a rational way to meet the problem. There are clear needs in the community waiting to be met. The Government has a clear dut~ ~o its citizens and their young and growing famllIes. Only through a process of proper planning, setting up of priorities and allocating of funds to meet these needs will the Government carry out its duty to the people in these growing areas on the fringe of western Sydney.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt) read a third time.
SUPPLY BILL (No.2) 1981-82
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 14 May, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt) read a third time.
ROADS GRANTS BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 May, on motion by MrHunt:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (5.34)-This legislation is part of the Government's hypocritical and irresponsible plan to hive off profitable avenues of work to powerful private sector interests

and to push the residual and politically sensitive areas of responsibility onto the States and local government, forcing them to meet the extra costs imposed or to reduce the level of services provided. It constitutes an abrogation of the concept of national responsibility and planning for roads which should properly be expected from a responsible federal government. It is hypocritical, as this policy is thinly veiled under the mythology of free enterprise, responsible government, decentralised decision making, lower costs and lower taxes. [ will demonstrate later that not one of these articles of dogma has any relation to the cold hard facts of this outrageous legislation. As the Bill provides some Federal funds, the Opposition does not oppose it but I will move an amendment at the conclusion of my remarks which summarises our objections to the provisions of the Bill and in the Committee stages I will move for the retention by the States of their discretionary power to select those national road works for which public tenders should be invited.
The main purpose of the Bill is to provide $685m in 1981-82 to the States and the Northern Territory for road works and, for the first time, it provides minimum levels of advance funding in 1982-83 and 1983-84 for Commonwealth national roads funding. The Bill retains the same relativities of funds between States and the Northern Territory and between categories as in 1980-81. There is, however, no commitment on the part of the Commonwealth to maintain these relativities over the rest of the 5-year plan to 1984-85. The monetary rise in grants was 11 per cent in 1980-81, 9 per cent in 1981-82, and a scheduled 7 per cent in 1982-83 and 6 per cent in both 1983-84 and 1984-85. In real terms this demonstrates a diminishing Commonwealth responsibility for road funding.
The Minister for Transport is to be empowered to declare as developmental roads an expanded range of roads which he considers to be of national importance. These include those that develop particular industries or particular energy resources, including roads in remote areas of Australia, roads that aid interstate or overseas trade and commerce, or help tourism. The Bill also reduces the number of road categories from four to three, by amalgamating urban arterial and rural arterial roads into one category of 'arterial roads'. The three categories remaining will be national roads, arterial roads and local roads. The legislation also involves the Minister consulting with the States on formulae for the distribution of Commonwealth funds to local government. In the absence of an agreement with any State or the Northern Territory, the existing practice whereby

Roads Grants Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2795

the Minister approves a program of local road altowards national roads, squeezing rural arterial

locations from the State is to be followed. As far and local road funding and cutting funds to urban

as I am aware, the formula approach has been arterial roads. The Minister has stated that the 11

adopted by New South Wales and discussions are per cent increase in funding in 1980-81 and the 9

in progress with Tasmania.

per cent in 1981-82 maintains the real value of

An important and undesirable change contained in this legislation is that all grants for national road construction will be conditional upon the States calling public tenders for the works. This differs from existing procedures, whereby the States have had discretion to determine which national highway construction works go to tender and which are to be built by State road authorities. There is unanimity among the States that this requirement is an unwarranted

funding. This is based on projections of the increase in road construction costs. The same claim of maintaining real expenditure was made for the 1979-80 allocations, yet in answer to my Question on Notice 303 of 25 February this year, the Minister said it actually fell 3.3 per cent in that year. This was the largest fall for a number of years and was based on the actual not projected rise in road costs, as measured by the Bureau of Transport Economics.

imposition upon them, without any economic jusWhat credence can be given to the Minister's

tification whatsoever. Rather than reducing costs, promise that funding for 1980-81 or for 1981-82

all States are adamant that this will cause massive will maintain real expenditure if actual price rises

disruption to road works and public road conhave increasingly been above projected rises in the

struction forces, retrenchments, an increase in red past few years? Not only has this occurred, using

tape, greater supervisory costs and replace existthe Bureau of Transport Economics road con-

ing flexibility and efficiency with an inflexible restruction price index, but also the accuracy of the

quirement. Despite the pious pledges of the Prime index itself has been in question over the last few

Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in his statement years. Almost every other road construction cost

on the Review of Commonwealth Functions reindex has risen more than the Bureau of

port, the roads Bill amply demonstrates that his Transport Economics index. While the BTE

mythological allusions to a free enterprise Utopia, index rose 139.5 per cent from 1968-69 to

were not meant to be closely analysed. The Prime 1978-79, the New South Wales Department of

Minister stated:

Main Roads index rose 197.7 per cent over the

A nation Australia's size cannot be effectively governed same period.

from Canberra .. . . The State and local governments are closer to the recipients of many services and are better placed to administer these programs.

Since 1978-79, this conservative, manipulative Government has replaced the BTE index with the 'implicit price deflator of gross fixed capital

They are fine words, but words are all they are. expenditure on private non-dwelling construc-

Every State is up in arms at the hypocrisy of this tion'. That will apply until the BTE index is re-

Government that bandies such cheap words vised. This inappropriate index does not even in-

around, whilst introducing a Bill that says States clude bitumen prices, which have risen up to 50

cannot competently determine the mix of conper cent in the past 18 months, depending on de-

tract work and day labour, despite their decades livery point of the product. In addition, the index

of experience. So much for co-operative federaldoes not take account of the differential cost

ism! Coercive Federalism is a more apt descrippressures suffered by the different levels of

tion. Let me cite another example of the Prime government. Local government, in particular,

Minister's flowery rhetoric and see what it means given its mix of inputs and revenue constraints, is

in practice. I refer again to his razor gang statebeing severely squeezed by the Commonwealth.

ment, in which he said that the Government's strategy was to 'further rein in government spending, to make room for private sector growth and pave the way for significant reductions in the bur-
den of taxation'.

The Minister then has the audacity to suggest that road costs will rise by only 7 per cent, 6 per cent and 6 per cent in the years 1982-83, 1983-84 and 1984-85; and if the rises are greater it is not his concern. Yet, Government policies such as the

I ask honourable members to bear this in mind crude oil pricing policy are adding to inflation.

when we consider the specifics of the legislation. This Government excels in the use of shabby indi-

When we look at specifics, this strategy is exposed ces and statistics to wipe indelicate facts under the

as a recipe for evading responsibilities rather than carpet. It has done it again with road funds. Even

a rose-tinted vision of a free enterprise system that if we use the BTE index to determine real expen-

decentralises influence and control, as the Prime diture, we find that total Commonwealth road

Minister likes to present it. Commonwealth road funding fell by 4.6 per cent between 1974-75 and

funding is being cut in real terms and redistributed 1980-81. In the same period expenditure on

2796 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Roads Grants Bill

national roads rose by 38.6 per cent, largely at the expense of urban arterial roads funding, which fe1151.4 per cent between 1974-75 and 1980-81.
Information provided by the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) in answer to my Question 303 shows the reduction in Commonwealth road expenditure expressed in real terms and the redistribution between categories since 1974-75. I seek

leave for the information of honourable members to incorporate the relevant parts of that answer in Hansard, together with Schedules 1 to 3 of the Roads Grants Bill 1981.
Leave granted. The documents read as follows-

COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS 1974-75 (1971-72 prices) ($'000)

Category

New South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

Total

National Roads ActNational highways construction
National highways maintenance
Export and major commercial roads

19,209 4,930

11,723 1,105

11,879 3,350
10

10,121 888 172

4,992 1,397
678

3,614 298 149

61,538 11,968 1,009

Sub-total

24,139

12,828

15,239

11,181

7,067

4,061

74,515

Roads Grants ActRural arterial roads
Rural local roads Urban arterial roads
Urban local roads MITERS
Beef roads

8,265 11,439 31,590 1,227
599

2,814 8,923 24,335 1,132
590

9,994 9,628 10,910
656 663 3,701

814 3,248 5,092
327 891

8,164 6,723 12,467
317 284

1,993 3,200 2,807
8 136

32,044 43,161 87,201
3,667 3,163 3,701

Sub-total

53,120

37,794

35,552

10,372

27,955

8,144 172,937

Total

77,259

50,622

50,791

21,553

35,022

12,205 247,452

In addition to the above amount, an amount of $279,000 ($189,000 in 1971-72 prices) was paid in 1974-75 under States Grants (Beef Cattle Roads) Act 1968.
Current price figures adjusted on basis of Bureau of Transport Economics Road Construction Price Index (see p. 121 BTE Report 'An Assessment of the Australian Road System: 1979 Part 1').

COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS 1975-76 (1971-72 prices) ($'000)

Category

New
South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

Total

National Roads ActNational highways construction
National highways maintenance Export and major commercial roads

23,401 4,458
298

10,251 976
2,929

13,485 3,600
872

11,456 1,287
657

6,579 1,736
549

4,261 414 312

69,433 12,471 5,617

Sub-total
Roads Grants ActRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads MITERS Beef roads

28,157
9,415 9,820 27,006 2,594 1,749

14,156
3,453 7,169 25,987 1,953 1,499

17,957
7,139 9,970 9,954 1,196 1,539 5,821

13,400
1,080 3,234 5,058
609 1,041

8,864
5,602 6,626 13,533
647 965

4,987
1,586 2,581 2,453
206 549

87,521
28,275 39,400 83,991 7,205 7,342 5,821

Sub-total

50,584

40,061

35,619

11,022

27,373

7,375 172,034

Total

78,741

54,217

53,576

24,422

36,237

12,362 259,555

Roads Grants Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2797

Current price figures adjusted on basis of Bureau of Transport Economics Road Construction Price Index (see p. 121 BTE Report 'An Assessment of the Australian Road System: 1979 Part 1').

COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS 1976-77 (1971-72 prices) ($'000)

Category

New South
Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

National Roads ActNational highways construction
National highways maintenance
Export and major commercial roads

27,100 4,761 2,380

12,981 1,190 2,879

14,725 3,986 1,537

9,577 775 720

6,020 1,182
714

4,842 321 388

Total
75,245 12,215 8,618

Sub-total

34,241

17,050

20,248

11,072

7,916

5,551 96,078

Road Grants ActRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads MITERS Beef roads
Sub-total
Total

8,542 10,272 20,262 2,546 2,646

2,380 5,923 21,922 1,716 1,592

44,268 78,509

33,533 50,583

6,588 7,805 8,470 1,218 1,495 4,982
30,558
50,806

1,827 2,934 4,207
608 831
10,407 21,479

4,434 6,714 11,564
794 886
24,392 32,308

1,384 2,270 1,660
172 332
5,818 11,369

25,155 35,918 68,085
7,054 7,782 4,982
148,976
245,054

Current price figures adjusted on basis of Transport Economics Road Construction Price Index (see p. 121 BTE Report 'An Assessment of the Australian Road System: 1979 Part 1').

COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS 1977-78 (1971-72 prices) ($'000)

Category

New South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

National roadsNational highways construction
National highways maintenance
National commerce roads

State Grants (Roads) Act

28,940 4,157 3,244

13,384 1,544 1,956

15,340 4,272 1,441

7,721 978 669

7,840 2,162
818

4,046 463 360

Sub-total
Other roadsRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads MITERS

36,341
9,266 13,281 14,773 3,809 1,699

16,884
5,714 9,780 14,876 1,853 1,664

21,053
11,839 9,677 5,612 1,956 1,338

9,368
3,603 3,449 2,368 1,132
875

10,820
4,844 7,412 5,765 1,220
927

4,869
1,565 2,522 1,390
515 309

Sub-total

42,828

33,887

30,422

11,427

20,168

6,301

Total

79,169

50,771

51,475

20,795

30,988

11,170

Total
77,271 13,576 8,488 99,335
36,831 46,121 44,784 10,485
6,812 145,033 244,368

Current price figures adjusted on basis of Bureau of Transport Economics Road Construction Price Index (see p. 121 BTE Report 'An Assessment of the Australian Road System: 1979 Part 1').

'2.798 REPRESENTATJVES 28 May 1981

Roads Grants Bill

COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1978-79(1971-72 prices) ($'000)

Category

New South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

National roadsNational highways construction National highways maintenance National commerce roads
Sub-total

States Grants (Roads) Act

26,834 4,740 4,744

13,375 1,544 1,606

14,629 4,970 1,441

36,318

16,525

21,040

7,760 977 331
9,068

8,167 2,020
626
10,813

3,920 463 360
4,743

Total
74,685 14,714 9,108 98,507

Other roadsRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads MITERS

9,260 13,272 14,764 3,807 1,697

5,710 9,774 14,840 1,913 1,929

11,832 9,671 5,694 1,955 1,251

3,889 3,447 2,367 1,132
874

4,841 7,408 5,761 1,219
926

1,687 2,521 1,389
514 309

37,219 46,093 44,815 10,540
6,986

Sub-total

42,800

34,166

30,403

11,709

20,155

6,420 145,653

Total

-----

79,118

50,691

51,443

20,777

30,968

11,163 244,160

Current price figures adjusted on basis of Bureau or Transport Economics Road Construction Price Index (see p. 121 BTE Report 'An Assessment of the Australian Road System: 1979 Part 1').

COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS 1979-80 (1971-72 prices) ($'000)

Category

New South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

National roads--National highways construction National highways maintenance National commerce roads
Sub-total

States Grants (Roads) Act

27,941 4,432 2,692

12,913 1,490 2,583

14,403 4,520 1,391

35,065

16,986

20,314

7,493 944 608
9,045

7,872 2,086
482
10,440

3,881 490 348
4,719

Total
74,503 13,962 8,104 96,569

Other roadsRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads MITERS
Sub-total
Total

8,940 12,814 14,255 3,675 1,639
41,323
76,388

5,513 9,437 13,632 2,096 1,738
32,416
49,402

11,424 9,338 5,582 1,887 1,123
29,354
49,668

3,477 3,328 2,285 1,093
844
11,027
20,072

4,674 7,152 5,563 1,177
894
19,460
29,900

1,490 2,434 1,341
497 298
6,060
10,779

35,518 44,503 42,658 10,425 6,536
139,640
236,209

Current price figures adjusted on basis or actual movement during 1979-80 in prices in Implicit Price Deflator of Gross Fixed Capital Expenditure on Private Non-dwelling Construction (sec p. 15 Australian Bureau of Statistics 'Quarterly Estimates of National Income and Expenditure, Australia, June Quarter 1980') and the Bureau of Transport Economics Road Construction Price Index (see p. 121 BTE Report 'An Assessment of the Australian Road System: 1979 Part I').

Roads Grants Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2799

COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES AND NORTHERN TERRITORY FOR ROADS 1980-81 (1971-72 prices) ($'000)

Category

New

South

South Western

Northern

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Territory

Total

National roads Rural arterial roads Urban arterial roads
Local roads

36,960 8,952 14,067
16,513

Road Grants Act 1980

18,868

21,374

9,721

5,521

11,439

3,481

13,250

5,681

2,464

11,549 11,240 4,427

11,338 4,680
5,581 8,341

4,990 1,492
1,376 2,934

4,782
393 371 2,675

108,033 35,958
42,790 57,679

Total

76,492 49,188

49,734 20,093 29,940 10,792

8,221 244,460

Current price figures adjusted on basis of forecast movement in the Implicit Price Deflator of Gross Fixed Capital Expendi-
ture on Private Non-dwelling Construction during 1980-81 and the Bureau of Transport Economics Road Construction Price Index (see p. 121 BTE Report 'An Assessment of the Australian Road System: 1979 Part I').

State
New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia . Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory

SCHEDULE I National Roads
($)

Year

Year

Year

commencing commencing commencing

1 July 1981 1 July 1982 I July 1983

103,566,000
52,868,000 59,893,000 27,240,000 31,769,000 13,984,000
13,399,000

103,566,000 52,868,000 59,893,000
27,240,000 31,769,000 13,984,000
13,399,000

72,496,000 37,008,000 41,925,000
19,068,000 22,238,000
9,789,000 9,379,000

State

SCHEDULE 2 Arterial Roads

New South Wales
Victoria Queensland
South Australia . Western Australia Tasmania . . . Northern Territory

Amount
$ 64,503,000 52,599,000 47,972,000 16,659,000 28,754,000 8,037,000 2,142,000

SCHEDULE 3 Local Roads

State

Amount

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia . Western Australia Tasmania . . . Northern Territory

$ 46,267,000 32,361,000 31,496,000 12,403,000 23,372,000 8,222,000 7,494,000

Mr MORRIS-I thank the House. The redistribution towards national roads is even more pronounced when we consider that they comprise only about 2 per cent of the Australian public

road system. There has also been since 1974-75 a 4.5 per cent annual increase in road travel. When considering urban roads, we should not forget that this Government breaks its promises as easily as it makes them. The complete withdrawal from urban public transport funding, transport planning and research, plus the decision to sell off Trans-Australia Airlines are just three examples of the Fraser Government's repudiation of firm election promises. The States should not be even slightly sanguine at the Government's promise therefore to maintain the real level of road expenditure or decentralise control to the States. The States might well get the responsibility but certainly not the funds. Put simply, the States and local government are being forced to maintain, as best they can, the Australian road network with the exclusion of national roads. If they abrogate their responsibility as the Commonwealth has done, the road system will assuredly disintegrate. The stage has been reached where the road network, excluding the national roads system, is living off past investment and is steadily but surely deteriorating. Mr Evans, the President of the Australian Automobile Association, crystallised the dilemma facing motorists when he said in his report last year:

2800 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Roads Grants Bill

Clearly, we pay for good roads whether we have them or not. And the inescapable fact is that we do not have good roads because of insufficient funds being made available for them.
Neither the States or Local Government can tlnance the maintenance and improvements to desperately needed roads; only the Commonwealth has this kind of money.
The AAA in its 1981 submission to the Prime Minister exposed the falsity of the Minister's claim that real expenditure on roads by this Government is being maintained. The submission stated:
Given that road construction and maintenance costs have increased by at least 16 per cent in 1979-80, the AAA could not accept the claim that expenditure levels would be maintained in real terms and believes the announced level of funding--
In this case it was for 1980-81 to 1984-85
can only result in th() further deterioration of the Australian road network. The Fraser Government's policy does not cut costs. It cosmetically transfers them from the Federal Government to the States 'and local government. The Australian taxpayer and motorist still pay, but through the rates system and State charges, which are not as equitable as Federal income tax and. which are not generally geared to capacity to pay as Federal income tax. It is therefore a regressive move. Meanwhile, the Commonwealth is reaping vast amounts in fuel excise duty and oil levy payments. In 1978-79 it collected in excess of $910m in excise on petroleum products and about $1,226m from the crude oil levy, the latter having risen more than fourfold since 1975-76. There was only a 56 per cent return to road funding from the excise duty alone.
H the Fraser Government's policies are to result in lower taxes, as it keeps telling us, is the Government going to pass on to motorists the benefit of its reduced expenditure commitments on roads in lower taxes? I think not. Between 1973-74 and 1979-80 the share of Commonwealth road funds expressed as a percentage of gross national product fell from 0.644 per cent to 0.474 per cent. In 1974-75 the Commonwealth funded 32.2 per cent of total road expenditure. By 1978-79 this had fallen to 27.3 per cent and is continuing to fall. Moreover, the BTE expects road travel, in terms of vehicle kilometres, to rise by almost 5 per cent a year up to 1984-85. These are probably the most telling statistics of the level of responsibility which this Government is willing to bear for the upkeep of the Australian road system. By its action to reduce expenditure on road works it is risking increased rates of death, injury and maiming on our roads.
The Motor Traffic Engineering and Road Safety Improvements Scheme, introduced by the Labor Government in 1974, significantly improved road safety. It was a most successful and cost effective program. It was abolished by the Fraser Government in June 1980 and no funds are provided for its re-establishment in this legislation. The razor gang has also scaled down

the activities of the Office of Road Safety, which was itself a watered down version of Labor's Independent Road Safety and Standards Authority, which the Fraser Government abolished in 1976. Similarly, the Bureau of Roads was abolished by the Fraser Government in 1976 and now this Government has scaled down the research activities of the BTE and abandoned responsibility for transport planning and research. Both of these actions are contrary to the recommendations of the Advisory Council for InterGovernment Relations. The States and local government, which must now bear this increasing responsibility, have differing abilities to pay for road improvements and maintenance.
The Commonwealth is also transferring costs to future generations, who will be burdened with a disintegrating road network that they will have to maintain. More and more Australians are asking: Why have a Commonwealth Government at all if its major objective is to abrogate its responsibilities under the euphemism of decentralisation? It deliberately promotes national disintegration, the decay of our Federation and the growth of a system whereby resource rich States may grow with no overall national concept of equity, regional balance or justice for the nation as a whole.
Whilst this Government squanders millions of dollars on jingoistic ditties that urge Australians to be more nationalistic and more ambitious, it is evading its true responsibilities for providing national leadership and equality of opportunity and is forcing women and children out onto the streets. It is establishing a climate for the destruction of our Federation, where the States can no longer trust the Commonwealth, where the gap between resource rich and resource poor States will widen, where the wealthy will wax fat at the expense of the less well off. Meanwhile the Government says that to cut immediate costs it must increasingly abdicate its proper functions.
We hear much from this Government about high growth rates and large scale foreign investment in Australia. It likes to take the credit. Australia has a great wealth of natural resources, created not by this Government, but by natural occurrence. Perhaps the Prime Minister's megalomania has reached such dizzy heights in his manic desire to have his own way that he really believes his Government created our nation's natural resources. The role of the Commonwealth is to foster the use of these natural resources equitably, for the benefit of our nation as a whole, for they are the birth right of all Australians. Instead, it is turning this wealth into a divisive factor, not the boon it should be. Let this Government take the credit for the fragmentation and destruction of

Roads Grants Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2801

this Federation, not the spurious accolades it bestows upon itself for something over which it has no control.
We need in this nation to see that a fairer share of Commonwealth resources is directed to roads improvements as one of the effective solutions. The Minister has asserted that by letting private enterprise tender for all national road construction, then at least the available funds will be used more efficiently. This is an article of faith; that if it is public it is inefficient; if it is private it is the best of all possible worlds. As with all this Government's so-called policy criteria, this policy is based more on ideology, on political theories and dogma, than on fact.
There is not one iota of evidence to show that private enterprise can build roads cheaper or better than the recognised high quality of those constructed by the present system of mixed private sector contract and day labour work, as determined by the States in light of all relevant circumstances. I asked the Parliamentary Library whether there was any evidence. I was told there was not. I asked the Australian Road Research Board, the recognised expert in this field, whether there was any evidence. It said there was none. Then the Minister representing the Minister for Transport told us there was not. I quote from part of the answer given recently by Senator Messner, on behalf of the Minister for Transport, in response to a question asked on the comparative costs of private and public roadworks:
It is therefore not possible to conclude, on the basis of available information, that private contractors will always do road works at a lesser cost than day labour.

and day labour work to a very imperfect market, to a procedure whereby a Federal official will stand guard at the opening of the tender box to prevent illegalities. The States have had decades of experience in determining the most appropriate and balanced mix for each type of job. This has resulted in effective use of available funds and the heavy taxpayer investment in costly road plant and skilled professional experts.
The Commonwealth now wants to replace this flexible situation with an inflexible blanket requirement forcing tenders to be called for all national road construction works. Instead of road construction expenditure being dictated by needs and efficiency, it will be dictated by a desire for private profit. Private enterprise will get the pick of the work and State road authorities will fill in the gaps. We will have the ludicrous situation whereby the States will design national road projects, do the survey work, prepare project specifications, draw up the tender, administer the procedures, submit their own tenders to themselves, assess all the tenders, and then give the work to themselves or a private contractor and, in any case, supervise the quality control of construction. The Commonwealth's contribution to this will be to ensure that a Federal officer is standing present at the opening of the tender box so that the States do not tamper with the tenders. We can just see it. Probably it will be a Commonwealth police officer who will be standing there with a pistol on his hip to make sure that nobody fiddles with those tenders when the box is opened up. So much for this Government's cant about cooperative federalism.

What a travesty of an answer! There is no evidence at all. Yet the Government is willing to gamble-it is a huge gamble-with the jobs of many thousands of people and with taxpayers' money in the faint hope that its ideology is correct. If it wanted to know the facts, why not undertake a study into the subject before gambling motorists' lives and taxpayers' money against an article of conservative dogma. That course was recommended by the now defunct Bureau of Roads to an earlier conservative government in 1969.
As I mentioned earlier, every State is against this Government's proposal to abolish the traditional discretionary power of the States to decide on which projects tenders should be invited. At present, private contractors get at least 50 per cent of national road construction work anyway. The Australian Labor Party is not opposed to the selective use of contractors, but it is opposed to the Commonwealth dictating to the States that they should cede control over the mix of contract

The new procedures will involve a mass of red tape, an increase in State supervisory work, a wasting of public money in needless administration, delays, large scale disruption of State road works, thousands of retrenchments and underutilisation of expensive road work equipment. I am advised that in New South Wales alone, 790 men will be affected. They work at the following 17 Department of Main Roads depots throughout New South Wales: Thornleigh, Bowenfels, Picton, Bellambi, Singleton, Waratah, Glen Innes, Tenterfield, Armida1e, South Tamworth, Holbrook, Tumut, Goulburn, Gundagai, Yass, Karoing and Wyong. Large scale hardship will because in rural areas and an undermining of provincial communities.
In Tasmania some 474 men could lose their jobs. In that State very few road contractors have the capacity to build national roads. So if the work is to be done by private enterprise, it will have to be done by firms from the mainland. This will involve a loss of jobs by Tasmanians and a loss

2802 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Roads Grants Bill

of influence over their own affairs. I hope the Tasmanian representatives in this House will support their State by rejecting this proposal from the Government. I understand that in New South Wales, in almost every case where a major road project has been performed by private enterprise the Department of Main Roads has had to make an ex gratia payment to the contractors to get them out of financial difficulties.
Moreover, in the past, contractors have been reluctant to purchase the necessary sophisticated equipment required to construct high quality roads, unless they were guaranteed long term high utilisation rates of the equipment. This is a complete denial of the competitive nature desired of the tender system and demonstrates featherbedding rather than free enterprise. 'Making room for private sector growth', as the Prime Minister likes to put it, is clearly a euphemism for feather-bedding of powerful sectional interests with the taxpayer picking up the tab. If free enterprise can only provide high quality roads at the cost of not being free enterprise, of featherbedding and of subverting the tender system, then why impose this system under the guise of a cost efficiency measure? No State supports this proposal, nor do local government associations. The Local Government Association resolved unanimously at its conference last year:
That the Conference endorse the recent action taken by the Executive in informing the Minister for Transport that it is the ACLGA's view that each Local Government authority should retain absolute discretion as to whether its road programs be put to tender or carried out by day labour.
The Association clearly sees the dangers to taxpayers and ratepayers in the Commonwealth's policy of compulsory preference for private road contractors. It also clearly sees the direction of this policy. This will mean national roads this year, arterials next year and local roads shortly after. The Government is imposing this system on the States yet no State or local government wants it. It is ignoring the elected representatives of the people to permit a private lobby to wax fat on public money.
The Government should admit the truth of its ill-conceived sell out and should not continue with this hypocrisy. It is clear that it considers the Australian people as dupes in this exercise. Selectively imposed rigours of competition only serve to concentrate benefits to the powerful, while, wage earners and small businessmen pay for this pampering and any of the supposed qualities of free enterprise are corrupted. I have shown that there is not a tittle of evidence to support the Government's decision to abolish the discretionary power of the States to call tenders for national road

works, that the decision is based on blind ideology and a sell-out to the financial interests of wealthy private sector groups, such as the Australian Federation of Construction Contractors, whose profits depend on the level of public sector capital expenditure and the share it gains of that expenditure. If we refer to its report for 1979-80 we find a reference to its concern at the decline in real terms in public sector expenditure, and a complaint that 70 per cent of that came from public bodies, but overall public expenditure fell by 18 per cent. It was particularly critical of the following fact:
The continued high incidence of day labour in both Victoria. and South Australia---
In fact, both are conservative States-
has effectively curtailed members' activity in these States.
it is ironic that both those States have conserva-
tive governments but even those governments recognise the absolute need for an appropriate mix of public authority and private sector construction works to ensure value and efficiency in the expenditure of the taxpayer's dollar on road works. A further referenc.e to the report shows:
Direct construction by governments has continued to be a major problem for the industry.
Without taking the time of the House, 1 mention that the report shows the actions taken by the Federation to get more public works, even to the extent of preparing legislation for the Government. Put simply, the Federation members want to get their hungry hands deeper into the taxpayer's pockets despite the complete absence of evidence to support their case as the Minister for Transport has told the Parliament. Their real problem is in the mismanagement of the economy by this Government and its slashing of capital expenditure. If these companies can make a killing with this proposal then so can their employees. There is no doubt that there will be a development of industrial unrest as one section of the industry coverage tries to get equality and possibility sweetheart deals over agreements and projects that move to another section of the industry.
The decimation of day labour forces and underutilisation of publicly owned costly road plant will add other costs. State road depots also provide dbcentralised employment essential for rural areas which this Minister and his colleagues claim to represent. These are the areas that will suffer hardship from this legislation. It will reduce training opportunities for skilled personnel in the State authorities, and it will alter the opportunities and capacity for the State authorities to carry out road works. They will have to step in anyway

Roads Grants Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2803

when private contractors go bankrupt and they will have to carry out incompleted tasks. This will have an effect upon the works normally carried
out by the State authorities.

'whilst not declining to give this Bill a second reading, the House is of the opinion that-
(1) the Bill fails to provide adequate funds to the States and the Northern Territory for desirable road construction and maintenance;

Again the taxpayers of Australia and the motorists in particular will be forced to meet the costs of this shabby Government's sell out to wealthy sectional interests of the private sector.

(2) the abolition of the discretionary power of the States to determine which national road works should be offered to private contractors by public tender is contrary to the national interest and will create disruption and dislocation of State Road

This Government's objective of decentralised free enterprise stands exposed as a myth, an unwar-

Authorities, leading to inefficiency, waste, inflexibility and the loss of employment;

ranted imposition on all Australians. 'Porkbarrelling', that is, the purchase of votes by the allocation of road funds to particular regions, has been perfected almost into a form of high art by

(3) the amalgamation of the former categories of Urban Arterial roads and Rural Arterial roads into a single category of Arterial roads will lead to an inequitable distribution of road funds between urban and rural areas; and

successive conservative governments. The amalgamation of the urban arterial and rural arterial

(4) the Government has again failed to use an expanded road construction and maintenance

road categories into a single category of arterial

program to provide safer roads and more jobs'.

roads will increase opportunities for this undesirable practice. Pork-barrelling is a major source of inefficient resource allocation which the

I commend the amendment. Sitting suspended from 6.4 to 8 p.m.

Government, by its simple-minded belief that Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mf Millar)-Is the

administration safeguards are themselves amendment seconded?

inefficient, consistently expands rather than reduces and the single category of arterial roads will facilitate inequity in the allocation of moneys for arterial roads as between urban and rural areas.

Mr Mildren-I second the amendment and reserve my right to speak.
Mr EWEN CAMERON (Indi) (8.1)-The Roads Grants Bill is an important step in the

I have shown on numerous occasions the further development of the Government's roads

opportunities that an expanded road works grants policy outlined in 1980. It marks the second

program and greater investment in our road sysyear of a five-year plan for guaranteed road fund-

tem would offer to save lives, improve efficiency ing by the Commonwealth Government. There

and create new jobs. The paucity of road funds are three aspects to the Bill which I would like to

being allocated by this Bill confirms the Governmention briefly this evening. They are: The calling

ment's spurning of those opportunities. Regret- , of tenders for the construction of national roads,

tably for Australians we have a government led by the ending of the quota system for funding and the

a Prime Minister who simplistically believes that further reduction of road classifications.

management of national finances is akin to management of a household budget and whose mismanagement has reached the stage where now he proposes to sell the house to pay the bills. We have a hapless Minister for Transport with an Alice in Wonderland approach to the cOlllplexities of his portfolio who thinks the tasks of building weekenders and national highways are the same, and who is an expert on diagnosing bellyaches in National Country Party Ministers.

This Government is very much a free enterprise government. In this Bill we have an example of the implementation of its free enterprise policies. After 31 August 1981, it will be necessary for all construction on national roads to be tendered for. This means that local councils and State government road construction authorities will be challenged to compete with private enterprise for contracts to build national roads. This type of initiative by the Government win create a competi-

This Bill is outrageous considered from any concept of national responsibility for roads, road safety, balanced and co-operative democratic federalism and efficient utilisation of taxpayers' money, Whatever else the Government says, the
simple fact is that it is nudging closer and closer to powerful sectional interests and further away from national responsibility every day. I conclude
by moving the following amendment:

tive environment which will ensure that maximum value is obtained for the Commonwealth's investment and therefore the taxpayers' investment in national roads. This decision is in line with recent decisions made by the Government to encourage smaller government and more efficient government. The legislation is designed to encourage private enterprise to take up the challenge to compete with traditional government activities.

That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substi-

The second aspect of this Bill to which 1 would

tuting the following words:

like to draw honourable members' attention is the

2804 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Roads Grants Bill

ending of the quota system. This system was introduced in 1959 and required State governments to provide a certain percentage of road construction and maintenance funding from their own resources. This section in the Bill was recommended by the Advisory Council for InterGovernment Relations in its provisions of roads, report No.4 in 1981. It is encouraging to see that many of the recommendations of this report have been implemented by the Commonwealth Government. In the financial year 1978-79 the Victorian Government spent approximately 47 per cent or $62. 3m above its quota under the legislation on Victorian roads. Tasmania spent 96.9 per cent over its quota and New South Wales spent 100 per cent or $158.5m over its quota. On average, the States provide 30 per cent of the total funds used on roads. These funds are derived from such sources as motor registration fees, loan moneys, licence fees---in many forms-municipal council contributions to main roads, tolls and general revenue among other sources of funding.
The third area which I would like to touch on briefly is the direction taken in this Bill to contain administrative expense and inefficiency. A reduction in the number of road classifications began with the 1980 Roads Grants Bill and is carried a step further with this legislation. The Bill gives greater power to the States to decide where the grant money could best be allocated. This is in line with the Government's policy of handing back to thc States the decision making responsibilities in areas which concern them. The reduction in category numbers gives more flexibility to the States when using the money. The introduction of retrospective reporting by the States in reference to arterial roads expenditure will speed up the decision making process and help keep administrative costs down. The use of a formula approach to the distribution of funds to local government should be an improvement on the previous system where prior approval was required.
The Commonwealth has retained the right to make decisions concerning national roads but for arterial and local roads it has decentralised much of the decision making. There are now over 800,000 kilometres of roads in Australia. That is approximately 0.06 of a kilometre of road per head of population, which can be compared with 0.03 per capita for New Zealand and Canada. These figures give some indication of the importance of roads and roads funding legislation to Australia. This network of roads is responsible for 90 per cent of all passenger travel and 20 per cent of all freight movement. Local roads comprise 85 per cent of the total network. It is of interest to

look at road grants for 1981-82. Tn Vic expenditure on national roads was $52.86m, arterial roads $52.599m and local roads $32.361m. I would be pleased to see more generous allocations to local roads, thus assisting the rural sector which depends so much on the local roads system in its more isolated living and working environment.
To sum up, this Bill will streamline avenues of administration by decreasing the number of classifications, discontinuing the use of quotas and replacing program approval requirements with retrospective reporting. All these measures contribute towards smaller and more efficient government. I comment the Bill to the House.
Mr CHARLES JONES (Newcastle) (8.8)- The Roads Grants Bill basically provides for five items, namely, a grant of $685m to the States, the amalgamation of road categories, the compulsory calling of tenders for the construction of national highways, less Commonwealth administration and the elimination of State quotas. We heard the honourable member for Indi (Mr Ewen Cameron) who preceded me in the debate make reference to the fact that this is an important piece of legislation in an expansionary program of assistance for roads by this Government. All I want to say is that that is absolute humbug. The Bill is typical of the Government's legislation dealing with roads since it has been the government.
Let us examine closely the expenditure on roads comparing the figures for this year with those for last year. Last year there was an increase of 11 per cent in the allocation over the previous year's allocation. This took the amount provided to $628m. This year there is an increase of 9 per cent or $57m-an increase to $685m. I do not know where the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) got his multiplier from. If we look at any four criteria, we can come up with an increase that is justified and should have been approved by the Government. Inflation is running at 9.5 per cent. That in itself should have brought about an increase of $3m in the appropriation which would have taken the grant to $688m. Even an inflation rate of 10 per cent, as shown in the Budget figures of the Treasurer (Mr Howard), would have brought about an increase of $6m and taken the grant to $691 m. Another Department of the Treasury document entitled 'The National Expenditure Deflator' shows that inflation is running at 11.5 per cent. The adoption of that rate would mean an additional $14m being allocated to the States, taking the grant to $699m.
It is an accepted fact amongst road authorities that the cost of road construction has increased by

Roads Grants Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2805

16 per cent. This Government has been a major contributor to that 16 per cent increase for it is guilty of increasing the tax on fuel. It devised the policy of world parity pricing which is a great 'raker-in' of money. So, if we take 16 per cent as the increase in the cost of road construction, that would mean an increase of $43m to the States, taking the grant to $728m. To show honourable members what a great expansionary program it is-I repeat the figures because I think that [must quote the figures over five years to reveal the facts-in J980-81 the projected increase is 11 per cent and 1981-82 the projected increase is 9 per cent. These years are when the real expansion occurs. In 1982-83, the percentage drops to 7 per cent. In 1983-84, it is 6 per cent. For 1984-85, the figure is 6 per cent. So, I do not know where members of the Government find this great expansionary program.
I am delighted to see a couple of honourable members from New South Wales present. Once again I register my protest at the poor deal that was handed out to New South Wales by this New South Wales National Country Party Minister, Mr Hunt. It is no damn wonder that the Leader of the Liberal Party in New South Wales resigned. The fact is that all of them ought to be ashamed of what they have done to that State. The Minister gave me a document a couple of days ago in answer to a question I asked when we were being briefed by departmental officers. The figures are authentic. I seek leave to have this document incorporated in Hansard. I apologise that I did not ask the Minister in advance for agreement.
Mr Hunt-The figures would have to be right if I gave them to him. On that basis, I grant leave.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
ACTUAL DISTRIBUTION OF COMMONWEALTH ROAD GRANTS AMONG STATES COMPARED WITH BOR RECOMMENDED DISTRIBUTION 1977-78

(b) These relativities have been maintained in subsequent years.
Mr CHARLES JONES-I thank the House. This document shows that on the 1977-78 figures-and the program is based on the 1977-78 figures-the Bureau of Roads recommended that New South Wales should receive a share of 34.6 per cent of the total appropriation. Instead of that, New South Wales had its allocation reduced to 32.4 per cent, a cut of 2.2 per cent. In real money terms, that means that this year New South Wales will get $15.07m less than it should receive on the recommendations of the Bureau of Roads based on the 1977-78 figures. I suggest to members of the Government from New South Wales electorates that they had better get off their tails and start putting pressure on their Government to restore the value of what the New South Wales Government should be getting. Forget that a Labor Government is in office in that State. It is their State and it is entitled to a share of the proceeds being doled out by this Government. The fact is that every other State in the Commonwealth receives an increase at the expense of New South Wales. That has to stop. The States should get what they are entitled to. They should receive a fair and reasonable allocation of the moneys available.
I said previously that this Bill was a humbug Bill in appropriating funds to the States. I have a table taken, once again, from a publication of the Bureau of Transport Economics. It is called 'An Assessment of the Australian Road System 1979'. [ believe it is the latest that is available. It shows that, in 1970-71, road grants amounted to 2.69 per cent of the total appropriation of federal funds. In 1980-81, this financial year, the figures show that that grant has dropped to l.74 per cent of total Budget appropriations. This demonstrates the way that this Government has whittled away the allocation of Federal funds to the States. That is a very, very substantial reduction in the amount of money that is paid to the States.

State
NSW Vic. Qld SA WA Tas.
Total

Actual Commonwealth
grant

BOR
recommendations (a)

Sm % share (b) $m %share

153.8

32.4

243.9

34.6

98.9

20.8

138.7

19.7

100.0

21.1

146.7

20.8

40.4

8.5

59.4

8.4

60.2

12.7

86.7

12.3

21.7

4.6

29.1

4.1

475.0

100.0

704.5

100.0

Whilst I do not believe that the standard of roads is the total solution to the transport prob-
lem of this country, they still playa most import-
ant part. The motorist, the road user, the people who buy the fuel and the people who pay the
taxes are entitled to a fair and reasonable share of their allocation. Treasurer Harold Holt said some
years ago that fuel is another commodity that can
be taxed. I accept that theory. But the fact is that
the road users and the fuel taxpayers are entitled to a fair and reasonable share when those taxes are allocated.

(a) Commonwealth Bureau of Roads, Report on Roads in

Let us now look at a couple of National Roads

Australia: 1975 Table 13.15.

and Motorists Association publications. They

2806 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Roads Grants Bill

state what new roads and modern highways can do to reduce the death toll in this country and save fuel. That Association recently carried out a survey on the new Liverpool to Mittagong freeway. I am very proud to say that I am the father of that road. The Whitlam Labor Government of which I was the Minister for Transport was responsible for starting that road. The honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) will agree with that any day of the week. I thank him for that in his absence. He arranged an invitation for me to the official opening of that freeway, which the Labor Government of that State forgot to extend to me. The survey showed that following the construction of that 64 kilometre road there will be an estimated saving in one year of 370 serious crashes including 150 casualty crashes with 300-odd people injured.
This type of expenditure is of great value in eliminating some of the needless fatalities and crashes that occur in this country. Some people will come up with varying 'figures as to what our road accidents really cost the economy as a whole. A figure of $1,OOOm has been mentioned as a cost for fatalities and accidents in this country. I believe that the figure is much higher than that. That figure has been used for seven or eight years. With inflation the figure would now be closer to $2,000m.
Another NRMA publication, Open Road of April-May this year, stated:
The NRMA estimates that completion of the F3--
That is, the Sydney-Newcastle expressway-
should result in an annual saving of 21 lives, 420 injuries and a cut of 920 in the number of recorded crashes. This estimate is based on current crash figures, and on studies which show freeways to be up to five times safer than conventional twolane highways.
There should also be enormous saving in fuel each year. A car with a fuel consumption of 11 litres/100 kilometres- . . . could save up to $1.30 on a trip from Wahroonga to Newcastle. This saving, spread across the estimated 12,500 vehicles which make the trip daily, could produce savings worth about $4.5m a year.
So the saving on those figures alone almost pays for the cost of construction of these roads. These figures and the extracts from 'An Assessment of the Australian Road System 1979' show quite clearly that this Government's allocation to roads is declining as against the States' allocation to roads. For example, in the period 1979-80 to 1983-84, the Commonwealth annual growth rate is estimated at 5 per cent; the State annual growth rate is estimated at 11.1 per cent; and the local growth rate is estimated at 9.5 per cent. That estimate is based on current prices. The 1976-77 prices showed a decline in the Commonwealth's average annual growth rate of 1.4 per cent, while

the States had an increase of 8.5 per cent and local government 1.8 per cent. On those figures alone, it can be established clearly that the Commonwealth is not playing its part as far as road funds are concerned.
Looking at the percentage share of road funding for the same years-1974-75 through to 1978-79-it can be seen that the Commonwealth's share of the expenditure for 1974-75 was 32.2 per cent, the States' share was 26.1 per cent, and local government 41.7 per cent. In 1978-79, the Commonwealth's share of road funding was 27.3 per cent, a decline from 32.2 per cent, and the States had to find more money. There was also a slight decline in the amount of money provided by local government. It does not matter what figures we look at. The Federal Government's contribution towards roads is on the decline and the States are faced with contributing greater amounts.
The other items dealt with in the Bill are the various categories of national roads and the amalgamation of rural and urban arterial roads. Once again I say to the poor Liberal members of this House: Why do the National Country Party members, the country blokes, always want to take over the Department of Transport? It is so that they can pork barrel their National Country Party electorates. Referring once again to 'An Assessment of the Australian Road System', it shows quite clearly that in relation to urban arterial roads, for example for the years 1974-75 through to 1978-79, on average the amount appropriated for urban arterials declined by 10 per cent whereas the rural arterials appropriation increased by 11.3 per cent. The poor mugs from the Liberal Party. The way they let their National Country Party colleagues, their coalition partners, their friends, put it over them! That is what the National Country Party members are doing on this occasion. They are amalgamating the two categories so that they can do things a lot more easily and so that what they are doing to the Liberal Party does not show up.
The elimination of State quotas indicates that this Government is refusing to face up to its responsibility to ensure that if it increases its appropriation for roads the States have to do the same. In Queensland recently the Minister for Local Government, Main Roads and Police increased car registration fees by 60 per cent, and he was caught out-apparently he did not know the contents of this Bill-and he blamed the Feds because he had to increase the State's quota for roads. He said that they had increasedthe quota. But he was unlucky. He was caught with his pants down. He forgot, or he did not know, that the States were no

Roads Grants Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2807

longer obliged to use the quota system. I was the victim of some lies told by Hinze, their Minister for Main Roads, and by the Premier, BjelkePetersen, in December 1974. In 11 Legislative Assembly electorates, all held by Labor, they laid off 4,500 road workers and said: 'If only Whitlam and Jones would give us more money we would not have to lay you poor men off'. We increased our allocation by just on $9m and the State reduced its allocation by $600,000 but they blamed us because they had less money and were unable to provide employment on the roads for the people in Queensland. On 15 March 1975, at a meeting of the Queensland Local Government Association Executive that Hinze and I attended, a resolution was carried deploring the fact that the Premier and the Minister for Roads had misled them, but it was too late. The 11 Labor members had lost their seats in the election becaLise of the lies of Hinze and Bjelke-Petersen. I am pleased that the Minister, in answer to a question yesterday morning, bowled him neck and crop once again. Another of Hinze's lies.
As far as the calling of tenders is concerned, I believe that there is a need to tighten up the efficiency of the State road authorities. The Whitlam Government was so disgusted with the way they operated their affairs that an advanced stage had been reached by that Government in setting up a national highway road construction authority under which the Federal Parliament would have been responsible for national highways. That shows how dissatisfied we were. I do not think that private enterprise tendering is the solution to the inefficiency of State road authorities. In fact, I think private enterprise is even more inefficient than the State authorities. It is certainly much more corrupt. Anyone who has been involved in local government, as I have, knows about the lousy roads, footpaths, kerbings and guttering that private enterprise lays down. Wherever there is a sub-division where the roadworks have been done by private contractors, within a matter of four or five years the council has to replace those works with better and longer lasting facilities. I do not think the answer to the problem is in private tendering. I think the real answer is to provide competition by setting up a national road construction authority.
As to what is required in relation to' the national concept of roads, it is for the Minister to proclaim the Inter-State Commission Bill, which went through both Houses of Parliament in 1975. There is a great need for that sort of instrumentality to examine the problems and to come up with answers, to call the necessary evidence from State governments, and to determine the cost of

freight, whether it be by road, rail, air, or by sea, for that matter. Such a commission must be introduced, and it should be able to make recommendations to the Government as to where roads should be built, why they should be built, and what the freight charges should be. The people who use them would then be in a position to levy reasonable freight rates and would at least be able to pay their taxes. They would not have to put up with the great free enterprise cut-throat competition that exists today in road freighting. So many of these unfortunate men believe that they can create a business. Suddenly, the hire purchase companies which really own their vehicles foreclose on them and they find themselves in the bankruptcy court.
In the limited time left to me I wish to deal with toll roads on the national highways whereby the user would really pay for the cost. I have never been a great supporter of toll roads but, having examined the toll road system in the United States in particular, I think there is merit in the user-pays principle. The user pays for the use of the road as he goes through the various toll gates. I think that system is worth looking at in the not too distant future as a means of getting ahead with national highways at a much greater rate. As far as highways and large arterial urban roads are concerned, the solution to the urban transport problem does not lie with the roads. For example, New York, Paris, London, Tokyo and Frankfurt have all found that freeways are not the solution to the public transport problem.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (S.28)-In rising to take part in this debate, it is my pleasure to support the amendment moved by my colleague the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris). The Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) in his second reading speech has claimed that the main purpose of the Roads Grants Bill is to provide $685m by way of Iton-repayable grants to the States and the Northern Territory for the construction and maintenance of roads in 1981-82. In the very first paragraph of the Minister's speech by the use of words he sought to give the impression that the Fraser Government is being benevolent to the States by providing this funding. He should have said that the Government is returning some 15 per cent of taxes collected by way of fuel tax-a tax that has increased tenfold under the Fraser Government-to the people who contributed the funds. In 1976, the first year of the Fraser Government, no funds were raised through

2808 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Roads Grants Bill

petrol tax, but in 1980 the tax rip-off from fuel related revenue exceeded $4,000m-this from a Government which promised to cut taxes. The facts show that in regard to funds collected from the transport sector of the economy there is a large surplus of income over expenditure. In June 1980 the Government announced a five-year funding program. The States were seeking the longer funding guarantee and, leaving aside the fact that the announced amounts are totally inadequate to cover the inflationary effect of the policies of this Government, particularly in the fuel tax area, this was a welcome improvement. There has been a significant downward trend in road funds, particularly for local government, in a period when road taxes have increased enormously. There is insufficient realisation of the losses suffered by municipalities through road grants not keeping pace with increased road construction costs.
The funds received by the Country Roads Board in Victoria for distribution have been grossly eroded by inflation. I have a table which clearly shows the relationship between State and Commonwealth grants to the Board in actual and real terms. It can be seen that from 1971-72 to 1975-76 the Commonwealth grants did keep pace with inflation whereas the State grants fell behind. In 1971-72 values, the Commonwealth's share rose from $49m in 1971-72 to $52m in 1975-76, and at the same time the Victorian Government's share fell from $63m to $53m. However, from 1975-76, under the Fraser Government, the reverse has occurred. Commonwealth funds in 1971-72 values fell from $53min 1975-76 to $43m in 1979-80. The State Government in Victoria increased its funding marginally from $53m to approximately $60m. The total accumulated deficiency of Commonwealth grants in real terms since 1975-76 is viewed with great concern by local government. In present day values the total accumulated deficiency in Commonwealth and State funds in the past eight years has amounted to $200m in Victoria alone. The figure is overshadowed only by the increase in taxes which this Government is collecting and not returning in sufficient quantities to maintain a reasonable road program. The Bureau of Transport Economics' report entitled 'An Assessment of the Australian Road System 1979' highlighted some interesting facts. With respect to proportions spent on construction and maintenance Australia-wide from 1974-75 to 1978-79, the Bureau indicated that 65 per cent was spent on construction and 35 per cent was spent on maintenance. Shire councils in the McMillan electorate are spending the reverse figures. Because there has been such a fall in real

terms in funding, they are spending 35 per cent on construction and 65 per cent on maintenance. At the same time, there is a backlog in the construction works required and most maintenance funds are being wasted on maintaining roads that have depreciated beyond their effective life. That report also stated:
Expenditure on construction categories was 20 per cent less than warranted, while maintenance was 51 per cent greater than previously estimated as warranted.
The Bureau finally arrived at the logical conclusion when it said:
It may well be that the increase in maintenance was in substantial part necessitated by lower expenditure on construction.
Local government bodies have been telling the Federal Government this for the last five years. It does not make economic sense to waste the funds being collected from the petrol tax simply because the Fraser Government has an ideology which says the matter is a State responsibility. The Federal Government is collecting the funds and should make them available to the responsible State bodies.
I would now like to move on to another aspect of the Roads Grants Bill, that is, the national roads appropriation. The Minister, while making it clear in his speech that the allocations to the States are firm and final amounts, said:
These national roads appropriations for 1982-83 should be regarded solely as a minimum planning base at this stage.
I take that to mean that the Ministerintends to increase the funds required to upgrade the national roads area. This approach is to be commended as there are many important development roads which need upgrading. There is no more important road than the road between the Latrobe Valley and Melbourne. This was declared a national road in the last two years. However, why one section of the road grants should receive priority over another is not made clear. In fact, considering the amount of funding being attracted to resource development, it could be argued effectively that the Government should require developers to take the infrastructure costs into consideration in the original contracts and make more available for roads in those areas.
There is one point in this Bill which has no logic whatever; that is, the clause which makes it conditional on State governments, through their road authorities, to tender for any work they wish to perform. It is intended that the procedures for assessing tenders will be the responsibility of the Federal Minister. After all the ideological rhetoric we have heard in the last month on the need for States to take more responsibility, how on earth

Roads Grants Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2809

this clause can be justified is beyond comprehension.
Let us look at the facts as to how efficient day labour can be under the control of a State authority. I refer the Minister to a section of national highway whose official opening he attended in February. I refer to the recently declared national highway section which connects Melbourne to the resource area of the Latrobe Valley. I would like to quote from a brochure that the Country Roads Board put out in 1977. The brochure outlined how much that section would cost. It states:
The cost of the Princes Highway project-
Motion (by Mr Bourchier) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Administrator recommending appropriation announced.
In Committee
Clauses 1 to 23-by leave-taken together.
Mr STEELE HALL (Boothby) (8.38)-1 want to refer briefly to the impact of the clauses in relation to the allocation of moneys between the States. I do not wish to speak at length because 1 dealt with this matter in a previous speech in this place when I mentioned particularly South Australia's disadvantaged position. 1may say that, having mentioned this previously, I was referred to somewhere as being particularly parochial in referring especially to South Australia's position when we were dealing with a program which encompassed the whole of the nation. I make no apology for referring to this matter again because, of all the States, South Australia is singled out for some bias in relation to the funding of its roads in comparison to the States which could be accepted, and must be accepted, as the standardsetters in this regard.
I pointed out previously that Western Australia is comparable to South Australia-as comparable as one can get-in relation to vehicle number~, kilometres per vehicle per year, population and so many other factors which can be taken as a base for the allocation of road funds. I pointed out previously that almost without exception in the last five or six years South Australia has received about 67 per cent of the grant that Western Australia has received. I have requested the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) to give special weight to this evidence. I remember saying to him on a previous occasion that if he took up this matter he would be the first Minister in a decade to

put right one of the greatest wrongs in the administration of Federal funds. 1 said then that, as a new Minister to this portfolio, he was a clean skin and that I put no responsibility on him for the disadvantageous position of my State. 1 must express my extreme disappointment that the Minister has not looked at the history of this matter which has meant that these allocations are so unsatisfactory in relation to South Australia. I am sure that had he so looked at the history of the matter, the evidence would have compelled him to move in the direction of at least marginally beginning to right the wrong done my State. However, he has not done so. Perhaps he has been too busy in some other matters which I recognise have occupied him in recent days.
Still 1 must say, in all seriousness, that I regard this as a lapse. There must be some bias among the Minister's advisers, if not with himself, which ensures that South Australia shall be so disregarded that, in relation to another sister State which has needs very close to that of my own, we get an equivalent of about 67 per cent of that State's allocation. I believe that that is a satisfactory standard of comparison. I have said in another place that South Australia has applied much of its own funds as a State Government to the construction of national highways. It can show $29m of expenditure in this way in recent years. For example, there is the provision of State funds which effected the completion of the Eyre Highway and which was spent also on the Melbourne-Adelaide highway. These are moneys which have precluded the building and finishing of other local roads so badly needed.
Beyond the local parochial needs of South Australians, in our State we have one of the great gas fields of Australia, This promises also significant oil yields for this nation. It is a fact that there is no sealed road to the gas fields which serve Adelaide and more significantly, on a national scale, the city of Sydney and associated centres along the way. The producers well know that in the last real rainy season that affected and encompassed the gas fields, the supply of gas to the two capitals of Adelaide and Sydney, was within several hours of being cut because no road transport could bring essential supplies into that field. It is simply not good enough with such significant centres of population in Australia being served by an essential supply of gas as they are in this way, that there is no satisfactory road to those on the gas field to provide them with services in times of need. I could repeat many of the facts. I do not intend to repeat these tonight. I want to remind the Minister that satisfaction has not been given and that a significant bias has been shown. The only factor

2810 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Roads Grants Bill

that encourages me is that in his speech he said that the Government will not guarantee to continue any commitment of these allocations further. That encourages me and I read that to encourage the Minister. To remind him of his own words I quote:
However, this should not be taken to imply any commitment an the part of the Commonwealth ta the maintenance of current funding relativities far the remainder af the five-year program.
That is something I am going to keep reminding the Minister about. I am sure that if I do it with some good humour he will not mind. I am going to keep the good humour for another 12 months. I say to the Minister that I have been at this now for some years. I am getting rather tired of this bias and I am going to go back to South Australia and do the only thing I know that can start to effect it, if politics are not effective here as they were for me in the Senate. I am going to educate the public of South Australia to know how deficient they are in road funds in relation to the sister State to which I have referred.
Mr Hunt-The present allocations are inequitable.
Mr STEELE HALL-I have that from the Minister. I very much appreciate that statement. It certainly encourages me and I will adopt my educative program in South Australia with the greatest of collaboration and co-operation. It will be educative. It is the only next step that I khow in the system. If politics fail then it is necessary to go to the people. I am going to go to the people with this question. I say that with goodwill. I do not want to continue with this. There are so many facts to support my case but it would only bore the House to hear them again. They are available if any member wants to know them. I will continue to put them to the public of South Australia so that they will know they are disadvantaged ard so that they can effect it from the grass roots. I do in a positive sense say that I am pleased at least to see the legislation. The continuation of the program is good for Australia and in this way I am pleased in the national sense. I have merely expressed my disappointment and hope in relation to South Australia's future involvement.
Mr CHARLES JONES (Newcastle) (8.45) -I am not going to say that I join with the honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall) but if he is going to plug the case for South Australia. I will again emphasise the point to the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt). I hope the Minister will say that the New South Wales appropriation is inequitable and unfair and that New South Wales should be getting a greater share of funds. To emphasise the point I state that

at least South Australia on the Bureau of Roads recommendation of 1977-78 got an increase in the actual Commonwealth grant, whereas New South Wales had a recommendation from the Bureau of Roads of a 34.6 per cent share but it got 32.4 per cent. In today's money terms it is costing New South Wales $15.07m. That is how much that State is worse off. I think the Minister will find New South Wales is much worse off as far as the rest of the States are concerned. I ask the Minister whether he considers New South Wales unfairly treated. If he does, what is he going to do about it when I have already drawn his attention to the facts. I referred to the figures from the table he gave me yesterday in the House on how the funds are distributed.
MrHunt-Can I answer that?
Mr CHARLES JONES Yes, the Minister may answer that.
Mr Hunt-We hope to get--
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The Minister can answer the question in due time. The Minister will remain seated.
Mr CHARLES JONES-Mr Chairman, please let the Minister interject on my speech.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member for Newcastle may proceed.
Mr CHARLES JONES-I look forward with interest to the Minister's response so that he can give us an assurance that New South Wales has been badly done by for years and should be getting more funds than it is getting. If the Minister were to share the whole of the money raised by way of fuel tax and fuel levy, New South Wales and Victoria would do badly under the appropriation and allocation of those funds. We are looking for another $15.07m to make up the shortfall that New South Wales is not getting against the Bureau of Roads recomendation. I will proceed to a consideration of the various clauses of the Bill. I always feel that when we deal with roads we look too closely at the question of roads and not at some of the alternatives in the overall transport debate and at the ways Federal Parliament should be appropriating money to assist the States to provide a better transport system in total. I cited figures as to what freeways can do in relation to saving lives and the saving of fuel, which in itself pays for at least 50 per cent of the cost of those roads. It is not possible to put a price on a human life but as was stated by the National Roads and Motorists Association in an article from which I quoted in a speech earlier tonight, there would be the saving of a considerable number of lives on the

Roads Grants Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2811

Sydney-Newcastle road if we were to have a fourlane divided carriageway all the way. I do not know what price we put on those lives but it must run into millions and millions of dollars more than the cost of the road itself. In looking at roads we should be concerned with a total transport approach and how we can improve it. As far as the Labor Government was concerned, it attempted to tackle the road problem by dealing with it as a transport problem and dealing with the overall question. That is why it came up with a $500m urban public transport assistance program for both trams, trains and buses or whatever the main mode of transport was in the particular city. I am sorry to say that this Government has given notice that it will abandon that program which is in the interest of transport as a whole. It is an alternative to providing expressways and high speed roads through cities. They only add to pollution and make for additional problems in the cities. Mr Chairman, I am referring to the paragraphs in the clauses concerned.
The CHAIRMAN. The honourable member is ranging rather freely in his remarks in this Committee debate.
Mr CHARLES JONES-The subject matter we are dealing with is roads, and I am putting an alternative case.
The CHAIRMAN. The Chair will hear the honourable member further. It would be obliged if he addressed himself purposefully to his task.

transport system in the outer suburbs-in areas where people must have cars because there is an inadequate bus, tram or train service. The Minister should look at this overall transport approach to the problem of roads instead of doing what is now being done, namely, reducing the amount of money being approprirated in real money terms. There has been an increase in money but in real money terms there has been a substantial percentage reduction in the total amount of money being provided for roads by the three levels of government-Federal, State and local government.
Mr COWAN (Lyne) (8.52)-1 feel every member of Parliament would be very pleased to see more money allocated from both the Commonwealth and the States for roads and bridges. I certainly agree with what the honourable member for Newcastle (Mr Charles Jones) says. We all fight for this and work towards it.. But I remind the honourable member that the policy of the New South Wales State Government in relation to roads is not what it ought to be. It has not proceeded with many of the freeways that were planned by the previous a4ministration. I know the honourable lllember explained that he does not believe in these freeways, but how can we funnel people through a city without freeways? Only the other morning I was in a car approaching Mascot airport. While at an intersection I watched 23 cars go by and only one car had a passenger.

Mr CHARLES JONES-Thank you, Mr Chairman. The Australian Labor Party endeavoured to use public transport as an alternative to building expressways through cities. The road engineers love them but I do not think they are in the best interests of the community as a whole, especially when we consider the experiment in Los Angeles. The transport system in that city is based on highways. The system in Los Angeles is a disaster. The transport authorities would love to pull down their roads and to restore the trams and trains they got rid of many years ago. New York, London, Tokyo, Paris, Frankfurt and many other major capital cities of the world have not relied on roads to solve their transport problems; they have used public transport as an alternative. These are just a few of the things that this Government should be looking at.
When the Labor Government unfortunately got the sack in 1975 a submission had been lodged-this should be right up the alley of this Government with its free enterprise philosophy-to provide assistance to private bus operators. In Sydney and Melbourne in particular they provide the major part of the urban

I certainly agree with the honourable member for Newcastle that maybe there should be some examination to induce people-we cannot force them-to utilise transport in a better way. I know that the National Roads and Motorists Association has given quite a lot of attention' to this. It has studied the various aspeqts of transport, particularly in metropolitan areas. We should also look at the amount of money that New South Wales has borrowed. I can recall that in a recent year-I think it was in 1979-80-,-the State borrowed $40m to spend on its road systems within the State.- Very little of that-perhaps less than $5m-was spent outside the metropolitan area.
I represent a country electorate. When legislation such as this Roads Grants Bill is discussed, one has to consider the local roads, the arterial roads and the highways that serve communities. I speak on behalf of the electors who I represent. A few minutes ago the honourable member for Riverina (Mr Hicks) said that he was concerned about his electors. We are suffering because we represent areas where the farmer sends his produce to the market and where the local school bus travels 20, 30 or 50 kilometres to collect children

2812 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Roads Grants Bill

to take them to school. There is a growth in the tourist industry. A shire associated with the coastal belt has to provide the roads and services to feed a growing seaside community. These are the problems about which we are concerned.
I support the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) and I commend him for his actions. I do not dispute in any way the Government's policy at this time. Even with a cut in overall spending, the Minister has been able to obtain additional fun9s for the States to spend on roads throughout the Commonwealth. J know it is not sufficient and ] suppose the Minister agrees. But, he has been able to make 9 per cent more funds available this year to our councils and States to spend on roads. I think that is very important. Honourable members should not lose sight of the fact that, as We noted last night in an economic review booklet, extra employment is being created, extra money is being spent in the community and inflation has fallen: These are the things that will help councils and people who pay the rates to get the benefit of every dollar spent on roads and bridges in their communities. These are the realities of the matter that any member of a parliament should look at aI).di;u~port.
As] said eariier, I am basically concerned about the .situation throughout the country areas of Australia. In the local communities, farmers want to get, their produce into market over rural local roads, m[!ny of which are in a very poor state or repair because councils are unable to put them into order or to maintain them in the way they want to. J draw particular attention to the fact that the arterial ,roads-the main and trunk fmids-under the old legislation were most imP\J~tant r<;lads as inter-community links. Everywhere in the country important shire roads serve the communities. Perhaps the shires feel they do
not have a: tremendous responsibility for those
roads because' they feed into adjoining shires. These are the developing roads of this country that we have to support. Under this new roads classification, there will be only three categories of roads.
t would like to instance the Gloucester Shire,
which is in the electorate of Lyne. That shire is a little inland-70 or 80 kilometres from the coast-but it is a very important Pilrt of the link to the tablelands area. It is roads such as the Gloucester~Walcha and the' Gloucester-Scone roads that transport the tourists, the timber and the produce. These are the alternative roads to the highways of the, State. Yet, with the funds aV'!-ilable, those roads cannot be developed quickly in,the way one would want them to be developed. This matter is of particular significance

because of an abattoir in that region. I am referring not only to the Gloucester-Walcha road but also the Cooplacurripa road. Under the priorities set by the State-I do not disagree with themthe Gloucester-Walcha road has to be completed before the Cooplacurripa road may recevie special funding.
I agree with what the Minister has said and with the Bill he has presented. More works should be carried out under the contract system. How often do we travel along a highway and see expensive, new equipment on the side of the road. It might work for only a few hours a day. I do not criticise the Department of Main Roads. In all the approaches I have made to it as a State member of parliament, I found it to be co-operative. But it is now time we looked at the situation. The DMR claimed in its last report that there is a 16 per cent increase in costs a year on road and bridge building in New South Wales. That is much higher than consumer price index increases. Is it not time we perhaps not only looked at the extra finance we want and saw to it that the taxpayer's dollar is spent properly? I believe at this time that it is not being spent properly. I believe that, in regard to the national highways and main arterial roads of Australia, much could be gained in the utilisation of the taxpayer's dollar if work were let out to private contractors. I strongly support that. I believe it would employ more people. It is a wonder to me that the Opposition is not supporting it instead of trying to find ways to retain the use of day labour.
I remind the House that funds for developmental roads are controlled by the Federal Minister as well as funds for national roads. I do not disagree with that. I am a little sorry that we saw an instance in New South Wales when, apparently, money from the development fund was directeq to the development of a road from Picton to Port Kembla to service the coal industry of the State simply because Mr Wran would not build a coal loader at Botany Bay. That was the only reason. I hope that this year and in the years to come developmental road funding will be spent for those purposes which are very well outlined in the explanatory memorandum of the Bill. These funds will be for the development of roads servicing industries or energy resources, including those in remote areas, roads for international and interstate trade and commerce and roads for significant tourist purposes. I hope that the funds will be of great advantage to country areas.
The CHAIRMAN-Before I call the honourable member for McMillan I remind honourable

Roads Grants Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2813

members that debate is proceeding in the Committee. Honourable members are required to address themselves to the clauses in question in a more specific manner.

put out a brochure before it went ahead with the construction of the Drouin and Warragul section, outlining where it would be built and how long it would take. The brochure stated:

Mr Morris-Mr Chairman, I take a point of order. I understood that some latitude was agreed to in respect of honourable members on both sides

The cost of the Princes Freeway Project at Drouin and Warragul is estimated to be $31 million at 1977 prices.~
Drouin section-$15 million.

of the chamber. I have not made any objection for Warragul section-$16 million.

that reason.

The $15m section has been completed. The Minis-

The CHAIRMAN. The honourable member for Shortland has informed the Chair of certain arrangements. On the other hand, the Chair is bound to apply the Standing Orders. It is not
party to such arrangements.

ter attended the opening in February. He i~ no doubt aware that the former Minister for Minerals and Energy in Victoria, the honourable member for Narracan, who has now an,nounced his retirement, was given the privilege, after 25 years in the State Parliament, of opening the

Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (9.2)-1 wish to cover an area that has been covered by the honourable member for Lyne (Mr Cowan), that is, the clause providing that funds for national

sections. He announced to everybody there that the day labour forc'e had done its job and the total cost of the project Was $12m. It was a four year project from 1977 to 1981. The day labour' force

roads will be conditional upon tenders being was able, because of gQod management and concalled. This clause clearly runs counter to what trol by the Victorian Country Roads Board, to re-

the Government has been telling the people of Australia for the last five years. It has said that it intended to see the States take more responsibility for doing those things they are best at doing. It

duce the estimated cost from $15rri in 1977 to $12m in 1981. Th~ Minister can put forward no argument as to ~why there is any need to make such road development conditional upon tenders

seems strange to me that this clause runs in the opbeing called. I think it is terrible that this Governposite way to what the Government has been sayment has decided that it knows best in this situ~ ing for so long. It is no wonder that we are hearing ation. It will not make the building of the road to

so many objections from State Transport Ministers, particularly in the north where a certain Minister seems to be making a lot of fuss about the conditional clause which has been included in

which I have referred any easier. It is a very im~ portant road to the only area in Victoria that is really developing. I thought' that this Government, with all i.ts rhetoric about resource develop-

this Bill.

ment, would have been keen to see the road built

To illustrate what can be done by a local roads authority, 1 refer to the Country Roads Board in Victoria. To this stage it has had the responsibility
for the development of national road works. It has the job of building a road from Melbourne to the

as efficiently al)d as quickly as possible. I believe that this clause in the Bill will have the opposite effect. No doubt the Victorian Minister i's saying so, but not publicly as his counterpart in Queensland seems intent on doit;lg.

Latrobe Valley. That is now a national road. The The Government seeins to take the view that if

Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) will be aware a job is put out to tender it will be done better.

of this road because he attended the opening of a Many places in Gippsland in, ViCtoria have very

section at Drouin in February. At present it is one wet conditions during the year. If a tender is given

of the stangest highways one could see. Most highto a private company it has to do the job in a set

ways have two lanes of traffic on either side. For a time at a set price. If the company runs into very

large section of this highway duplicate bridges wet conditions it will continue the job, bog its

have been built by the Victorian State Electricity machinery and do everything it should not do.

Commission but there is no highway connecting The Country Roads Board, by controlling the

them. The State Government at this stage, situation, can easily defer that part of the job and

through the SEC, has played its part and built move to another area. It would have complete

new bridges to carry big loads to the resource control over where it should work in the State. I

area, but the Government is lagging in building do not know where the Government got the evi-

the sections that connect the bridges. It is worth dence supporting the inclusion in the Bill of a

looking at the highway with bridges and no roads. clause such as this. On the same day that the sec-

The construction of the section of this highway to ond reading speech was made in the House the re-

which I have referred contradicts the reasons port of the Advisory Council for Inter-

everybody has given for such construction to be government Relations was tabled. I refer to a

put to tender. In 1977 the Country Roads Board section of it. It stated:

2814 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Roads Grants Bill

In April 1977 the Premiers' Conference requested the Advisory CounciJ,for Inter-government Relations to undertake an examination of the relationships that should exist between Commonwealth, State and local governments . . . the Council decided to investigate the relationships among governments in the provision of services in appropriate functional areas, oile of which is roads . . . Early in 1980, the Council reached agreement on some matters on which its views were then communicated to the Prime Minister, the Premiers and the Australian Council of Local Government Associations. An outline of this advice is contained in Chapter 2.
I now turn to Chapter 2 to indicate what advice was given by the Council at that time. It stated:
The CounciL considered that the States should be fully responsible for the physical construction and maintenance of the national hi~hway system and, consequently, did not support the concept of the Commonwealth requiring open tendering for national highway projects. Tendering procedures should be a matter for individual State authorities.
So much for setting up an advisory body! Nobody in this Government takes any notice of it. How will the tendering system be administered? From what we can find out, the Minister will administer it under procedures which will still have to be worked out. In other words, the CRB will have to tender to the CRB. I take it that a Commonwealth officer from the Department of Transport will have to be present when the box is opened to see that theCRB does not cheat the CRB or the public. I think that people who have been dealing with roads for many years and who will continue to deal with most of the roads in the country should be allowed to accept the responsibility for looking after the tenders and deciding whether all the jobs should be put out to tender. It is not logical to do so, in many cases. Perhaps in the construction of a very big highway connecting Sydney and Melbourne, such as the Hume Highway, there are grounds for putting the work to tender but in the construction of a new national development road there is no logic in doing so. Some of these roads are strictly resource projects. Some of the roads, as dealt with in this Bill, will be new tourist roads. Therefore, the local authorities would by far be best able to judge what section of the job should go out to tender and how best it could be done. I think that the Government is making a very big mistake in writing this type of conditional provision into this Bill.
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (9.10)-1 will not detain the Committee for very long but there was one question which the honourable member for Newcastle (Mr Charles Jones) raised in respect of the distribution of funds among the States. The honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall) also referred to the distribution of Commonwealth funds to the States and the disadvantage that he claims South

Australia is suffering. I have been aware of the inadequacy of the current formula for the distribution of funds as between the States. That was brought to our attention when the last report of the Bureau of Transport Economics on roads identified a real problem. I brought this to the attention of the State Ministers at an Australian Transport Advisory Council meeting and at a roads Ministers meeting earlier this year. I attempted to reach some agreement with them on a new method of distributing the funds.
The truth of the matter is that I could not get any agreement whatsoever. Even the New South Wales Minister was amongst those who appealed to me as the Commonwealth Minister to leave the allocations between the States as they exist for this year to enable the road group of officers, as it is called, to meet prior to the next ATAC meeting to have a further look at the problem and to report back to the ATAC meeting in July. That will happen. There is no doubt that some States are not getting a fair deal under the existing allocation of funds from the Commonwealth resources. Certainly, Queensland is doing badly under the existing arrangement and New South Wales is lagging behind. I think there is probably some room for concern in Western Australia and South Australia. I do hope that the State Ministers adopt a statesmanlike attitude to the next meeting of ATAC. I can see that it will be very difficult to get any consensus or agreement amongst them. Quite clearly, between now and when the next roads legislation comes into this Parliament, a lot of work has to be done and there will be a need for a fairly bold initiative from our own Government.
Clauses agreed to. Clause 24 (Additional conditions with respect to Part II projects).
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (9.13)-Clause 24 is the key clause in introducing compulsion upon the State authorities to call tenders for all national road projects. This is an ill-considered and illprepared piece of legislation. If passed it will make bad law. It is based upon blind ideology, not upon any evidence that will show there will be improved efficiency or better value for taxpayers' dollars which are spent on roads.
Mr Hunt-It is well drafted.
Mr MORRIS-I will show the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) where it is bad law, if he will listen. The best evidence is contained in the report of the Australian Federation of Construction Contractors. If the Minister has a look at the report I am quite sure he will find that the only evidence that the Federation could produce that private contractors could build roadworks any

Roads Grants Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2815

cheaper than public authorities was to enclose a clipping from the Sydney Daily Telegraph of 14 July 1972 in respect of some kerbing and guttering carried out by Blacktown City Council. That is the only evidence there is. What is at issue here is the abolition of the long standing right of the States to exercise their discretion as to which national road projects should be subject to tender. Let me make it quite clear that not from the Australian Labor Party or the States is there any argument about the value of using a combination of private contractors and public road authorities. The argument is about removing the discretion of the State road authorities to choose which projects should be put out to tender. That is what the argument is about. That decision by the Government to introduce that compulsion, as I have said, is based on ideology.
In line 36 the clause provides that the States will invite, and deal with, tenders for those works in accordance with procedures approved by the Minister. No information is provided to the Parliament, nor is any information available to the States, as to what those procedures will entail. They have not been negotiated. They have not been determined. The States do not know what matters will be covered by those procedures. The Minister does not even know. There is nothing in that clause to enable the Minister-for instance, when he is. faced with a situation where a tender has been let and bad weather conditions Or unforseen circumstances which are beyond the control of the authority or the contractor occur, such as washaways, floods or natural disasters, and a part propect is interfered with or additional costs are incurred, to have the discretion to say: 'In these urgent circumstances, in this special situation, the tenders should not be called and another procedure should be adopted to make urgent repairs or recovery to that national highway construction'. Nor is there any provision in that clause to cover the situation, as has often been the case, of a private contractor carrying out a national roadworks project.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! I ask honourable members on my right to lower the tone of the conversation.
Mr MORRIS-It does not matter to those opposite, Mr Chairman; it is only public money that they are squandering. An amount of $12m will be incurred on the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting. Those opposite do not worry about the women and kids in the streets who may be in need of that money. Here we are talking about roads.
Mr MacKellar-Come, come!

Mr MORRIS-The Minister for Health should not have too much to say after what he has done to the sick people. Here we are talking about national roads. There is nothing in this clause to enable the Minister for Transport to have the discretion to use a process other than tenders should a contractor get into financial difficulties or become bankrupt. We will have a fine situationthis has happened in the past-where a contractor who is part way through a project gets into financial difficulties and cannot carryon, De we then stop the whole project? For instance, would we stop the Bruce Highway project in Queensland? Would we determine what is needed, draw up new specifications, prepare new drawings, invite new tenders, wait three months for applications for tenders to be lodged and then determine it? There is nothing in this clause even to provide that power to this Minister. If one were to agree with the proposal--we do not-put forward in this clause, there should be that discretionary power provided to the Federal Minister for Transport. Nothing is indicated to the Parliament, negotiated or discussed, as I have pointed out, on how the tender procedures are to provide for the assessment of tenders. What will be the principal facts to be taken into account?
Mr Hunt--The normal tendering process which the States are using.
Mr MORRIS If that is so, why is it not contained in the Bill?
Mr Hunt-Because the States will be calling the tenders.
Mr MORRIS--Why is it not contained in the Bill? It is Federal money which the Government is spending. The Minister will have a chance to respond. I will listen to his answer then. Will the principles of the assessment of tenders, the manner in which there will be a'determination on who is a successful tenderer, the basis of award of tenders, the financial viability of the tenderers themselves are matters that arise. Is there to be registration of the contractors or can anybody tender irrespective of the background of the company or its proven record in road construction or road maintenance? Will the industrial record of the firm be taken into consideration? Certain construction firms have infamous records in respect of industrial relations. They always have overruns in period and costs. Will the quality of the work carried out by the tenderer by assessed? How many tenderers will be involved? What will be the situation-this will very likely happen in certain regions of Australia-if there is one tender only lodged from a private firm? In Tasmania, there are no major road construction firms. There

2816 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Roads Grants Bill

win have to be imports from other States, and similar problems will arise in other regions. The same situation will apply to local government. There is not the range available.
Competition implies that several competitive tenders will be lodged. In this case there is no indication. What would be the situation if a State underquoted on a tender-deliberately pitched its tender low to make sure-it gained the job? Is that provided for? There is nothing at all. The opposite position is happening in South Australia where the State road authority is deliberately overquoting so that it will not get the work. What is happening there by overquoting is that the private contractor is able to inflate its tender and so competition is not working at all. No mention is made in this clause, no explanation is given by the Minister and no reference is made in the procedures as to how this myriad of matters is to be dealt with. What will happen to the surplus that some State road authorities certainly will make on road projects? Will it be deducted from future Federal funds to be allocated to the States? No explanation has been given. I am sure that the Government and the Minister have not considered these aspects of this very important change to established procedures in respect of roads. Earlier the honourable member for Lyne (Mr Cowan), in criticising the increased cost of bridge building in New South Wales, mentioned the report of the Department of Main Roads. Ninety per cent of bridge building in New South Wales is carried out by private contractors. So the very figures he was criticising indict the financial performance of the private sector, not the State road authorities in New South Wales. Private contractors build most of the bridges.
Because of the time constraints, I turn now to the other matter I want to mention in respect of tenders. The State road authorities do not have to make profits. The corollary of this legislation will be, as is found in the airlines and public transport fields, that the private contractors will be saying next that a State road authority does not have capital investment, does not have to serNe shareholders and does not have to pay interest. So it should be forced to add 20 per cent or 40 per cent to its quotes to enable other tenderers to be competitive. It must be recognised that the road authorities in some States cannot compete with or tender against private contractors for work other than specified government work, whereas the private sector has an unlimited opportunity to tender for all works on the open market. The only thing that is certain about this clause is that the Government has decided that there must be a Federal

official present. As I said earlier, a Commonwealth policeman with a pistol in the holster on his hip will be guarding the tender box to make sure that the States do not tamper with it. A few moments ago the Minister mentioned established tender procedures. They do not provide for Commonwealth policemen to be present. That means the Minister must have evidence of illegality. I challenge him to produce that evidence of illegality before this debate is concluded. I move:
Clause 24, page 12, lines 32-38, omit paragraph (a) of subclause (l), substitute the following paragraph:
H(a) that, where moneys paid to the State in accordance with the grant are required by virtue of this Act to be expended on the carrying out of an approved project by way of the construqtion of a national road, the State, in its discretion, may invite, and deal with, tenders for those works;".
That amendment, if adopted by the chamber, will ensure that the States will retain the long-standing discretion to determine in their wisdom, in light of all the circumstances, the best procedures to follow in the interests of getting the best value for the taxpayers' dollar and that they will make a decision as to which projects should be put out to tender. I commend the amendment to honourable members.
Mr BURR (Wilmot) (9.23)-1 do not want to take up too much of the time of the House but a couple of the points that the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) just made need to be answered. One of the most pertinent points he made about this clause was that the State main roads departments will be quite free to submit tenders for national road construction work and that, in fact, the State main roads departments do not have to make a profit whereas those private contractors which will be competing with the departments in the tender process will be required by their shareholders to make a profit. I would assume from that that in fact the main roads departments would have a significant advantage in their tender procedures if they do not have to return a dividend to their shareholders. Rather than place the departments at a disadvantage, I would have thought that that would give them a very clear advantage over the priv2.te tenderers with which they would be competing.
There has been some considerable concern in Tasmania about this clause. In fact, the Tasmanian Minister for Main Roads, Mr Field, has held a number of meetings with the work force of the Department of Main Roads in various centres around Tasmania. It is my understanding that he has not been giving the departmental workers correct information and that that has caused considerable concern amongst the workers. They are

Roads Grants Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2817

concerned that, in fact, there could be a quite significant loss of jobs in various centres around Tasmania. Naturally, that is causing a lot of concern. In view of the concern that has been expressed by the workers in Tasmania, the honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom), the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck) and I sought during the week to clarify the meaning of this clause and the procedures that would be followed under it.
For my part, I am very concerned at this stage that the methods of accepting tenders have not yet been determined. Before the method of accepting tenders is determined, I strongly urge the Minister for Transport (Mf Hunt), in conjunction with the Minister for Main Roads in Tasmania, to look closely at giving preference to tenders received from Tasmanian tenderers for construction works. I know that it is not possible to write into legislation that there should be a preference clause for particular tenderers. That would be most improper. But I urge that, in the consideration of tenders that are received in the future for construction works, preference be given to Tasmanian tenderers so that job opportunities can be retained in the Department of Main Roads or, if not the Department of Main Roads, with contractors from that State. We are particularly concerned to ensure that there is not a loss of job opportunities to contractors which come to Tasmania from other States for major construction works and bring their own workers with them. Particular concern has been expressed about that. The final words of clause 24 (a) read:
. . . if it has not invited tenders for particular works involved in the project before the date of commencement of this Act, will invite, and deal with, tenders for those works in accordance with procedures approved by the Minister.
My colleagues and I are satisfied that the words 'procedures approved by the Minister' for the acceptance of tenders give the Federal and State Ministers, when they are considering these tenders, sufficient latitude to be able to ensure that there is a not a loss of job opportunities in Tasmania. For that reason our doubts have been quelled and we are quite satisfied that there is sufficient scope in the procedures for accepting tenders to dispel any doubts of the workers in the Department of Main Roads in Tasmania that their jobs will be placed in jeopardy.
The CHAIRMAN. The question is that the amendment be agreed to.
A division haVing been called for alld the bells being rung-
Mr Barry J ones-I raise a point of order-

The CHAIRMAN--Order! Thc question has not been put. No directions have been given to members of the Committee as to where they take their places for the vote on the question.

Question put:

That the amendment (Mr Morris's) be agreed to.

The Committee divided.

(The Chairman-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

44

Noes

58

Majority

14

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J, L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R.

AYES

Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly, R. J. Kcnt,L Kerin, J. C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les (Teller) Mildrcn, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Thcophanous, A. C. Uren, T. West,S.J.
Willis,R. Young,M.J.

NOES

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baumc, M. E. Birney, R.I. Bourchier,J. W.
Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N.A.
Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, \V. P. Connolly, D. M.
Cowan,D.B. Dcan,A.G. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W. C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Hall, Steele llarris, G.1kD. Hicks, N. J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Iiodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.

Hunt, R. J. D.
Hyde,J.M.
Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C.
Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar,M.J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh,D. T. Macphee, J. M. Moore,J.C.
Peacock, A. S. Porter, 1. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M.
Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, J. McC.
Spender, 1. M.
Tumbling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W.
Viner, R. r.
White, P. X D. Wilson, L B. C.

In division-

Government supporters inteljecting-

2818 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

The CHAIRMAN. Order! Honourable grants will now have the character of general pur-

members on the front bench on my left please repose payments. As such, they are appropriately

main silent.

included in the present Bill and, from 1983-84,

Mr Armitage-I raise a point of order. Would you agree, Mr Chairman, that those on your left

they will increase each year in the same proportion as the tax sharing grants.

are the government members whom you just called to order?
The CHAIRMAN-There is no point of order. Question resolved in the negative. Clause agreed to.

The new tax sharing arrangements have been determined by the Government after careful consideration of the views put forward by the States in a submission received last February and after consultation with the States and the Northern Territory at a Premiers Conference held on 4

Remainder of Bill-by leave-take as a whole, and agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt)-by leave-read a third time.

May. The new health grants arrangements reflect the Government's consideration of the Jamison Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals, discussions with State health Ministers and the outcome of the Review of Commonwealth Functions. This Bill, in short, reflects detailed consideration of the wide range of views that has been expressed on these matters. It also reflects, as I shall explain, the con-

STATES (TAX SHARING AND HEALTH GRANTS) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.

tinued attention by the Government to the pusuit of policies which are both economically necessary and consistent with the States accepting greater responsibility for the operation and financing of State services.

Second Reading Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (9.40)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill 1981, has two main purposes:
(a) To give effect to new arrangements for the payment to the States of tax sharing grants during the period 1981-82 to 1984-85; and
(b) to give effect to new arrangements for the payment of health grants to the States and to the Northern Territory in the same period.
The new arrangements for the payment of tax sharing and health grants reflect the outcome of major reviews which the Government has undertaken of the existing arrangements for assistance to the States for general revenue and health purposes.
The existing tax sharing arrangements, which are authorised in the States (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976, provided for a review to be undertaken prior to 30 June 1981. The hospital cost sharing agreements with four States and the Northern Territory expire at 30 June 1981. These latter arrangements, together with certain other assistance for health pruposes, have been revised so that, with the exception of payments to South Australia and Tasmania under their continuing hospital cost sharing agreements, the health

New Tax Sharing Arrangements
A major feature of the new tax sharing arrangments is the switch from using personal income tax to total tax as the base for purposes of calculatingthe tax sharing grants to both the States and the Northern Territory. A sharing of total Commonwealth tax collections provides a more equitable basis for determining the provision of general revenue assistance as it will mean that the tax sharing grants will grow at the same rate as total Commonwealth tax revenues. It will avoid possible problems in the future if there were to be changes in the mix of Commonwealth taxation. As total tax collections tend to fluctuate somewhat less than personal income tax collections, it should also help to reduce uncertainty in the yearto-year levels of grants to the States and the Northern Territory.
Under the Bill, total tax collections by the Commonwealth are defined by reference to those taxes set out in schedule I. These taxes cover over 99 per cent of total tax revenue as defined in the Budget Papers and, apart from certain minor taxes, fees and fines, the items excluded for purposes of the new arrangements cover only those taxes and charges that are effectively set aside for specific Commonwealth purposes or for the Australian Capital Territory. These exclusions are both appropriate and will simplify administration. I emphasise that the rate of growth of total tax collections as defined, which will determine the

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2819

rate of growth of the tax sharing grants, will not government services of a standard broadly com-

differ to any noticeable extent from the rate of parable with those of each other State without im-

growth of total tax shown in the Budget Papers, posing higher rates of taxation or other charges.

except in circumstances where the CommonHowever, there are considerable practical and

wealth imposes a special tax surcharge or rebate. conceptual difficulties in determining the appro-

In that event, as is the case under the existing perpriate relativities. Accordingly, the Government

sonal income tax sharing arrangements, the gain will carefully examine the Commission's report

or loss to Commonwealth revenue will not be and consult with the States before reaching a de-

counted for purposes of determining the grants. cision as to any changes in the distribution of gen-

eral revenue grants and as to the arrangements

The tax sharing grants will not be determiried which should apply after the current financial

by reference to total taxation until 1982-83 as the year as regards the right of States to receive

move to a total tax base will involve a transitional special grants.

year in 1981-82 in which the basic percentage of

total tax collections to be provided to the States On present estimates, the total amount of the

will be established. That percentage, which is 1981-82 tax sharing grant payable to the Northern

expected to be about 20 per cent, will be derived Territory is $315.1m. In accordance with the

by taking the States' tax sharing grants in 1981-82 Commonwealth's intention that the population

as a percentage of total tax collections, as defined element in the formula in the memorandum of

in 1980-81.

understanding with the Northern Territory should be fully observed, an additional sum of

Tax Sharing Grants in 1981-82 For 1981-82, the total tax sharing grant for the States and the Northern Territory will be calculated by increasing the 1980-81 taxsharing grant for the States and the Northern Territory combined by 9 per cent. An amount of $78.1m will then be added to take account of the transfer of certain Commonwealth functions to the States and the Northern Territory and of the population component in the formula for determining the

$5m is included over and above the Territory's share of that portion of the total tax sharing grant derived by increasing this year's grant by 9 per cent. The amount of $315.1m also includes a sum of $4m in respect of the transfer of Commonwealth functions to the Territory. I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard a table which contains the latest estimates of the tax sharing grants payable to each State and the Northern Territory in 1981-82.

Northern Territory's grant. The total amount Leave granted.

payable to the States and the Northern Territory under this arrangement will thus be $6.29m, or

The table read afollows-

10.2 per cent more than in the current financial year.

STATES AND NORTHERN TERRITORY TAX SHARING ENTITLEMENTS 1980-81 (ACTUAL)

The distribution of this amount between the

AND 1981-82 (EST)

States and the Northern Territory in 1981-82 can-

1980-81 1981-82(a)

not be finally determined until final population figures as at December 1981 are available. That portion of the amount derived by increasing the current year's grant by 9 per cent will include special allocations to three States totalling $27m,

New South Wales Victoria

$m (actual)
1,839
1,355

$m (est. )
2,022
1,491

% Incr (est. )
10.0 10.1

which were decided upon at the Premiers ConferQueensland

1,093

1,210

10.7

ence of 4 May and are set out in column 2 of South Australia

692

758

9.6

Schedule II. The distribution of the remainder of Western Australia

734

807

9.9

that portion will be on the same weighted population basis as for this year's grants.

Tasmania

299

326

9.2

Total

6,011

6,614

10.0

I should emphasise that, if any changes in relaNorthern Territory tivities were to be effected as a consequence of

274

315

14.9

consideration of the forthcoming report of the Grand Total

6,285

6,929

10.2

Grants Commission, further amending legislation

would be required. As honourable members will be aware, it is generally accepted that the general revenue grants should be distributed between the States so as to enable each State to provide

(a) The amounts payable to each State and the Northern Territory are subject to revision in the light of final population figures for December 1981 are subject to change in the light of
any decision to alter relativities following the review of relativities by the Commonwealth Grants Commission.

2820 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

Tax Sharing Grants for 1982-83 and in Subsequent Years to 1984-85
Following the transitional year in 1981-82, the total tax sharing grant for the States for any particular year will be determined by applying the basic percentage of total tax to collections of total tax in the previous year. The Northern Territory's grant will be determined by reference to the formula in the memorandum of understanding, but with the substitution of total tax for personal income tax. Provision for the Northern Territory's tax sharing grants for these years will be made in the annual Appropriation Bill and the Territory will continue to be eligible for special grants payable on the recommendation of the Commonwealth Grants Commission.
A number of features of existing tax-sharing arrangements will continue under the new arrangements. I refer in particular to, firstly, the retention of the right of the States and the Northern Territory to impose surcharges or give rebates of personal income tax under stage 2 of the federalism arrangements; secondly, the retention of the Commonwealth's right to be able to declare an increase in, or rebates of, any Commonwealth tax to be a 'special surcharge or rebate', and hence excluded from the total tax-sharing base; thirdly, the continuation of arrangements for consultation between the Commonwealth and the States and the Northern Territory on changes in Commonwealth taxation which affect the tax base; and finally, the guarantee that the States and Northern Territory grant in any year will not be less, in money terms, than in the previous year.
Tax Shal'ing for Local Government
The Government has also decided on the continuation of the existing generous arrangements whereby local government is entitled to 2 per cent of net personal income tax collections. I note that tax-sharing grants to local government have been increased from 1.52 per cent of net personal intome tax collections in 1976 to 1.75 per cent in November 1979 and to 2 per cent in May 1980. The associated Bill to amend the Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976, which I will introduce shortly, is a machinery provision to enable that Act to remain in force after the States (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 has been repealed. The amendment Bill includes various definitions-presently included in the States (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976-on which the Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 relies.
Before turning to the new health grants arrangements I should like to refer to one or two aspects of proposals made by the States to the

Commonwealth in regard to the Tax-sharing arrangements. In particular, it needs to be recognised that the States made it quite clear in their February submission that they regarded the existing arrangements, as reflected in the States (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976, as unsatisfactory and requiring amendment. The main proposed change ymught was for an assured minimum growth in general revenue payments. In effect, the States sought a share of the tax pool or a guarantee, whichever was the larger. Acceptance of this proposal would have committed the Commonwealth to a minimum growth in general revenue grants of one to two per cent faster than gross domestic product-that is, possibly 5 to 6 per cent per annum in real terms. This would have been inconsistent not only with the need to restrain public sector expenditure but with the need to limit the Commonwealth's own expenditure commitments.
Health Grants
I turn now to the new health grants arrangements. As I have indicated, these are included in the present Bill because of the Government's decision to change the basic character of Commonwealth assistance for health from assistance specifically directed to that purpose to payments which are for general purposes but which are identifiable as health grants. The Government sees this change as a move towards ending divided control over the provision of health care services in the States and the Northern Territory and thus eliminating potential costs and inefficiencies that can be involved in such duplication. The arrangements contained in the Bill are an interim step towards full absorption of health grants into the tax-sharing grants.
In determining the form of the health grants arrangements, the Government has been guided by two fundamental principles: Firstly, the States should assume their full constitutional responsibility for the provision of health services and should be free to determine their own priorities as to the allocation of funds for those services; secondly, those people in the community who can afford to pay for the cost of health services they receive should do so either by way of personal payment or through health insurance, but those who cannot afford it should continue to have access to free basic health treatment. This Bill is concerned only with the Commonwealth's direct grants to the States for health purposes. It must, of course, be considered in the context of the overall revision to health care arrangements which were outlined in statements in the House by my

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2821

colleague the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) and me on 29 April 1981.
For purposes of the Bill, the States and the Northern Territory are divided into two main groups, according to whether their hospital costsharing agreements expire on 30 June 1981 or 30 June 1985. In the case of South Australia and Tasmania, whose hospital cost-sharing agreements expire on 30 June 1985, the required funds will be provided under the authority of this Bill unless these States decide to terminate their agreements and join the new arrangements. Provision is made to meet this eventuality. Assistance to these two States in lieu of payments for community health and school dental programs is provided in the form of special health grants, which in 1981-82 and 1982-83 will be approximately equal to the real level of the total of such payments in 1980-81. After 1982-83, these special health grants to South Australia and Tasmania will escalate in proportion to the appropriate previous year's increase in total taxation collections, as defined. Tn the case of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory, there will be one grant in place of separate assistance previously provided in respect of public hospitals, community health and school
dental services.
The amount of this overall grant for 1981-82 will be determined by increasing the equivalent of 1980-81 assistance by 10 per cent and deducting from that sum 60 per cent of the Commonwealth's assessment of the capacity of each State and the Northern Territory to raise additional
revenue if the States concerned were to impose charges of $80 a day for shared ward accommodation and $110 a day for private ward accommodation, $15 an out-patient occasion of service, and an average cost per bed day for compensation patients. The assessment of additional revenue raising capacities, for 1981-82, which will be determined by the Treasurer on the advice of the Minister for Health, will be made on the assumption that the specified charges should not apply before 1 September 1981 and that there would be one month's lag in the collection of revenue. Towards the end of the financial year 1981-82, there will be a reassessment to take account of any relevant revenue raising experience. In addition to these grants, there will be a further $16m provided to Queensland, for 1981-82 only, to cushion the adjustment that State would otherwise
experience.
In 1982-83, the total health grants for these four States and the Northern Territory will be ap-
proximately the same real level as in 1980-81, less 100 per cent of the additional revenue, compared

with 1980-81, which the Commonwealth considers could be raised if the specified charges were in place. The distribution of the total derived in this manner would then be determined in the light of advice from the Commonwealth Grants Commission. The terms of reference of the Grants Commission inquiry will be announced shortly. After 1982-83, the total annual health grant for these governments will increase in proportion to th~ increase in total tax collections in the appropnate previous year. That is, it will increase in the same way as the tax-sharing grants. The Bill also provides for further possible variations to interstate relativities after 1982-83 in the light of consideration of the report of the Grants Commission. A condition attached to health grants for those governments is that eligible pensioners and disadvantaged persons and their dependants, as assessed by the Department of Social Security, are to have free access to shared ward accommodation and services refdered in public hospitals.
In conclusion, J emphasise that, in deciding on these new tax-sharing and health arrangements, the Government has had very much in mind the urgent need to restrain the growth of public sector expenditure so as to make room for productive growth in the private sector without giving rise to inflationary pressures that could only damage the economic prospects for Australia. The Commonwealth has a recognised responsibility for econom.ic management, and the Government firmly believes that these new arrangements are in the longer term interests of the nation as a whole and of individual States. It is acknowledged that these arrangements are less generous than their precedessors. This needs to be viewed in the light of a number of faciors. I mention, in particular, the generous nature of the arrangements which have applied since 1976-77, resulting in large increases in the real level of general revenue payments each year since then; the apparent rapid improvement in levels of services provided by the ~tates in recent years, as indicated by the average 1l1crease of about 3 per cent per annum in real per capita terms in State recurrent expenditure on goods and services between 1975-76 and 1980-81: and the fact that the States have been able to reduce the burden of their taxes in recent years.
Beyond this, it needs to be kept in mind that the relative size of the public sector has not been reduced to any extent since the large increase that occurred in the mid-1970's. The Government believes that there is scope to place greater reliance on the private sector and, in present and prospective economic circumstances, a pressing need to free resources to allow an expansion in the private

2822 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Conciliation and Arbitration Bill

sector. This view has been fundamental to economic decisions taken by the Government in recent times and will remain at the core of its economic strategy. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hawke) adjourned.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (PERSONAL INCOME TAX SHARING) AMENDMENT
BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (10.0)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is complementary to the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill 1981 I have just introduced. Relevant details of the Bill Were outlined in the second reading speech to that Bill.
I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hawke) adjourned.
NEW BUSINESS AFTER 11 P.M.: ADJOURNMENT OF THE HOUSE
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications) (1O.2)-I move:
That Standing Order 48A, adjournment of the House and Standing Order 103, 11 o'clock rule, be suspended for this sitting.
The purpose is that by arrangement we intend to introduce the Airlines Agreement Bill. We are waiting on that legislation.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 May, on motion by MrViner:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr HAWKE (Wills) (lO.3)-The Bill which we are discussing tonight in the opinion of the Opposition epitomises the Fraser Government's approach to industrial relations and industrial legislation generally. There are four aspects in particular which we condemn in the legislation. It shows an appalling contempt for consultation with employers and trade unions; it demonstrates a cynical attempt to deceive the Australian public about the purpose and value of the legislation; it shows a one-sided legislative program directed against the trade union movement alone; and it involves the tragic misdirection of the resources of government into industrial legislation which will in fact contribute nothing to the improvement of

industrial relations in our nation but which is likely to lead in fact to a deterioration in those industrial relations. When this Bill is seen in its proper context, when its provision and likely operation are understood, when its effects on industrial relations are appreciated, it becomes clear beyond question that the introduction of the Bill is nothing more than a cynical exercise in politcal irresponsibility on the part of this Government.
I have said before, and I repeat, that industrial relations in this country are too important to be treated as a political football. This Government's approach to industrial legislation is a disastrous one. It makes impossible decent industrial relations in Australia. The way the Government is approaching-this subject should be seen to be opposed to the interests of all Australians. I take up in turn each of those points that I have made. First, I refer to the contempt for consultation which is in fact involved in the legislation before the House. One way in which industrial relations in Australia may in fact be improved to the benefit of all concerned is through meaningful and genuine consultation between government, employers and unions, leading to the introduction of sound and constructive reforms to the industrial relations system. There is no doubt that some members of the present Government recognise the undoubted value of consultation but the Government itself has proved itself to be incapable of engaging in meaningful consultation with employers and unions. This Bill is another example of the failure of the Government in this area.
I remind the House of what in fact happened last year in regard to the promises that were made by this Government, particularly by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), and by the relevant Ministers for Industrial Relations, as to what they intended to do in this area. We can go back to 18 September of last year when the then Minister for Industrial Relations, the present Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street), announced to this House that this Government, if re-elected, intended to introduce legislation as soon as possible dealing with two matters. The two matters which were dealt with in the statement by the then Minister on 18 September were firstly the question of the amalgamation of trade unions and, secondly, the question of a form of secret ballots with respect to industrial action. The then Minister in his announcement acknowledged the value of consultation among government, employers and unions in formulating proposals for what he said were much needed reforms in the law relating to union amalgamations. It is very significant and important that we should

Conciliation and Arbitration Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2823

remember at this time when we are faced with the breaking of yet another promise by this Government exactly what the Minister had to say in regard to the promise he had to make about union amalgamatiqns. I quote from his speech of 18 September in this House. He said:
The Government is firmly committed to the use of consultation in industrial relations. It was for that reason that we established theNational Labour Consultative Council. . . .. Through its committee system, the Council has been able to examine, in detail fundamental industrial issues. The work of the committee . . . on amalgamation of industrial organisations clearly illustrates the constructive role the Committees have played. They have proved an important vehicle through which the Council has been able to involve the wider industrial community in its work . . . As I said at the outset, the contribution of NLCC to the Government's deliberations and the final outcome has been invaluable and, on behalf of the Government, I thank the Council for its work.
He went on to say:
I might also add that this achievement shows that Government, employers and unions can work together and produce tangible results for the benefit of each other and the community.
He concluded what he had to say in this area with these words:
The new amalgamation provisions are yet another demollstration of how the Government is meeting its responsibility to provide an industrial relations framework which takes account of the views of the parties and meets their needs, while paying due regard to the public interest.
That is a clear and unequivocal statement by the then Minister for Industrial Relations on 18 September not only of the intention to introduce amending legislation and to facilitate amalgamations but also most importantly his statement that the Government paid great attention and attached great importance to this question of consultation among government, employers and the unions and that it was out of such consultation that proposals for new legislation to facilitate amalgamations had come.
After that statement by the Minister in September, the Prime Minister referred in his policy speech for the last election to the Government's commitment to introduce the amalgamation legislation. That policy speech was delivered on 30 September. The Prime Minister made an unequivocal promise at page 5 'Supplementary Statements' in that policy speech. He said:
The task is a continuing one. For the future, the Government proposes to--
He referred to the secret ballot provisions. There was no question-he promised that. He then went on to say:
legislate to facilitate the amalgamation of unions where there is a 'community of interest'.
So we have the picture of the unequivocal st'atement by the then Minister in this House on 18

September last year promising legislation in regard to facilitating amalgamations, followed a foFtnight later by an unequivocal promise by the Prime Minister in his election policy speech. The third commitment was made in this House by the next Minister for Industrial Relations. By this time, after the elections, it was the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock). He repeated the commitment made on 18 November 1980-the third commitment.
Despite all those assurances and the Fraser Government's alleged commitment to consultation, the legislation relating to union amalgamations has been put on the shelf. It is very important to understand what we mean when we say that the legislation has been put on the shelf because, in fact, a most remarkable thin;g happened. We had the three promises-two in September 1980 by the then Minister, Mr Street, and the Prime Minister and then the one by the honourable member for Kooyong. Indeed, they moved to give effect to their promises. The document which I have in my hand is the amending legislation which was drawn up to give effect to the first two promises. This is the legislation which was around just a couple of weeks ago and which was prepared by the Government to give effect to the promises which it had in fact made in September last year and on which it was re-elected, in part, on the basis of its specific promise in regard to amalgamations. This is what went before the Government parties. It included the promise to facilitate amalgamations and the proposals in regard to the secret ballot. What happened?
The present Minister, in his second reading speech, said that the reason for shelving the proposals referred to is that the Government parties wished to examine the matter further.. Perhaps I should do justice to the Minister by reading exactly what he said in his second reading speech. He said:
Work has been done, in cOllsultaton with the NLCC, on amendments to the amalgamation provisions of the Act on the basis of a criterion of the community-of-interest of unions desiringamalgamation. However, the Government parties wish to consider the full implications of such a criterion for amalgamation.
The Minister for Industrial Relations, in his usual fashion, did not put the whole truth before this House. He did not tell this House that in fact the amending legislation had been prepared. When the legislation came before the Government parties some of the more conservative membersthey do have their gradations of conservatism, as is quite apparerit each day in this House-decided that it would be a frightful thing if in fact the Government kept its promise in this regard. Just imagine the horror and shock experienced by

2824 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Conciliation and Arbitration Bill

some of those' conservative members when they would represent the desire of the parties con-

discovered that the Government was proposing to cerned and that was brought before the Govern-

do something positive in the field of industrial rement parties. So the document representing all

lations. There .was a specific promise embodied in that work was prepared.

the draft legislation before them. They discovered to their horror that the Government was, in fact, going to do' two things. It was going to keep a promise. That must have comeasa terrible shock to many of them.

What happened to it? Because this Government and this Prime Minister, in particular, were under pressure at the time-everyone was getting into him-the Prime Minister said: 'Here is a group of shellbacks after me. What will I do? [

will get them off my back by saying that I won't go

Even more shocking than the fact that the ahead with the legislation'. It did not matter that a

Government was going to keep a promise was that promise made to the people of Australia was

it wasgoing to introduce legislation to give effect being broken and it did not matter that three years

to 'l,t report of the National Labour Consultative of work undertaken by this body was being put at

Council which, had taken three, years to prepare nought. The then Minister for Industrial Re-

and which was; in ract, endorsed by the leading lations praised that body in September and said

employers' organisation, the Confederation of that it gave the Government great pleasure and

Australian Industry, and by the peak trade union that credit should be given to it because it brought

organisations and the Government. That is what people together. That was all to no avail. The

happened. There had been three years of work legislation now before the House is not the

within the National Labour Consultative Council. amending legislation that the Government parties

Th~ work haa been undertaken by the head body considered because some of those shellbacks said:

of the employee~s, the CAL It was undertaken in 'No, we cannot ever possibly have an amendment

conjlJnctionwith the Australian Council of Trade to the legislation which may, in fact, create a

l]nions, the Council of Australian Government somewhat larger union if two unions take advan-

Employee Organisations and the Government. tage of the provisions, provisions which em-

Out of the three years work had' come the proployers, the peak unions and the Government

posals, agreed upon unanimously by all the parrepresentatives had agreed upon unanimously.

ticipants, that this 'legislation should be Any member of the House who looks at the mat-

introduced to facilitate amalgamations.

ter honestly must agree that the shelving of the

amalgamation legislation has made a complete

I suggest to every responsible member of this mockery of the concept of consultation.

House that it is an indictment of this Government Mr Tuckey-That is what you were saying

in terms of its approach in the area'of industrial when I came in.

relations that the one piece of legislation in six years of office of this Government that would have been introduced with the support of both employers and the unions has been shelved. The one piece of legislation whose need was clearly

Mr HAWKE-When one is talking to people of the honourable member's calibre it is necessary to repeat it a couple of times in the fragile hope that it might even get through to them.

recognised by virtually all commentators on the Let us consider the real effects of the proposals

Australian industrial relations scene has been before the House. The new secret ballot proposals

shelved. I suggest to members of this House that were announced by then Minister for Industrial

there could not be a greater tragedy in the indusRelations on 18 September. They came as a bolt

trial relations area. We have the situation in out of the blue to everyone who was engaged

which three years of work-not antagonism, but practically in the field of industrial relations: No

hard, constructive work-was done by the repserious suggestion had been made by any recog-

resentatives of the trade unions, the major emnised commentator on industrial relations that

ployer organisations and the Government and such amendments were either necessary or desir-

they came up with an agreed position, an agreed able, Indeed, all the available evidence from

document, and said that Australian industrial reindependent academic sources suggested that no

lations would be improved on their consensus of useful purpose would be served by pretending

judgment if the legislation were introduced to that extending the secret ballot provisions already

amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act. in the Conciliation and Arbitration Act would

They did not content themselves with having bring about any improvement to the industrial re-

done their three years of work; they consolidated lations scene. In fact, when the matter was raised

it into concrete proposals which were in fact at the National Labour Consultative Council the

brought before the draftsman in terms of what representatives of both the employers and the

Conciliation and Arbitration Bill

28 May J981 REPRESENTATIVES 2825

trade unions raised serious questions about the operation and the value of the proposed secret ballot provisions. The situation is that it did not matter. That was the position adopted by the employers and the trade unions. They said there was no need for it, but the Government said that it would go ahead.
There is ample evidence-it ought to be considered by members of this House if they are conscientiously to cast their vote on this matter-that the introduction of ballots in the circumstances referred to would in fact be a retrograde step in industrial relations. I wish to give some references to these matters to show that independent commentators who have examined the situation have come down unanimously and strongly against the proposition that the availability of ballots to members before a strike would help the situation.
r go to three sources to establish this point. I refer
first to an article by McCallum in the Monash University Law Review of 1976. After examining this matter, at page 174 he said:
Finally it is difficult to infer from the cases that the rankand-file are morc moderate than their leaders. The fact that the Commission has failed to order ballots in certainly 99 per cent of the disputes which have come before it would seem to suggest that their Honours believe that the active rankand-file accept the advice of their leadership. Otherwise, why if one could be always sure of a moderate response, not simply order ballots and use the results to pressure the leaders into a settlement?
At page 175, he said:
From Australian and overseas experience it can be concluded that strike ballots have not, by themselves, prevented industrial disruptions; and further they have not shown that the active rank-and-file are being manipulated by the leadership. It is suggested that on such evidence, the introduction of compulsory strike ballots would not lead to a lessening of industrial stoppages; rather, they could bring about bitterness and worst of all wild and unofficial strike action thus enhancing the growing power of the shop floor movement.
That is a statement made by a researcher on the Australian scene. I refer secondly to the report of the Royal Commission on Trade Unions and Employers' Associations in the United Kingdomthe Donovan report -which covered a period from 1965 to 1968. It was composed of 12 people including independents, law lords, representatives of the trade union movement and employer organisations, and academic observers. They went to this question of strike ballots and, at paragraph 428, said:
There is little justification in the availahle evidence for the view that workers are less likely to vote for strike action than their leaders; and findings from our workshop relations survey, already cited, confirm this. Experience in the USA has been that strike ballots are overwhelmingly likely to go in favour of strike action. This is also the experience of Canada, where strike hallots are compulsory in the provinces of Alberta and British Columbia.

11 seems to me that anybody who is rationally concerned with this and is not concerned with peddling prejudices but looking at facts should have the Commission's conclusion clearly in his mind. Paragraph 430 states:
We do not recommend that it should be compulsory by law, either generally or in certain defined cases, to hold a ballot of the employees affected upon the question whether strike action should be taken.
That is the unanimous recommendation of 12 people. The Commission continued:
We think it preferable that trade union leaders should bear, and be seen to bear, the responsibility of deciding when to call a strike and when to call it off. Occasions may of course arise when union leaders would themselves wish to hold such a ballot or are required to do so by their rules. The decision on sLlch a matter should contine to rest with the unions.
Finally, in case people want to say what I have quoted was said by an academic at Monash University 1 point out that it was said unanimously in 1968 by law lords, academics and trade unionists as well as employers' representatives. If that is not good enough for them, I will try, thirdly, the observation of a person whose views should be regarded as being formed from a wealth of experience and presumably a degree -of impartiality. I refer to a statement by Sir John Moore, the President of the Conciliation a'nd Arbitration Commission. A report in the Age of 18 January 1980 of a speech he made in Perth states:
Sir John also warned that compulsory ballots for unions contemplating strikes would not be as .effective as many people believed in reducing strikes.
There we have the situation that the whole point being made by that range of commentators unanimously is that the concept that the Government will improve the situation by having strike ballot provisions is not in fact going to produce the result anticipated. In the second place, the Government has sought to suggest that the proposed legislation will make some wothwhile contribution to industrial relations in Australia when in fact it will not, on the basis of the history of this matter in this country. In fact, we have had in the legislation for 53 years-since 1928a provision which enables secret ballots to be ordered by the Tribunal. That provision has existed for 53 years and in that 53 years the Tribunal has seen fit to order the use of that provision on only six occasions-in 1929, 1941, 1945, 1962, 1976 and 1980. The record shows that in a number of those six cases such an order did not work to produce the result desired but that in fact when the ballot was taken there was a majority in favour of undertaking action; but in othet cases there was not. In other words, history shows that the existing provisions in the Conciliation-and Arbitration Act-

2826 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Conciliation and Arbitration Bill

dealing with secret ballots have been used infrequently and that, on several occasions when they have been used, the result has been to endorse the action that has been taken.
There is ab~olutely no reason to think that the existing provisions in the Act are not adequate or that a new procedure, such as that proposed by the Government, is necessary. Taking all that into consideration one would say that, on the basis of historical experience and on the basis of the independent evidence that has been adduced in this country and other countries, no government in its right mind would proceed with legislation of this sort. But let us look at the practical difficulties that are involved in the proposals that are before this House. In the first place if one looked at the legislation one would have to say that an application for a secret ballot would in fact take a very considerable time to process: There has to be a petition by employees, a hearing before presidential members of the Commission, a reference to the President in certain cases, arrangements by the Electoral Office or the Industrial Registrar for the conduct of the ballot, the holding of the ballot and the forwarding of the results. Look at the time that is involved in that process,
It is obvious that the ballot is very unlikely to be used except in the case of very long disputes or where industrial action has been planned a considerable time in advance. In other words, the provisions will have no operation in respect of the vast majority of industrial disputesin this country, But most fascinating of all in this matter is that the result of the ballot, if one looks at the legislation, is very unlikely to have any impact on the' dispute at all. In this respect it is fascinating to read what the Minister said in his second reading speech. What will be done when the ballot is conducted? What is it to do? What impact and what effect will it have? In his second reading speech, the Minister said:
. . . the Commission will be able to test the strength and depth of that feeling-
He is referring to the feeling of the members-
and take it into a<;count in coming to a settlement of the dispute giving rise to the industrial action.
What does that mean? Let us assume that a ballot is conducted under the provisions of this Act, after it has taken all this to reach that stage, and that 98 per cent of the members taking part in the ballot say: 'We are in favour of taking industrial action', In terms of the words of the Minister, the member of the Commission dealing with the dispute will say: 'That means that there is overwhelming support and depth of feeling for this dispute so we had better give them $50 to settle the dispute. If 80 per cent vote in favour of it then

the depth of feeling is not so great and we will give them $40. If 70 per cent vote in favour of it we will give them $30 and so on down the scale', What a ridiculous situation. Let us relate it to what happened yesterday. Yesterday some 14,000 members of the Australian Telecommunications Employees Association took a vote. In New South Wales about 98 per cent, in a secret ballot, voted in favour of industrial action. Around Australia an average of 96 per cent voted in favour of industrial action in a secret ballot. Does that mean, in terms of this legislation, that that shows the depth of the feeling? Because nearly 100 per cent of the members voted in favour of industrial action does that mean that the Government would do more than it would do if 75 per cent of the members voted in favour of industrial action? It is one of the most amazing and ridiculous statements that has ever been made on industrial relations by any Minister in this House.
If a situation occurs, as is most likely, of a ballot being taken and the majority voting in favour of industrial action, anyone who has been involved in the settlement of industrial disputes must know that the existence of that vote will, in fact, make the resolution of the dispute more difficult. It inhibits the negotiating position that can be taken between reprr-sentatives of unions, employers and other people. The strike would have to be ended within the framework of the decision taken in the ballot.
There are other factors which will make for a worsening of industrial relations by the provisions contained in this legislation. Indeed, the proposed amendments will have a negative effect. One can look in vain in this legislation to see any provisipn dealing with vexatious litigants. People may decide to exacerbate an industrial situation by asking for ballots to be taken. If it is established that they are being vexatious, there is no provision in the legislation to deal with them, Most disturbing of all, I suggest, is the fact that if this legislation is passed, it will impose upon members of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission a totally unreal burden. In the way that the legislation is phrased, a dispute has to go before a deputy president. In most cases, if there is a finding against the application, the case will go up to the President. It will impose a totally unreal burden upon the people in the Commission.
The next criticism I would make of the proposed legislation is that it is totally one-sided in its approach. There is no suggestion of applying it to employer organisations. Also, it is based upon the false assumption that all industrial action is

Conciliation and Arbitration Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2827

caused by unions when all of the independent evidence shows that that is not the case. The legislation imposes standards on unions in respect of ascertaining views of membership that are not imposed on any comparable bodies in the Australian community. Would it be considered by honourable members opposite in regard to companies that there should be some suggestion of secret ballots of their shareholders in respect of a decision being made by a company with which they did not agree? The situation is also exacerbated by the fact that the legislation imposes an introduction of its provisions into the States sphere.
One can conclude by saying that the legislation is impractical. It is unnecessary and it will have a divisive rather than a constructive effect on industrial relations in this country. Unfortunately, it represents again the imposition of ideological idiosyncrasies into a situation where one should have a practical approach based upon meaningful consultation between the parties. There should not be a contradiction as to the outcome of that consultation.
Mr PEACOCK (Kooyong) (10.33)-At this rather late hour, I support the Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill. The Conciliation and Arbitration Act has been in existence since 1904. It has been amended many times for specific reasons and with specific intent. The intent and wording of the Act has an undeniable influence on the nature and process of formal and informal industrial relations and on the structure and form of unions. The Bill presently before the House goes to 'petitioned' secret ballots in regard to industrial action.
The amendment is another step towards giving rank and file union members a greater say in the conduct of industrial affairs. It implements a procedure whereby the rank and file can indicate their support, or lack of it, for industrial action in which they are being asked to take part. Where democracy already exists in a union, this amendment will have no effect because linion members will have already had the opportunity to express their view and to determine the action in question. The effect of the amendment should encourage union leaders to be closely in touch with the views of members and to channel information to them so that they are in a position to make an informed and responsible judgment. The amendment will also have the effect of discouraging union officials from calling 'threat strikes', which are unsupported by members, to 'ginger-up', as it is termed, negotiations with an employer, or proceedings within the Commission. The actual effects of the

amendment, of course, remain to be seen, and like any legislation its effects should be monitored.
The other changes in the Bill before the House are of a technical nature. I note, without surprise, the failure to present to the House proposed legislative amendments which would have been the fruition of the recommendation of a royal commission report, a 1978 Cabinet decision, endorsement by the National Labour Consultative Council and initially by the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions, the razor gang. I refer, of course, to the matter of an amendment to incorporate the Public Service arbitration system into the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. This legislation would have been a constructive step in the direction of the streamlining of industrial tribunals. However, I have referred to the background to this matter before in the House and will not belabour it now. Suffice to say the time is long overdue for the Government to reassess its relations with its own employees. We will doubtless experience the results of the decision not to put the amendment to the Parliament.
With some concern I note the absence from the Bill of the proposed amendment in regard to amalgamations. Whilst agreeing that more information is necessary before any specific structure of industry unionism is encouraged, I am of the view that the amendment would not have hindered any subsequent action. It would have eased the limitations on amalgamations with appropriate safeguards to ensure that any proposed amalgamation would not make more difficult the goal of industry unionsm. After all, the objective of industry, unionism has not been adopted by the Government without serious thought. There is of course a danger in any naive view that industry based unions or enterprise based unions, or any other form of union structure, will meet a goal of reducing excessive union power simply because there are occasional examples of this occurring. Industrial relations and the labour market are far too complex for any such simplistic assumption. In many cases union structure, or any other specific aspect, is not the only factor working towards the desired result.
Information is necessary to assess the effects of industry based unions, and other possible structures, in the context of the Australian industrial relations environment and their success and problems in other countries. In this way we can guard against the dangers and build upon the benefits. Elements of industrial relations such as collective bargaining and conciliation and arbitration, industry based unions and craft based unions are, in themselves, neutral. They do not, of themselves,

2828 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Conciliation and Arbitration Bill

generate positive and negative industrial effects. Positive and negative effects stem from the nature of those industry based unions, their implementation, history and internal structure, and from their environment in the broadest senseeconomic, technological, social and legislative. Employer structure and practices are also important. These influences and effects will be both formal and informal. Even when we opt for industry based unions, our work starts; it does not finish.
Industry unions are generally accepted as being unions whose membership is entirely comprised of persons employed within one industry and in which employment in the industry is the sole criterion for membership. Industry unions can: Firstly, largely overcome problems of demarcation and jurisdiction; secondly, improve communication between employer and union bodies in many Australian industries where no single union has the authority to speak for the industry; and, thirdly, improve the level of union service to members, which in small unions, due to lack of finance and poor organisation, may well be minimal. The creation of large industry unions would, however, increase the need to safeguard democratic procedures within the union.
There are some important questions in regard to the details of planning for industry unionism which have not yet been resolved. Examples of these questions are: Firstly, which industries should be selected as the basis for this kind of unionism? Technological change, resources development and the shift from the secundary sector are relevant here because they affect the growth, or indeed the shrinkage of an industry. The industry structure selected is also a determining one in regard to the power base and influence of unions created. The matter of definition of boundaries is one that would probably be a continuing matter of debate. Secondly, how many unions should have jurisdiction in each industry? There need not be only one. But if we opt for competitive unionism how can we avoid more demarcation and jurisdiction problems? Thirdly, which union should have jurisdiction? This may be the most difficult question 0 f all, especially in terms of implementation.
Clearly, existing unions will be greatly affected by any move towards industry unionism. Strong opposition can be expected. There is, however, a deal of consensus on the objective. I am aware that the Australian Council of Trade Unions has had industry based unions as an aim for some time. It too has been unsuccessful for various reasons. Many employers are also interested in the concept. Given this, there is a valuable opportunity for union and employer peak councils, with

the assistance of government and its administrative arm, to give detailed consideration to the benefits and problems of industry unions and proposals for implementation. These areas have been thoroughly canvassed by the Jackson Committee to Advise on Policies for Manufacturing Industry which recommended this form of unionism. The matter has been given some consideration by the NLCC but more initiative is needed by the industrial parties most involved. Government should only be involved to reconcile interests if necessary and to protect the public interest.
Legislation may be a necessary accessory to implementation of industry unions but it is dangerous to believe that as a sole instrument it can create a desired union structure or, for that matter, that it can of itself increase individual involvement in union affairs. The unforeseen effects and failures of early legislation are still with us in the form of our present unsatisfactory union structure. Legislation can only be the end of a process of seeking understanding, of co-operation and, it is to be hoped, consensus, and of movement and initiative from unions and employers. The Inquiry into Wage Determination and Industrial Relations announced by the Minister for Industrial Relations, (Mr Viner), seeks to supply such information by examining both determination of wages and conditions and broader aspects of industrial relations.
I stated my view, in a speech as Minister for Industrial Relations in February of this year, that I saw a need to re-examine the whole area of centralised wage fixation. I outlined the pressures which led to me to doubt whether centralised wage fixation can work effectively. There is a need to take a long and serious look at centralised versus decentralised methods of wage fixation and possible forms of each. The aim should be that the outcome, whatever it is, will be by consensus based on compromise and that, if a transition is involved, it will be planned and orderly. The announced inquiry arose out of concern by the State Premiers and the Federal Government at the current state of industrial relations. The inquiry would supply the means by which all those involved in, or concerned with, industrial relations could make a real contribution to an examination of some issues of great concern and importance. The ACTU has, however, taken exception to the terms of reference of the inquiry. Instead of offering a constructive criticism or an alternative it has decided not to participate. It is going to conduct its own review. Such a review cannot help but be biased. As such, its findings cannot be given credence. The ACTU tells us that it is experiencing serious problems due to the operation of the

Conciliation and Arbitration Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2829

present wage guidelines and the operation of cendirected my Department, as it then was, to under-

tralised wage fixation. The Government is contake a review of the Conciliation and Arbitration

cerned at this. To show its concern the GovernAct.

ment should make a concesssion. The terms of reference are not sacred. Let us refer them back to Mr Hawke-You said you were going to bring the National Labour Consultative Council-the in amalgamation.

creature created by this Government. The terms of reference can then be discussed in full by the industrial parties and restated to represent properly

Mr PEACOCK-I have said today that I think that is sensible.

their views and concerns. Such a concession is not Mr Hawke-Get a secret ballot on the Prime only sensible but also necessary for the success of Minister. the inquiry and the value and acceptance of its

findings. It would also be conducive to the success Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-

of the inquiry if the industrial parties were fully Order! Honourable members on my left will re-

informed and involved on who should conduct the main silent.

inquiry and on its time span. The ACTU wants to use industrial action to
prove it is serious about its problems. Put bluntly, such action is reprehensible after the ACTU has appeared before the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, being heard and having its submissions influence the decision. The ACTU wants to bring about some changes. Perhaps it will. The standing of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and the continuance of centralised wage fixation depends ultimately on com-

Mr PEACOCK-The honourable member is so occupied with secret ballots that he would be the leading authority on them. Any broader inquiry into industrial relations-the inquiry that I referred to into the Conciliation and Arbitration Act-would be on a firmer footing if it were delayed until the results of this review that I have mentioned were available. This is true in terms of both deliberations and implementation, especially iflegislation is contemplated.

pliance of the parties. The ACTU may be able to The Conciliation and Arbitration Act has been

cause change by piecemeal industrial action amended over 70 times since its enactment in

which breaks down present methods and pro1904-14 times under the present Government. I

cedures. What will it replace the industrial action have to say that this represents lack of direction

with? The threatened industrial action is based on and lack of consensus over many years on direc-

no coherent formulation of problems or of any tion over time and the fallibility of legislation.

proposed solutions. Therefore I suggest that the This Act has surely reached saturation point. The

ACTU does not know where it is going.

cumulative effect of legislation on industrial re-

The alternative is for the ACTU to work with all parties for planned change through the peaceful avenue of an inquiry. Let the ACTU show that it is serious about its problems by doing just that. I am no more enamoured about the idea of another inquiry than anyone else. There have been over 40 inquiries in the last 10 years-apart of course from those conducted by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. An inquiry should be undertaken only if it is based on a clear and agreed need, if its purpose is specific and there is reasonable expectation of a high quality of input and good prospects of innovative, specific, practical and timely recommendations-all the sorts of things that the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) could never do when he was the Leader of the Opposition in Victoria.

lations is largely a matter of conjecture and often ill-informed assumption. There is a need for the Act to be simplified into a useful tool for the practitioner in industrial relations-not complicated by further legislation. Proliferation of legislation is, after all, a form of so-called big government that must be reduced. Problems cannot be consigned wholesale for government solution; nor should government unnecessarily intrude. Industrial problems should mainly be resolved by those most involved. Government must create a background by making its views clear and acting only if necessary to reconcile competing interestsincluding the public interest. Legislation should be undertaken only if it is necessary to ensure the outcome and there is confidence that it will do this and only this.

That is why he was debunked and sent here.

Before we attempt to improve future industrial

I return to the issue. Let the industrial parties relations we need to understand the present. The

shoulder some of the responsibility for ensuring Conciliation and Arbitration Act is an influential,

that this inquiry meets those requirements that I but not decisive, determinant in this regard. We

have outlined. I announced in December last year need to try to understand its effects and its inter-

as Minister for Industrial Relations that I had action with informal industrial relations. We-by

2830 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

this I mean unions and employers with the assistance of government and its administrative armcan only then assess how industrial relations generally and wage determination more specifically can be made more efficient, more co-operative and closer to the day-to-day industrial life of the enterprise. Knowledge based on information will, after all, lead to understanding. This will give the confidence to all the industrial parties in cooperation to take initiatives and to act. Without this we will be, as Ernest Hemingway would put it, a kind of mixture of fools and angels who rush in and fear to tread at the same time.
Debate (on motion by Mr Charles) adjourned.
AIRLINES AGREEMENT BILL 1981
Bill-by leave-presented by Mr Hunt, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (10.53)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to ratify a new airlines agreement which is appended as a Schedule to the Bill. This is the first of four Bills which together implement the Government's domestic aviation policy. There has been a four-year lead up to the finalisation of this agreement and the legislation to be introduced today. In 1977, recognising the need for a thoroughgoing investigation of domestic aviation policy, the Government commissioned the Domestic Air Transport Policy Review. Following the release of the report in 1978 the Government indicated its acceptance of the basic thrust of the recommendations, that is, the maintenance of the two-airline policy and the introduction of measures designed to increase competition within the industry. There is a substantial number of other recommendations which are being implemented separately from this legislative package. The Government's decisions to continue the two-airline policy was undoubtedly a contributing factor to the two major domestic operators' decision to re-equip with new modern equipment. These initiatives have been followed by other operators at regional and commuter level.
Just prior to the House rising in September 1980, 1 introduced into the House a Bill directed towards making the Australian National Airlines Commission more commercial. I took the opportunity to outline some aspects of the Government's new airline policy. At that stage a new airlines agreement was signed. However, before seeking to enact the agreement, the amendments to the Australian National Airlines Act, which it

was not possible to pass through the previous parliament, and other related legislation, it was decided to await the receipt of the Holcroft report. The Holcroft inquiry had been established by the Government to investigate competing claims which were being made about the equity between long and short distance fares.
On 1 April I announced the Government's decisions on the Holcroft recommendations. The Government accepted a number of the principles contained in the inquiry's recommendations, namely: Continuation of a cost based, nationally consistent approach to air fares by the use of an air fare formula comprising a flagfall and a distance rate for the national jet network; endorsement of the inquiry's view on the approach to be taken to social discount fares; and support for as wide a range of discounts as possible without increasing the burden on the full fare paying passengers. I also announced approval of a new fare formula which significantly increased the flagfall to $40. This formula was derived to meet the thrust of the Holcroft report recommendations and, after an initial examination of the inquiry's cost allocation methodology, with the specific intention of minimising cross-subsidisation. I also announced further Government initiatives in the area of domestic air transport policy, including the setting up of an independent authority with powers to make decisions on proposals for changes to air fares and an in principle decision to establish Trans-Australia Airlines as a public company.
The latter step has the advantages of further freeing TAA from the many constraints resulting from its statutory authority status and, as such, goes further than was contemplated by the September 1980 proposed amendments to the Australian National Airlines Act. Obviously this step does not exempt TAA from the normal government involvement in the aviation industry. As announced, the Government will initially hold all the shares in the new TAA company. However, the Government is commissioning consultants to examine the practicalities of selling shares in TAA, including how this might be done in the light of domestic air transport policy and including the new 1981 airlines agreement. The consultant's report is expected in about 12 months' time.
The Government has also decided to establish an inquiry to undertake an objective assessment of the advantages and disadvantages of deregulating the domestic aviation environment. This inquiry is also to take account of the developments of different fleets by the two major operators including the introduction of wide-bodied aircraft. It is intended that the inquiry's report will be

Airlines Agreement Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2831

available for consideration and decision by the Government before the completion of the five year term certain of the 1981 agreement. As soon as the inquiry has reported, the Government will ensure that there is a full parliamentary debate on its report. Should the inquiry make recommendations supporting deregulation for the domestic aviation industry, and the Government accept those recommendations, the Government would then move immediately at the end of the five-year period of this agreement to give three years' notice to terminate the two airlines agreement in accordarice with its provisions for termination.
I turn now to the airlines agreement itself. This is directed towards maintaining the two airlines policy but with the objective of increasing the level of competition within the industry in a rational and orderly manner. The two-airline policy has served Australia well. On the trunk routes we have benefited greatly from the existing Boeing 727 and DC9 jet operations. As indicated earlier we are now progressing into a new era of fleet development with the two major operators acquiring different equipment. Over the next few morlths TAA will begin to introduce the widebodied Airbus, the first wide body to be used in .domestic service in Australia. At much the same tiIVe Ansett Airlines of Australia will start to introduce its new B737-200s as a replacement for its DC9s. The B737-200 has the advantage of having the same fuselage size as the B727. Ansett of course plans to introduce 8767 wide-bodied aircraft. Ansett will be one of the first to introduce this new generation aircraft.
Let me now deal with the new agreement and relate it to the Government's domestic air transport policy, especially the objective of creating increased competition in an orderly manner. The first is that the Government, in accordance with the domestic air transport policy review, has removed freight from the two-airline policy. The Government has already taken a number of steps in this direction in approving the operation of small time critical freight operations. A number of specialised operators are seeking to import jet aircraft and other large cargo carrying aircraft to exploit the freight market. This will be possible under the new policy, subject of course to establishing that there is demand for the proposed services and the operator providing certain undertakings to ensure that jet aircraft will not be used for passenger operation. An application has already been received which, if approved, would be the first to take advantage of the new arrangements. In the past, air cargo has tended to be dominated by the two major carriers where cargo

services have been characterised by a heavy dependence on passenger aircraft. These factors have restricted the development of specialised cargo services. However, we can expect the major operators to show an increasing interest in this segment of the market with the opportunities for freight carriage in their new aircraft, especially the wide bodies.
Changes have also been made to the aircraft import policy. The previous restrictions on aircraft above 5,700 kilograms maximum all-up weight limit have been removed and replaced by limits which greatly expand the range of aircraft types which may be imported under the new general consent. In addition, action is being taken to introduce a new supplementary airline licence to give formal recognition to the third level segments of the industry. In order to complement the introduction of this licence my Department has been actively reviewing the operating standards presently applying to commuter services. Considerable progress has been made. The dividing line between an airline licence and a supplementary airline licence will be based upon the certificated passenger carrying capacity and maximum pay load of the aircraft to be operated under the licences. This will also be the new limit for import under the general consent.
Import permits will not normally be granted for types of aircraft having a certificated capacity of more than 30 passengers or a maximum pay load of more than 3,500 kilograms except:
(a) Aircraft purchased by the Commonwealth or by Australian operators holding an airline licence, but not a supplementary airline licence;
(b) aircraft in a special aerial work category, such as aerial survey;
(c) certain aircraft to be used exclusively for freight operations subject to satisfactory information substantiating the demand of the proposed service;
(d) replacement aircraft purchased by charter licence holders of an equivalent type to that currently operated; and
(e) aircraft to be used in gen uine private operations provided that satisfactory evidence substantiating the use of the aircraft is furnished to the Secretary to the Department of Transport.
This passenger capacity limit may need to be reviewed in the near future to take account of recent aircraft developments. I turn now to the provisions of the new agreement. The parties have agreed that the agreement should not come into effect until the Commonwealth Parliament has

2832 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

approved the agreement and enacted the necessary legislation to introduce amendments to the Airlines Equipment Act, the Customs (Prohibited Import) Regulations and the Independent Air Fares Committee Bill. In respect of the latter Bill the agreement provides a 90 day period in which the Commission and the company may examine the Act and determine whether they wish to withdraw from the agreement. Should either party withdraw, the status quo would continue and the existing airlines agreements continue in force. I have been given unequivocal assurances by both TAA and Ansett that this provision will not be invoked unless the Independent Air Fares Committee Act materially differs from their understanding of the provisions relating to trunk routes that the Government intended to incorporate into the Bill that is introduced into Parliament.
Clause 6 provides extensive definitions of the role of the trunk airlines and of other operators. This clause for the first time defines Australia's trunk route network as consisting of trunk routes linking any two centres that currently receive pure jet services from TAA and Ansett Airlines of Australia with provision to add, but only by agreement between the parties, and subject to parliamentary disallowance as provided in the Act, other centres as the jet network expands. The enabling Act requires the Minister to table in Parliament any proposed agreement to add to the list of trunk route centres. The proposed addition to this list is subject to disallowance within 15 sitting days.
The agreement provides that TAA and Ansett shall be the only two operators of scheduled domestic passenger services over these routes-but with most important exceptions. The first exception is that other operators can provide services over prescribed routes, which includes successive prescribed routes combined to provide a service between two trunk route centres. A number of prescribed routes are trunk routes. Let me explain. A prescribed route is defined as one that is intrastate, intraterritory or between a regional centre and any other place in Australia, and also a route over which an operator other than TAA and Ansett provided a scheduled domestic passenger service as at 1 July 1980. Let me emphasise that a route between a regional centre and any other place in Australia includes capital cities. T would like it placed on the record that if this agreement had been in operation over the last decade East West, the major independent regional operator, would not have been precluded from operating any of the services it now operates.

Provision is also made that should TAA and Ansett decline to provide a satisfactory passenger service over a trunk route not currently operated by them other operators will be able to serve that route as a prescribed route. It is up to regional operators to respond to this challenge. To give an example, it would be possible for an operator, other than TAA or Ansett, to put forward proposals to operate between, say, Brisbane-Alice Springs--Perth. If TAA and Ansett were not prepared to operate a satisfactory service on that route, the Minister could approve the other operator's proposal. That route would then become a prescribed route for the life of the agreement. As was envisaged by the Domestic Air Transport Policy Review Report, successive prescribed routes such as Sydney-Albury-Melbourne can be combined to enable operators to increase further the extent of outside competition, subject to the requirement that the principal purpose is carriage of passengers over the individual prescribed routes and not the carriage of passengers between two trunk route centres, such as in the example just mentioned. Finally, specialist scheduled passenger services of a type not adequately catered for by TAA and Ansett may be provided over trunk routes by other operators if TAA and Ansett decline to do so when requested by the Minister.
It has been claimed that the most restrictive part of the existing agreement is the rationalisation provisions. These provisions have had the elTect of stifling initiatives and fare innovation within the industry. Under the old rationalisation provisions, should the airlines fail to agree on a particular matter, the matter could then be referred by either airline to a rationalisation committec comprising airline representatives and a co-ordinator nominated by the Minister. If required, the co-ordinator takes a decision on the matter and should either of the airlines disagree with that decision, an arbitrator is appointed to give a final and binding decision. Let me give the example of the dispute over the Perth-Port Hedland-Darwin services. TAA was first granted a licence to operate over the route in February J974. Objections by Ansett came before the Coordinator, then the Arbitrator, followed by the High Court and finally the Arbitrator again. This resulted in delays in the introduction of TAA 's first weekly DC9 service on the route by 3+ years. In its submission to the public hearings of the Holcroft Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares in Port Hedland, TAA claimed that between November 1977, when the DC9 services commenced, and August 1980,41,168 passengers had used the DC9 services. These passengers had paid some $1. Sm

Airlines Agreement Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2833

less for their travel than if they had used F28 serdetail when amendments to the Airlines Equip-

vices, a saving of over $25 for each passenger.

ment Act are introduced.

It is now recognised that these rationalisation provisions have outlived their usefulness and are now excessive. However, after careful consideration of all the issues and detailed discussions with the airlines; it has been decided not to entirely delete the old rationalisation provisions. We are satisfied that there are some aspects of the rationalisation provisions which continue to benefit the community. Some of these arrangements enable the airlines to contain costs and thus fares. Accordingly, we have sought to develop new provisions which maintain and improve the advantages of the rationalisation provisions but minimise their disadvantages. The consultative arrangements embodied in the new agreement do that. They provide for three main areas:
The 'may consult' group where the airlines can discuss issues and may reach agreement, but are not obliged to reach agreement.
The 'must consult' group, restricted to only the most important issues such as aircraft utilisation and industry load factors, which have similar conditions to the old rationalisation provisions. However, the role of the co"ordinator has been removed. Any disagreement that either airline wishes to pursue is referred directly to an arbitrator who is able to have regard to submissions by the Secretary to the Department of Transport and such other persons as he considers appropriate. Reductions of the steps in the appeal process will reduce delays in resolving issues.
Fares, where all consultations must be in the presence of a member or representative of the Independent Air Fares Committee.
The airlines are obliged to consult on core fares and may only consult on discount fares at the direction of the Fares Committee. Each airline is to make individual submissions on air fare variations and it is no longer necessary for them to try to reach agreement on the level of increases to be sought.
The new provisions included relating to import controls involve requiring the Secretary to the Department of Transport to have regard to the agreement in exercising his power to approve the importation of aircraft under the Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations. The Commonwealth has given an undertaking in the agreement that the conditions I outlined earlier governing the use by other operators of turbojet aircraft will be incorporated into the Airlines Equipment Act. These arrangements will be explained in greater

Much has been made in recent times of the definition in clause 15 of the agreement of the respective roles of Qantas and the domestic airlines. In order that there was a clear understanding, incorporated in this agreement, between the Government and the domestics these roles as they now apply were defined. The Government has also made certain commitments on the manner by which these roles could be varied. This will lead to greater clarity and to the need for a consistent approach on decision making on any changes in the role for Australian operators. The agreement contains provision that the parties acknowledge the Commonwealth will consult Qantas on any changes in roles that affect it. I can assure honourable members that it is the Government's clear intention and commitment to consult with the Qantas board on any negotiations to be undertaken on a change in roles of the three airlines.
These provisions do not in any way whatsoever prevent the chartering of each others equipment by Qantas and the domestics. It is on a similar basis that East-West Airlines has been operating Qantas's Norfolk Island-Auckland entitlement for over 6 months and that Ansett and TAA have been providing B727 services on the HobartChristchurch service. On the other hand, there has not been progress on the utilisation of Qantas excess capacity by domestic carriers on the long haul domestic routes. There are quite significant problems involved in such arrangements but honourable members may be assured I will continue to press the airlines to explore this matter further and for the Commonwealth to see what progress can be made in resolving the facilitation difficulties involved.
Substantially increased reporting obligations have been placed on the airlines by this agreement. Clauses 7, 13 and 23 particularly refer. Annual reports must be made on the use of the consultation arrangements, each airline's trunk route, and total airlines' tlnancial performance and on the operation of thc agreement. These reports will of course be provided to Parliament.
Some changes have been made to the cost recovery provisions in the agreement. No longer will the Commonwealth be restricted to annual increases in air navigation charges. We have formalised current practice of including fuel excise paid by the airlines in cost recovery calculations and that cost recovery in regard to trunk route services will not, allowing for minor variations between years, exceed 100 per cent.

2834 REPRESENTATlVES 28 May 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

Revised arrangements have been introduced to ensure stability of airline services to rural routes. The previous agreement required the airlines to remain on a route unless revenue on the route was less than direct operating costs. New arrangements provide for withdrawal after consultation with the Secretary to the Department of Transport on a replacement operator. An oper;- ator is able to withdraw at three months notice if revenue does not exceed total costs over a sixmonth period. Information supporting this is required to be provided to the Secretary, who may reject the proposal if he is not satisfied that the information justifies withdrawal. Should the operator still wish to cease the service arbitration provisions are included.
I recognise that the provisions of clause 12 of the agreement are the cause of concern especially to those members and senators represe(1ting the State of Queensland. However, it should not be assumed that TAA's services will necessarily be curtailed. However, in the event of an application being made for the cessation of the services the Government in the first instance will endeavour to negotiate with other carriers to ascertain if they are prepared to operate services to people in the remote areas of Queensland and other rural areas of Australia.
I am well aware of the interest of East-West Airlines in some of the regional routes that are operated by the domestic carriers. Indeed, some discussions have already taken place between East-West and TAA in regard to some of TAA's existing services. As the House would know, both Ansett and TAA have already negotiated satisfactory commercial arrangements with Bush Pilots Airways Ltd to take over some of the services that it was operating in Queensland. It is possible that BPA might also be prepared to take over other routes that either TAA or Ansett wish to vacate. The three-month period between any such notice to terminate services at least gives the Government an opportunity either to assist in promoting commercial negotiations between operators or to discuss with the State Government alternative arrangements that may be necessary to 'ensure that people living in Queensland are not left without adequate air services.
The airmail provisions of the old agreement have been dropped. Australia Post will under the new arrangements have the flexibility to develop its own commercial arrangements with the operators. The other provisions of the agreement sub, stantially repeal those contained in the current agreement: These relate to equal access to government business, application of ,the agreement to subsidiaries of Ansett Transport Industries and

TAA, compliance with curfew requirements and the Air Navigation Act, consutation on departmental infrastructure programs, the use of Ansett and TAA facilities in an emergency and nondiscrimination against Ansett or TAA.
Criticism has been levelled against the new agreement because, from the date of commencement of the agreement, it has an effective minimum life of eight years. It is not widely appreciated that the current agreement can be terminated only after five years notice. Since the Government made a firm commitment to the two airline policy before its re-election to office last year, the earliest one could expect that notice of termination of the current agreement could be served is after the next election, due in 1983. Such notice would have to specify a termination date of at least five years from then, say the beginning of 1989, or eight years from now. I have earlier made a commitment in respect of the termination of this agreement five years hence should certain circumstances occur. In deciding upon such arrangements I was concerned to allow a reasonable period of operations under these new arrangements before contemplating further amendments particularly bearing in mind the massive investment of some $800m made by TAA and Ansett to acquire new fuel efficient aircraft to maintain their high standards of service. I believe every minute of the 8-year period of agreement will be needed.
The 1952-1970 agreement has provided a good back drop against which air transport has developed in Australia over the last 30 years. The new airlines agreement incorporates significant changes to many areas, some new provisions and deletes some existing provisions. It forms the cornerstone for the orderly development of the industry in the years ahead in a manner consistent with the Government's policy and prospective developments in air transport. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Me Morris) adjourned.
INDEPENDENT AIR FARES COMMITTEE BILL 1981
Bill-by leave--presented by Mr Hunt, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Me HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (1 1.21)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to establish an Independent Air Fares Committee to conduct reviews and determine domestic air fares for all regular public

Independent Air Fares Committee Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2835

transport domestic passenger operators. Arrangements relating to the setting of Australia's air fares were extensively examined by the Holcroft Committee and it was after the Government's consideration of that report, though not directly recommended by the Committee, that the decision to establish a separate body to determine air fares was taken.
This decision was announced in Parliament on 1 April when the Government's initial decisions on the Holcroft recommendations were announced. At that time. I announced that the Government had accepted the following principles: We will adopt a cost based, nationally consistent approach by use of an air fare formula comprising a flagfall and distance rate for the national jet network. We endorse the inquiry's view on the approach to be taken to discount fares. The Government supports as wide a range of discount fares as possible without increasing the burden on the full fare paying passenger. Discounts for the aged and provision of tour basing fares are to be considered further with the airlines.
I also indicated that the Government is concerned that special innovative discounts which are negotiated by the airlines on the basis of their commercial viability must stand the test of public scrutiny. These and further decisions on the Holcroft recommendations are reflected in this Bill. There are, however, some areas of difference. The Government has decided that all fares for regular public transport operators should be set by the Committee. This decision was taken in order to minimise, if not eliminate, cross subsidisation between fare types and to ensure the integrity of the national trunk route formula is maintained.
Turning to specific provisions, the Committee is to comprise a chairman and two members, to be all part time appointments. Members may hold office for periods specified on their appointment, not exceeding .five years, and are eligible for reappointment. Their terms and conditions of appointment, except for a judge, are as determined by the Remuneration Tribunal. Clause 9 makes provision for the disclosure of any interest, pecuniary or otherwise, of any member of the Committee that could conflict with the proper performance of his functions and outlines actions the Chairman may take when he becomes aware of such an interest.
Functions of the Committee and conduct of reviews by the Committee are specified by guidelines in Part III of the Bill. The functions of the Committee are, for all regular public

transport passenger operators, to conduct cost allocation reviews to determine the attribution of costs to the flag-fall component and the distance component of the air fare formula as well as the amount, expressed as a percentage of the economy fare, by which first class fares will exceed economy fares; conduct major air fares reviews and minor air fares reviews to determine as appropriate a formula for fares; approve proposed discount air fares. A member of the Committee or a representative of the Committee is to be present at consultations between Ansett Airlines of Australia and Trans-Australia Airlines on fares in accordance with the provisions of the airlines agreement legislation. Clause 12 specifies the limitations of the Committee's functions regarding fares on intrastate routes to accord with the Commonwealth's constitutional responsibilities in regard to corporation.
Clause 13 provides that the Committee shall undertake cost allocation reviews in relation to a passenger operator or operators at the request of the Minister. The Minister shall request a review in relation to trunk route operators before the expiration of three years after the commencement of this legislation with subsequent review to commence between two to three years after the preceding review is completed. Cost allocation reviews for Ansett and TAA in relation to trunk and associated F27 routes shall be held concurrently. As other operators were not considered I;ly the Holcroft inquiry the first cost allocation review shall occur as soon as practicable after commencement of this Act, with subsequent reviews occurring at least three years after the completion of the previous review.
When the Minister requests the Committee to undertake a cost allocation review in rdation to a passenger operator, or passenger operators, the Chairman will notify the relevant operators inviting submissions. A notice in the Australian Government Gazette will invite submissions from the public. At the time of a cost allocation review a passenger shall advise the Committee of the terms of any air fare concessions that the operator provides, or proposes to provide, in respect of existing social discount fares and these will also be published in the Gazette. The Committee will not have a role in the determination of social discount fares.
During any cost allocation review the Minister may request the Committee to take into account, in conducting the review and in making a determination after completion of the review, the need to ensure that air services are operated on an

2836 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Independent Air Fares Committee Bill

'efficient and economic basis; air services are proensure that air services are operated on an

vided over trunk routes by two economically viefficient and economic basis; the need to ensure

able passenger operators; 'and domestic air serthat air services are provided over trunk routes by

vices are, as far as possible, operated on a two economically viable passenger operators; the

competitive basis. In conducting a cost allocation need to ensure that economy air fares over trunk

review, and making determinations, after such a routes are on a consistent basis; the need to ensure

review, clause 14 specifies that the Committee that air services over trunk routes are operated as

shall have regard to the need to ensure that air far as possible on a competitive basis; determi-

fares charged by operators over routes with siminations of cost allocation reviews relevant to that

lar characteristics, where similar equipment is operator; and the effect that availability of first

used by those operators are determined on a conclass and existing concession fares have on costs

sistent basis; the need to ensure that fares are, as and revenue.

closely as practicable, related to costs of providing the service; the need to ensure that air services are operated on an efficient and economic basis; the effect of the level of fares on demand for those services for which the fares are charged; and the need to ensure that air fares charged by trunk operators over trunk routes are able to be determined on a consistent basis.

Clause 16 of the Bill provides for the Committee to conduct minor air fares reviews at the request of operators where the proposed fare increase would not result in an economy fare that is more than 5 per cent greater than the economy fare determined at the previous major air fare review for that operator. As for the major air fares review, the operator for which the review is being

Clause 15 provides that an operator may reconducted shall provide to the Committee

quest the Committee to undertake major air fares specified information for the Committee to under-

review and determine the economy air fares to be take a review within seven days. These reviews

offered on specified routes. (Quorum formed). are to be conducted in private and completed The Committee may initiate a review in respect of within 21 days of receipt of the application or an operator provided at least six months has within 14 days of the provision of the information

elapsed since completion of the previous review in whichever is the sooner. The Committee shall

regard to that operator in respect of those routes. conduct minor reviews for Ansett and TAA ser-

Where Ansett, TAA or the Committee initiates a vices in respect of all or trunk and associated F27

review in respect of all routes or related the Comroutes jointly and determine the same trunk route

mittee shall conduct reviews in respect of both opfares for both operators.

erators over those routes. Determinations in reIn conducting a minor air fares review the

lation to services by Ansett and TAA over trunk Committee shall have regard to increases in costs

routes are to be the same for both operators.

relating to wages, being approved by any body

The Committee shall maintain, in relation to each class of passenger operator, a list specifying the information that is to be provided by the operator to enable the Committee to complete a major air fares review. After a review is initiated, either by an operator or the Committee, the operator shall provide the specified information within seven days. The Committee shall undertake such reviews in private and determine the economy air fares that are the subject of the review within 35 days of the operator's request or 28 days of the

having functions in relation to conciliation and arbitration matters, fuel and air navigation charges; the need to ensure that air services are operated on an efficient and economic basis; the need to ensure that air services are provided over trunk routes by two economically viable passenger operators; the need to ensure that economy air fares over trunk routes are made on a consistent basis; and, any determination made by the Committee at the completion of the last cost allocation review relevant to that operator.

provision of the required information, whichever The approval of discount fares is another func-

is the sooner. In conducting a major air fares retion of the Committee. Under the provisions of

view and determining economy air fares the Comclause 17 of the Bill operators may submit to the

mittee shall have regard to: The costs involved in Committee proposed discount fares, setting out

the provision of air services by that passenger opthe level of discount and the conditions attached

erator; any estimates made by that passenger opto the fare. If the Committee is satisfied that the

erator of the effect on costs and revenue of provision of the discount fare is likely to improve

expected traffic over any route during any future the profitability of the operator, the conditions

period; if a previous review has been conducted, associated with the fare are reasonable and, where

the effect on the costs and revenue of any estiappropriate are unlikely to increase economy

mates referred to above made for the purposes of fares on trunk routes, the fare shall be approved.

that review proving to be inaccurate; the need to A decision must be made within seven days of the

Independent Air Fares Committee Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2837

operator's application. The requirement for the Committee to publish its decisions will ensure there is public knowledge of the range and conditions of discount fares that are available. Under the provisions of this Bill, all fares proposed to be offered on trunk routes by operators other than Ansett or TAA will be considered against the criteria relating to discount fares before the Committee approves them.
Clause 17 also provides for the Committee, if it thinks fit, or at the request of any operator, to conduct a review concerning the availability of previously approved discount fares. The review is to be completed within 14 days. Unless the Committee is satisfied about the profitability, the conditions associated with the continued provision of that fare and, where relevant, the effect in economy fares on trunk routes, the approval of that fare may be revoked. These provisions ensure that once a discount fare has been approved the operators and the Committee have the opportunity to reassess the availability of such a fare, should circumstances so warrant.
When conducting its reviews, the Committee shall have regard to the guidelines I have described, which provide for cost based fares, including a nationally consistent fare formula for two economically viable operators providing services on trunk routes on a competitive basis. It should be noted that where a fare is approved for one operator in respect of a route any other operator on that route may also offer that fare. Decisions and determinations of the Committee, including interim determinations, in relation to all reviews shall be notified to the relevant operators and made public within seven days of the making of those decisions and determinations. Evidence and material to support the findings of the Committee together with a statement of reasons shall also be made available. Determinations shall remain in force until the notification of a further determination.
The Bill provides for the Chairman to direct the arrangements of the Committee for the purposes of reviews. With respect to cost allocation reviews this includes the ability for the Committee to decide, apart from the operators involved, who shall be entitled to be a party to the review, give evidence, call witnesses and make submissions to the Committee. Under clause 21, if it thinks fit, or is requested by a party to a cost allocation review in regard to information which would adversely prejudice its commercial operations, the Committee may direct that part of the proceedings to be held in private. The Committee may give directions prohibiting or restricting publication of evidence or documents given to the Committee at

any proceedings. This will allow the operators to be quite frank and open to the Committee, and provide information which would otherwise not be divulged in a public forum. The Committee also has the power to obtain all information necessary to undertake its tasks. Clause 25 of the Bill allows operators to request the Committee, in respect of intrastate and intraterritory routes subject to State or Territory government fare approval, to amend a determined fare to equal that fare approved by the State or Territory government.
Part IV of the Bill provides for the enforcement provisions currently contained in regulation 106 of the Air Navigation Regulations to continue to apply. Under clause 26 the Minister may direct the withdrawal of the use of any aerodrome or any air route facility maintained and operated by the Minister in pUf5Uance of ANR 82 to any operator whilst advertising, charging or collecting air fares not determined and approved hy the Committee. Penalties are provided for contravention of the Minister's directions under this clause. J stress that this is an enforcement provision only and does not allow the Minister to affect in any way the Committee's approval or determination of any fare. The provisions of ANR 106 relating to the Minister for Transport's power to approve air fares are to be repealed upon the commencement of this Act.
The final part of the Bill contains various penalty provisions for not complying with the Committee's directions. Protection and immunity to members of the Committee and persons summoned to appear before the Committee are the same as afforded in proceedings in the High Court. The Comittee is required to report annually, through the Minister, to Parliament. With the establishment of a specialist body to undertake one specialist task we have been concerned to ensure that the body does not grow into a monster. Whilst staff from the Puhlic Service will be attached to the Committee it is our very clear intention to ensure that the secretariat, whilst adequate for the task, is not of a size that will seek involvement in areas outside the Committee's charter.
Our very approach to government involvement in industry makes the introduction of the new airlines agreement an appropriate time to transfer the fare setting function from the Minister to such a compact specialised body in a manner that will further the Government's objective of increasing the level of competition within the industry while reducing the level of government involvement. I commend the Bill to the House.

2838 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Airlines Equipment Amendment Bill

Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
AIRLINES EQUIPMENT AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill-by leave-presented by Mr Hunt, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (11.44)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to amend the Airlines Equipment Act to accord with the Government's decisions to remove freight from the ambit of the two-airline policy and to revise the policy controls over the import of the aircraft by operators other than Ansett-Airlines of Australia and Trans-Australia Airlines. Under the Airlines Equipment Act 1958 the Minister for Transport determines the aircraft capacity requirements of Ansett and TAA for specified periods and the airlines are obliged not to provide capacity in excess of that determined in each period. Clause 6 of the Bill revises the arrangements for the determination of the overall aircraft capacity for TAA and Ansett and as a consequence provides for the exclusion of air cargo from the calculation of the Ansett and TAA capacity. Consequently the two-airline policy will apply only in respect of passenger services.
Under clause 9 of the Bill operators other than Ansett and TAA may come within the provisions of the Airlines Equipment Act as amended. The Act provides that before the Secretary to the Department of Transport consents to the importation, other than by TAA, Ansett and Qantas, of turbo jet aircraft in excess of 3,500 kilograms payload or exceeding a capacity of 30 passengers, the operator will undertake to comply with the obligations set out in the Act. The obligations on the regional operator are not to provide aircraft capacity in excess of that determined under the Act by the Minister in accordance with the definition of the function of regional operators and the estimated demand and to provide the determined capacity over defined routes. In the event a regional operator is deemed to have excess capacity he will be under an obligation to dispose of sufficient capacity so as to comply with the Minister's determination.
Cargo operators will be required to undertake not to uplift passengers on their designated turbo jet cargo aircraft and, when the aircraft is to be sold, either to sell overseas or obtain an undertaking from the Australian buyer to comply with the obligations. These amendments will permit operators access to modern, efficient aircraft for passenger or cargo operations while still providing the

means to afford a measure of security to the two major operators which operate services over the whole of the trunk route.
The provision accords with the role of the regional operator specified in the 1981 airlines agreement, as the provision of services over combinations of prescribed routes to provide a service over a trunk route and the provision of specialised services over trunk routes when these are not adequately provided by Ansett or TAA. The provisions of this Bill do not apply to application for the importation of turbo jet aircraft below the payload or capacity levels specified or for turbo prop aircraft. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL AIRLINES REPEAL BILL 1981
Bill-by leave-presented by Mr Hunt, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (11.48)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The introduction of this Bill is a further step by the Government to ensure that Trans-Australia Airlines operates as a competitive, commercially oriented airline. This will be of benefit to the Australian people. The establishment of TAA as a public company will remove the additional obligations of consulting with government bodies, with which TAA complied in accordance with its statutory responsibilities under the Australian National Airlines Act. The Government intends that the new company be fully commercial with the powers of the Government restricted to rights of shareholders to appoint directors. In this way, TAA will be able to participate more fully in the competitive environment established by the Government's aviation policy. No changes are envisaged in regard to safety and operational requirements. Our intention is to repeal the Australian National Airlines Act thus leading to the abolition of the Australian National Airlines Commission. All the Commission's assets, liabilities, agreements and arrangements will be transferred to an appropriate public company in which the Commonwealth is the beneficial owner of all issued capital.
In more detail, clause 2 of the Bill provides that there will be a commencing day to be fixed by proclamation on which the assets and liabilities of TAA will be transferred to the new company, provided that all the issued share capital is beneficially owned by the Commonwealth. The Australian National Airlines Act will also be

National Airlines Repeal Bill

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2839

repealed on the commencing day, as provided by I would point out that because accrued rights

clause 3. Before the transfer, the Minister will be are preserved, provision is also made that ad-

required by clause 5 to notify in the Commonditional benefits which would otherwise arise

wealth of Australia Gazette the public company, solely out of the transfer, are prevented by the

incorporated in the Australian Capital Territory legislation. Thus, under sub-clause 9(7) and

to which all the assets and liabilities of the Com9(11), severance payments concerning long ser-

mission will be transferred. The bulk of the transvice leave and superannuation which would

fer of the Commission's rights, property and assets otherwise be made upon abolition of the Com-

as well as debts, liabilities and obligations is promission, are not to be payable to staff who trans-

vided by clause 6. However, the following are not fer to the new company.

transferred under this clause.

In regard to superannuation, provision has been

Firstly, liabilities or obligations to existing made to preserve the terms, conditions and

Commission staff are dealt with by chmse 9. Secaccrued benefits of superannuation for all trans-

ondly, any Commission liability to pay dividends ferring TAA employees, including those in the

to the Commonwealth under section 30A (l) of Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme. To do

the Australian National Airlines Act are dealt this, transfer provisions have been made as flexi-

with under clause 12. Thirdly, in keeping with our ble as possible. The company is free to seek ap-

aim of freeing the new company of unnecessary proved authority status for the purposes of the

controls, obligations under the Australian Superannuation Act, whereby those in the

National Airlines Act are similarly not transferCommonwealth Superannuation Scheme can

red. Clause 6 also deals with some matters relating continue their membership. Alternatively sub-

to superannuation, which I will describe in a clause 9 (4) requires the new company to develop

moment.

its own superannuation schemes providing

Clause 8 extends the transfer on the commencing day to any contract, agreement or arrangement entered by the Commission and in force on

equivalent benefits to any superannuation schemes involving Commission staff in which the company does not wish to participate.

the commencing day. As should be noted, specific On the matter of the superannuation liabilities

reference to the airlines agreements is made in this of the Commission and the company, I draw your

section. Under clause 10, the company will also be attention to sub-clauses 6 (5) and 6 (6) of the Bill

substituted on the commencing day for the Comand to the Government's decision to place the

mission in any proceedings before a court or trinew company as far as possible on a truly com-

bunal, where the Commission was a party.

mercial footing. These two sub-clauses transfer to

As I mentioned, provisions relating to the transfer of staff are made in clause 9. (Quorum formed). Under this clause, on the commencing day, each and every current staff member of the Commission becomes an employee of the new
company. The staff shall be employed on the commencing day under the same terms and conditions as they were employed on the day before by the
Commission. All accrued rights and benefits will also be preserved.

the new company any outstanding liabilities of the Commission under the Superannuation Acts of
1922 or 1976. Moreover, these two sub-clauses, as well as the provision in clause 8 of the Bill transferring all Commission contracts to the company,
mean that the Government is able to make an agreement with TAA at any time before the commencing day to resolve the outstanding superannuation issues. The Bill allows the Government to assist with this aspect regardless of whether the company seeks to be an approved authority, or

This provision is not to be affected by the operwhether subsequently it does not have that status.

ation of any State or Territory law or determiThe transfers of TAA's operation to the company,

nation, unless such laws render the terms and under clause 11, will not attract stamp duty.

conditions more favourable. Under such circumstances, those more favourable conditions will apply.

Under clause 12, the Commission will continue in existence for a time after the commencing day to fulfil certain obligations relating to the Com-

The Bill includes the preservation of the rights mission's shareholdings and overseas contracts,

of those TAA staff with rights under the repealed assets and liabilities. This will enable the Com-

Officers' Rights Declaration Act or Part IV of the mission to hold so much of the property and assets

Public Service Act 1922. However rights cannot as have not been transferred in the first instance to

be preserved, under this or other legislation, be the company, as well as meeting certain outstand-

yond the time when, or if, the Commonwealth ing debts, liabilities or obligations. Under this

does not have a controlling interest in the clause, the Commission will be required to pro-

company.

vide annual reports and pay dividends for the

2840 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

National Airlines Repeal Bill

period ending with the commencing day. The company will be required to provide such staff and other assistance to the Commission as are necessary for it to meet these obligations and the Commission may delegate its powers to the staff seconded under this arrangement. The Minister, when satisfied that the Commission has fulfilled its obligations under this clause, will notify in the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette that the Commission shall cease to exist.
It is the Government's intention to facilitate the transfer wherever it can. Thus clause 13 provides that the Treasurer, on behalf of the Commonwealth, may, at the request of the company, provide loan guarantees for borrowing arrangements entered into by, and liabilities of, the Commission before the commencing day. The Treasurer shall table the details of such guarantees in the Parliament within 15 sitting days after the guarantee is given. These guarantees can be provided to cover TAA's borrowings from the staff superannuation reserves as well as its overseas borrowings. To complete the transfer, the Bill, in clause 14, will facilitate the transfer to the new company of the Commission's taxation benefits and obligations. These include the right to income tax deductions for any unrecouped losses and in relation to Commission property vested in the company, any depreciation allowances, investment allowances and trading stock values as if the Commission had continued in operation. The last clause in the Bill, clause 15, provides for compensation to be paid by the Commonwealth in certain circumstances to any person whose property is acquired.
As I indicated on 13 May, the Government has decided to engage consultants to examine the practicality of selling some or all of the shares in TAA, including how this might be done in the light of the Government's domestic aviation policies. The consultants will be asked to report on what measures should be taken to ensure the independent ownership of Australia's trunk airlines in the event of a decision that any part of the equity in TAA be sold. The consultant's report is expected to be completed in about 12 months time. J should emphasise that at this stage the Government has not made a decision on the long term ownership of TAA. If the Government does decide to sell any portion of TAA to the private sector after receiving the consultant's report, a
full statement will be made to the Parliament at that time. The Parliament will then have the opportunity to debate the matter.
Honourable members will by now have had the opportunity to consider the changes to the structure of TAA provided by this Bill. They give the
airline the opportunity to contribute to the future

progress of the industry. The greater incentives to compete, together with reduced government involvement, will ensure that the travelling public will be served well by both our major domestic airlines, operating in a competitive environment. Before I finish I reaffirm the Government's intention to look after the interests of all TAA staff during the transfer. A number of provisions of the Bill are directed to this most important objective. I now acknowledge the contribution of the Australian National Airlines Commission to the development of aviation since its establishment in 1946. TAA is an airline with a great reputation. This is due to its management and staff, the people who have made and are making it a great airline. I firmly believe that by making it a public company and freeing it of many bureaucratic controls it will go from strength to strength. In its new form as a public company, the Government confidently looks forward to TANs continued expansion in the new era of competition in domestic aviation in Australia. I am sorry that the House has been detained for so long but these are very important pieces of legislation. I felt that J owed it to the Parliament, the Opposition and the nation to give a full explanation of the provisions of each of thesc Bills. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
Friday, 29 May 1981
ADJOURNMENT
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
Thallhe House do now adjourn.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
Thallhe queslion be now put.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
House adjourned at 12.2 a.m. (Friday)
NOTICES
The following notices were given:
Mr MacKellar to present a Bill for an Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Mr Sinclair to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Mr Sinclair to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act 1946.
Mr Scholes to move-

Notices

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2841

That the following matter be referred to the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence for investigation and report:
The capacity of the Australian Defence Force to provide adequately equipped forces for United Nations peacekeeping purposes outside Australia, which are capable of guaranteeing their own security.

Mr Viner to move-
That, in accordance with scction 5 of the Parliament Act 1974, the House of Representatives approves the following proposal: Construction of car parks behind the provisional Parliament House.

2842 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

World Coal Trade
(Question No. 412)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
Does the Government accept the recommendation in report No. 10 of the National Energy Advisory Committee that in view of the expected rapid developments in the world coal market and the effects these developments may have on the level of demand for Australian coal, the Government should, in consultation with the coal industry, closely monitor the activities of current and potential competitors; if not, why not; if so (a) how does the Government propose to monitor world coal trade, (b) what authority will undertake this task and (c) when will it begin.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Monitoring of the activities of Australia's potential competitors in the world coal market has been carried out by the Government for several years.
The monitoring is undertaken by the Department of Trade and Resources by day-to-day consultation with the Australian coal industry, relevant State bodies, and Government and private bodies in other countries; by association with international bodies and through the vetting of published information.
Social Security Office at Sandgate, Queensland
(Question No. 625)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(I) Did the Minister in reply to my Question No. 227 (Hansard, 4 December 1980, page 478) state that all honourable members are advised of any significant changes in departmental operations in their electoral divisions; if so, did the Department of Social Security inform the former Member for Lilley in writing (a) of the impending expiry of the lease on the office at Sandgate, Queensland, on 28 November 1980 and (b) that the decision had been made not to renew the lease which expired on 28 November 1980 and that the office would be closed.
(2) Did the former member reply in writing; if so, what was stated in the reply.
(3) If the former member was not informed, why not.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) On I August 1980, the then Minister for Social Security wrote to the former member for Lilley advising him of the proposed opening of the Nundah regional office which was to commence operations on 4 August 1980. Although this letter did not specifically mention the intention to service clients of the Sandgate Office from the new Nundah office, it is understood that the former member was aware of the arrangements being made. In discussions with the Director of the Department of Social Security, Queensland, on or about 4 August 1980, the former member for Lilley asked whether it would be possible to keep the Sandgate office open. After examining all aspects, the Director of the Department of Social Security,

Queensland, again spoke with the former member for Lilley and informed him that the Sandgate office would be kept open while the lease remained. There is a visiting service to Sandgate.
(2) No.
(3) Not applicable. The former member for Lilley was informed.
UNCTAD Common Fund
(Question No. 800)
Mr Willis asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
(1) When was the UNCTAD Common Fund for Commodities officially opened for signatures.
(2) Which countries have agreed to ratify the establishment oftheFund.
(3) Has Australia agreed to ratify the establishment of the Fund; if not, why not.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Agreement Establishing the Common Fund for Commodities was opened for signatures on 1October 1980.
(2) As at 19 May 1981 the Agreement Establishing the Common Fund for Commodities had been ratified by Indonesia and Denmark.
(3) Australia has signed the Agreement but has not agreed to ratify because the necessary legislation has not yet been enacted.
Trade in Agricultural Commodities
(Question No. 859)
Mr Holding asked the Minister fOf Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
What have been the (a) items, (b) quantity and (c) value of trade in agricultural commodities to (i) the United States of America, (ii) Japan, (iii) the European Economic Community, (iv) the United Kingdom, (v) Egypt, (vi) Saudi Arabia, (vii) Iran, (viii) Iraq, (ix) Israel, (x) Syria,.(xi) South Africa, (xii) Singapore, (xiii) Malaysia, (XIV) Thailand, (xv) Vietnam and (xvi) New Zealand, in each of the last five years.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Recorded Australian produce exports of agricultural commodities to the countries and for the years nominated by the honourable member have been compiled and tabulated by my Department.
A copy of the tabulations has been placed in the Parliamentary Library for the information of honourable members.
Hazardous Chemicals
(Question No. 861)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:

Answers to Questions

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2843

(\) How many officers of his Department are employed wholly or partially on matters relating to control and assessment of introduction, use, transport and disposal of hazardous chemicals in Australia.

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(2) What progress has been made on the introduction of the interim voluntary notification scheme for assessment of new chemicals as at 24 March 1981.
(3) What priority is he or his Department giving to the qu~stion of possible legislative arrangements which may need to be introducedfor control of chemicals in Australia.
(4) What are the details of progress made on the establishment of a National Register of Chemicals as at 24 March 1981.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Five officers, comprising the Hazardous Chemicals Section, are wholly employed on these functions. Two others are engaged on closely related functions within the Environment Division of the Department. The activities of the Department with respect to control of hazardous chemicals are those described in a submission (July 1980) made by the former Department of Science and the Environment to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation.
(2) Planning is well advanced. There is continuing close liaison with the chemical industry, whose co-operation is essential to the success of the scheme. It is expected that details of procedures to be followed .under the scheme will be given final consideration by Commonwealth and State Government environmental authorities in June, and that the scheme will commence in the latter half of 1981
(3) The Standing Commillee of the Australian Environment Council (AEC) has given high priority to consideration of the possible legal arrangements which might be made ultimately for the management of environmentally hazardous chemicals in Australia. A study of this issue is shortly to commence under the auspices of the AEC.
(4) Planning for the first stage of the proposed National Register of Chemicals is well advanced. It is planned that the Toxicology Data Bank develped by the US. National Library of Medicine, will be introduced shortly, It would form part of the national MEDLINE system operated by the National Library of Australia. The Toxicology Data Bank will provide health, environmental and other information on several thousand chemicals likely to be of greatest environmental significance. ft is proposed to progressively assemble supplementary Australian information for inclusion in the data files, The Toxicology Data Bank is expected to provide valuable information on potential hazards of chemicals to a range of interested bodies, including government, industry and research institutions.
Age Eligibility for Pension
(Question No. 904)

(I) Yes.
(2) The Commonwealth old-age pension scheme was introduced in 1908 and provided for a pension at the age of 65 years for both males and females. The female age was reduced to 60 years in 1910. I am not aware of any documentation of the original reason(s) for this distinction.
(3) In view of my answer to (2), it is not possible to say if this reason is still valid.
(4) No relevant Commonwealth legislation currently exists. While there may be arguments to suggest that the payment of age pension to women from the age of 60 years rather than 65 years is discriminatory, the provision has existed now for over 70 years and its removal would require very careful consideration to protect the needy and those whose retirement plans had been made on the basis that this long-standing provision would continue.
International Year of Disabled Persons
(Question No. 961)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) In this International Year of Disabled Persons what is the total commitment of the Commonwealth Government towards the attainment of the objectives of this program.
(2) What additional assistance is it anticipated will be made available to (a) the State of South Australia and (b) the Electoral Division of Grey.
(3) Will additional assistance be made available to assist those disabled persons attending (a) sheltered workshops and (b) those who, for various reasons, cannot avail themselves of these workshops.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) The Commonwealth's approach to the International Year of Disabled Persons is to identify measures that can contribute to the welfare and independence of people with disabilities; and to have a publicity campaign and community information program to generate community support, understanding and practical action, so that any progress made in 1981 towards the integration of disabled people into the wider community will be of lasting benefit. To reinforce this long term aim, the Commonwealth has decided that most funds for IYDP should come from normal budgetary allocations. To date some 150 major projects have been listed by Common- .wealth departments and authorities for IYDP.
Specific Commonwealth funding allocations for 1980-81 are:

Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(1) Are males eligible for the age pension at 65 years and females at 60 years,
(2) If so, what was the original reason for this distinction.
(3) Is this reason still valid.

$148,500 to the Australian Council for Rehabilitation of Disabled for a Secretariat for the National Committee of Non-Government Organisations (NCNGO);
$1,000,000 for a publicity campaign;
$100,000 for administration purposes;
$400,000 to the States/Territories ($50,000 each) from the Children's Services Program to assist community and self-help groups carry out special projects.

(4) Does this distinction contravene the anti-discrimination legislation, at least in spirit.

$95,500 to enable the 19 members of the NCNGO to meet monthly.

2844 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) (a) South Australia has been allocated $50,000, as has been each other State and Territory, to assist community and self-help groups carry out special projects in connection with IYDP.
(b) The extent of such assistance to the Electoral Division of Grey is not known at this stage. The closing date for applications for assistance in South Australia has been extended to enable further canvassing of country districts in order to encourage proposals from these areas.
(3) Yes. The Government introduced a three-year program under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act commencing in 1980-81. $33 million has been allocated for new facilities and provision has also been made to continue on-going financial support for new and existing services. Funds are made available to approved voluntary organisations to establish and operate a wide range of approved services for handicapped people. These services, which include sheltered workshops and activity therapy centres, are designed to provide vocational and other training for handicapped people.
Agent Orange
(Question No. 994)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veteran's Affairs, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
(1) Did the Minister give an undertaking to Senator Tate in answer to a question without notice (Senate Hansard, 26 March 1981, pages 781-2), to provide Senator Tate with more specific information on claims made by Dr Peter Hall and others; if so, will the Minister also provide me with that information.
(2) If the Minister will provide the information to me when can I expect to receive it.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) and (2) In my interim answer to Senator Tate I indicated that I was pursuing the matters raised by him.
.Further information will be provided when the inquiries I am making with the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs have been completed.
Underspending of Estimates: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 1104)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 590-Administrative and (b) 591Social Welfare Policy Secretariat.
(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos I and 2); If so, what are the reasons.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to her Question No. 1101 (Hansard, 13 May 1981, page 2374) provided by the Minister representing the Minister for Finance.

Annllal Reports and Other Publications: Minister for Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1254)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What annual reports are produced by the Department of Veterans' Affairs and authorities under the Minister's aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
(3) Are other regular publications issued by the Department of Veterans' Affairs and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Annual reports produced by the Department of Veterans' Affairs and authorities within the jurisdiction of the Minister for Veterans' Affairs are as follow:
Annual Report of the Repatriation Commission. Annual Report of the Repatriation Review Tribunal. Annual Report of the Defence Service Homes Corporation. Annual Report of the Soldiers' Childrens Education Scheme (6 State editions).
(2) The cost of producing eaeh annual report for 1979-80 was as follows:

Annual report

Production cost

$

Repatriation Commission Annual Report .

4,190.52

Repatriation Review Tribunal Annual Report

571.18

Defence Service Homes Corporation Annual

Report . . . . . . . . . . . .

1,409.81

Soldiers' Childrens Education Scheme Annual

Report

- - - - - - - . - . . . . . . . .

*850.00

*Some State boards have yet to produce reports for

1979-80.

(3) (a) Other regular publications issued by the Department of Veterans' Affairs and authorities within the judisdiction of the Minister for Veterans' Affairs and the production costs of these publications are as follows:

Publication

Frequency of
publication

Review of Repatriation General Hospital, Con-
cord Repatriation Benefits Repatriation Facts and Fi-
gures Repatriation Artificial
Limb and Appliance Service Journal Research Projects

Annual Annual Biannual
Periodically Annual

Production cost $
2,501.00 5,260.00
680.00
987.00 863.00

Answers to Questions

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2845

(b) Copies of these publications are distributed on request from Offices of the Department of Veterans' AtTairs. No complete record is kept of distribution and it is therefore not practicable to determine the cost of distributing these publications.
Recruitment through Private Employment Agencies: Department ofindustry and Commerce
(Question No. 1286)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost?
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes. The Australian Tourist Commission recruited staff through private employment agencies for the following positions:
1. Assistant to Director-Australian Operations 2. Manager, Product Development 3. Office Managers, Overseas 4. Market Research Analyst 5. Travel Officer, Head Office 6. Promotions Manager 7. Director, Australian Operations 8. Steno-typists 9. Receptionist, Head Office.
The total cost was $17,595.
Recruitment through Private Employment Agencies: Department of Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 1301)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) Where any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
One stenographer was recruited for a short-term, urgent joh in November 1979 through an employment agency. The total cost incurred by the Department was $126.88.
Industrial Action: De]lartment of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1384)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many officers or employees in the Department of Veterans' Affairs have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last two years.
(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.
(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.
(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.

!VIr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' AtTairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) (a) The numbers of staff members of the Department of Veterans' Affairs involved in strike action in 1979 and 1980 are 1,549 and 2,449, respectively.
(b) The numbers of staff members involved in restrictive work actions in 1979 and 1980 are 13 and 293, respectively. Some other staff members were involved in restrictive work actions in 1979 and 1980 but these actions had no significant effects on 1V0rk flow and there is no record of the numbers involved.
(2) The numbers of manhours lost due to strike action in 1979 and 1980 are 7,688 and 13,741, respectively. The number of manhours lost due to restrictive work action is not available.
(3) No.
(4) Tn 1979, 13 staff members who engaged in restrictive work action were stood down without pay.
Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 1401)
!VIr Bungey asked the Minister, representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April1981:
(I) Have any officers and employees of the Department of Social Security been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.
(2) What is the division and approximate salary of level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.
!VIr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Approximately 99 staff members have been identified as currently having approval to engage in outside employment. A more precise fIgure is difficult to obtain as complete information in the form requested by the honourable member is not readily available in respect of staff in Central Office (A.C.T.) and South Australia. To extract this information would entail inordinate etTort and involve the diversion of
officers from their normal duties. r am not prepared to direct
that scarce staffing resources be released for this purpose.
Specific information available in respect of approvals granted is as follows:
New South Wales 1 Third Division, SI77S1, Tutor at College of Advanced Education 1 Third Division, $22359, Contributor to Administrative Law Service I Third Division, $20618, Bookmaker's Clerk 1 Third Division, $17280, Steward 1 Fourth Division, $13084, Taxi Driver 1 Fourth Division, $13084 Race Court Gate Attendant 1 Fourth Division, $9788, Musician
Victoria 1 Third Division, $17280, Greyhound Trainer
Queensland 1 Third Division, $20618, Greyhound Race Course Announcer 1 Third Division, $21491, University Tutor 1 Third Division, $18299, Musician 1 Third Division, $15113, Casual Announcer

2846 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Answers to Questions

I Third Division, $24083, Office Bearer of Co-operative Trading Society
I Third Division, $27555, Office Bearer of Co-operative Trading Society
I Third Division, $22359, Office Bearer of Co-operative Trading Society
I Fourth Division, $11l43, Musician
I Fourth Division, $12743, Barmaid 1 Fourth Division, $9861, Singer

Western Australia
I Third Division, $15766, Shop Assistant I Third Division, $22359, Football Commentator I Third Division, $18879, Bookmaker's Clerk
1 Third Division, $13037, Translator
1 Third Division, $15981, Musician I Third Division, $21492, Lecturer/Tutor
I Third Division, $40839, Private part-time medical practice
1Fourlh Division, $10255, Babysitter 1 Fourth Division, $12061, Bookkeeper

Tasmania
1 Third Division, $11895, Interpreter/Translator 1 Third Division, $18412, Musician 1 Third Division, $18879, Waitress I Third Division, $18879, Bookmaker's Supervisor I Fourth Divsion, $10417, Waitress 1 Fourth Division, $13084, Salesman
1 Fourth Division, $11350, Salesman

Northern Territory 1 Third Division, $18879, Lecturer 1 Third Division, $14247, Waitress

Australian Capital Territory I Third Division, $27555, Metalwork Contractor 1 Third Division, $18299, Sports Commentator 1 Fourth Division $9152, Cookery Teacher

South Australia
Individual figures are not known but approximately 60 staff could be involved as follows:
25 Third Division 35 Fourth Division Salaries range [rom $9000 to $15000 42 staff Entertainment (Band musician, singer etc) 12 staff Waitress, bar attendant 6 staff Salesman

Air Travel in Australia: Department of Social Security

(Question No. 1479)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

What sum was paid by the Department of Social Security,
or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by that Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

The sums paid by the Departmcnt of Social Security to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80
were as follows:

Ansett Airlines of Australia East West Airlines (Operations) Ltd
Trans Australia Airlines
Bush Pilot Airways Ltd

$ 339,219
16,213
599,482 5,340

Airlines ofSouth Australia Opal Air Pty Ltd MacRobertson Miller Airline Services Civil Flying Service (WA) PtyLtd
Transwesl Airlines Ply Ltd Ord Air Charter Pty Ltd Air Tasmania Ply Ltd
Executive Airlines Tasmania Aviation Services Pty Ltd
Northern Airlines Ply Ltd Alice Springs Air Charter
Chartair . . . . . . Aeropelican Intercity Commuter Air Ser-
vices Pty Ltd Club Air . . . . . . . Davey Air Services Pty Ltd .
East Coast Commuter Airlines
Hazelton Air Services Pty Ltd Kendall Airlines Pty Ltd Masling Commuter Services Pty Ltd Southern Cross Airways Pty Ltd
North West Airlines . . . . . Northern Territory Aircharter Pty Ltd Katoomba Air Services
Lloydair Pty Ltd

$ 7, III
505 59,766
566 402 946 2,604
59 193 3,899 390 130
47 47 188 232 120 545 196 50 638 950 280 709

Total

1,040,827

Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 1531)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many officers and employees of the Department of Social Security have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by the Department.
(2) What was the cost to the Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) (a) Nil, (b) 240
(2) $25,471.
Tea Services: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 1597)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many (a) full timc and (b) part time staff are employed on teamaking and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices ofhis Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his Department in 1979-80.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) (i) 4, (ii) 4.
(b) (i) nil, (ii) nil. ,
(2) (a) $67,904, (b) $1,888.

Answers to Questions

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2847

Importation of Meat
(Question No. 1623)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What (a) fresh, (b) frozen or (c) chilled beef has been imported into Australia from North America since the lifting of the prohibition on importation of such meat.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The honourable member is referring to the Quarantine Proclamation published in the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette No. G6 on 12 February 1980 permitting the importation into Australia of uncooked bovine meat from Canada and the United States of America. Since that time, however, there have been no imports into Australia of fresh, frozeh or chilled beeffrom either Canada or the United States.
Temple Society Trust Fund
(Question No. 1736)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) What moneys have beeh paid into the Temple Society Trust Fund over the last 5 years.
(2) What moneys have been paid from the Temple Society Trust Fund during the same years, and to whom.
(3) What moneys are currently in the Trust Fund.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Money paid in to the Temple Society Trust over the last 5 years (to April 1981 ) totalled $75,191.06.
(2) The following payments have been made from the Trust over the last 5 years:
(a) Funds totalling $318,876.61 were paid to 73 individuals assessed as eligible by the Trust. These funds were provided by the British and West German Governments, and not the Australian Parliament
(b) Payment to the Temple Society of Australia~for the use by the Templar Home for the Aged and the Tabulum Nursing Home $89,923.42.
(c) Fares and Expenses in connection with meetings of the trust-$766.85.
(d) Postage Costs $277.16.
(e) Salaries $64,708. .
(3) The current balance of the Trust is nil. There are no further receipts or payments anticipated and the Trust is in the course of being wound up.
Agents Board of the Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1823)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What were the costs of running the Agents Board of the Australian Capital Territory in 1979-80 and what is the estimated cost for 1980-81.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that:
(a) the cost of running the Agents Board in 1979-80 was $10,373 made up of:

$

Fees paid to Members Travelling allowances
Fares . . . . .
Witness fees Proportion of Salary of Departmental
Member - . . . . . . . . . Proportion of Salary of Departmental
Officer acting as Secretary to the Board Estimate of Departmental Secretarial
Services . . - . . . . . . .

2,862.00 212.00 279.00 nil
1,670.00
4,050.00
1,300.00

and

(b) the estimated cost for 1980-81 is $12,700 as follows:

$

Fees to Members Fares Travelling allowances Witness fees Departmental Member Departmental Secretary
Contract Secretarial Services

4,030.00
320.00 430.00 250.00 1,860.00 4,610.00 1,200.00

Government Housing in the Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1828)
Mr Bung..,y asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) What loss to revenue will result from the rent reductions for Government housing in the Australian Capital Territoryannou!1ced in his press release of 11 December 1980
(a) for the period 10 April 1980 to 12 March 1981 and
(b) in a full financial year.
(2) What increase in revenue will result from the increases in housing rentals to operate from 12 March 198 I, also announced in the press release.
(3) What additional revenue would have been received if the rental increases applied for the period 11 December 1980 to 12 March 1981.
(4) In view of the statement at page 53 of the Annual Report of his Department for 1979-80 that in November 1979, an improved computer system for government rental accounts came into operation, what are the operating requirements referred to in his press release which, in conjunction with the disruption of the Christmas and New Year holiday period, appear to have prevented the rental increases being applied earlier than 12 March 1981.
(5) What was the reason for limiting rent increases resulting from the review to a maximum of $7.50 per week.
(6) How many rents would have been increased above this amount, and by what sum, if this limit had not been applied.
(7) Is it a fact that rental increases which were effected from 29 September 1977 increased the majority of rents by $9.10 per week.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) $8,760 for period 10 April 1980 to 11 March 1981. (b) $9,490 for full financial year.
These figures are based on the full receivable rent for the houses referred to in the II December 1980 press statement.
(2) $652,000 in cutrent financial year (increase in revenue as a result of an increase in gross rent receivable).

2848 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) $489,000 for period 18 December 1980 to 11 March 1981 (notc that 18 December 1980 was the beginning of the first full rental period after II December 1980).
(4) Many tenants pay by deducting from salary. To arrange for the employing authority to vary fortnightly deductions, lead time is required. In the case of Public Servants paid through the Department of Finance pay system, at least six weeks lead time is required. This is made up as follows:

Elapsed time weeks

Arrange for and receive input schedule

2

Return input schedule to Department of Finance

2

Department of Finance to prepare input and pro-

cess variation

..........

2

6

The processing of deduction changes requires continuity over the periods preceding the implementation of a rent review. The,- early cut-off imposed by the Department of Finance on payroll input for the second pay period in December and the intervening holiday period would have resulted in disruption of the continuity of the lead time periods and would have increased the administrative difficulties in dealing with deduction changes occurring during the lead time. To overcome this problem it was necessary to arrange for the deduction listings to be produced in the first pay run after the holiday period.
Rent increase notices were posted to tenants on 4 March 1981.
(5) The ultimate intention is that government rents in Canberra will move to full market levels but it is recognised that this cannot be achieved immediately in all cases without causing hardship. Having regard to this it was considered that a maximum rental increase of $7.50 a week was reasonable. It is proposed that government rents in Canberra now will be reviewed each year.
(6) The rents of some 1,500 dwellings would have incresed by more than $7.50 perweek. The average additional amount would have been about $1.32 a week, with a minimum of $0.05 a week and a maximum of$9.30 a week.
(7) Yes. However, the increase of $9.10 a week comprised an increase of $6 plus an amount to cover water and sewerage rates which was included in the rent for the first time. Previously, tenants had been billed directly for water and sewerage rates.
Government Housing in the Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1829)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) When were the rental rebates operating in respect of Government housing in the Australian Capital Territory last compared with similar concessions' granted by State Governments.
(2) What was the result of this comparison.
(3) If no study has been made recently, will he give con- ~ideration to initiating such a study in view of the fact that 40 per cent of the total rental housing stock in the Australian Capital Territory in 1979-80 qualified for rebates compared to 22.7 per cent in 1977-78.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) The Australian Capital Territory government housing rental rebate formula has been continuously compared with those of the States over the past three years. Following a review of the formula which included a direct comparison with arrangements in the States in late 1979/early 1980 the Australian Capital Territory rental rebate formula was varied and the present formula was approved by the then Minister for the Capital Territory on 30 April 1980. The formula will be reviewed again in the light of the provisions that are finally set down in the 1981 Commonwealth/State Housing Agreement due to take effect from 1July 1981.
(2) A comparison of the Australian Capital Territory rental rebate formula with those of the States is as follows:
New South Wales
Rent payable by a household is 20 per cent of the income of the tenant, or tenant and spouse where both are in receipt of an income. For each additional member of the household in receipt of a regular income of over $25 per week, $5 is added to the calculated rent.
In the case of a single pensioner or pensioner couple whose only income is the aged, invalid, widows, service or similar pension and any supplementary assistance, the amount of rent payable is 18 per cent of total income. Pensioners with children pay 20 per cent of total income. Increases in weekly rents for pensioners are restricted to $1 per week per year. Rent becomes payable at 20 per cent of income where a tenant is no longer eligible for supplementary assistance.
Victoria
Rent payable by a household is calculated as follows:
(1) Where total income of tenant and spouse is less than or equal to "the Victorian minimum weekly wage ($129.40 at 30 June 1980) the rent equals 20 per cent of such income, plus rent calculated under (3), if applicable.
(ii) Where total income of tenant and spouse is greater than the current Victorian minimum weekly wage, rent is 20 per cent of that level, plus 25 per cent of difference, plus (3).
(iii) If there is another wage earner, 10 per cent of that income or 10 per cent of minimum weekly wage, whichever is less, is added to the rent addressed in (1) or (2).
Rent is fixed for bedsitters such that less than 20 per cent of the pension is paid because the rent is fixed in relation to the dwelling.
Queensland
Rent payable is calculated as follows:
20 per cent of family income if family income is equal to $83.30 per week
less 25 per cent of the difference between assessable family income and $83.30 if assessable family income is lower or
plus 27.5 per cent of the difference if assessable family income is higher than $83.30.
Family income comprises:
(i) the highest whole weekly income of the following: tenant, spouse, any of their children over 23 years of age,
parents or parents-in-law in receipt of a pension
(ii) t of the income of the person mentioned in (i) whose income is the next highest
(iii) t of the income of any other person mentined in (i) with a maximum of $3 per tenant
(iv) any person living in the dwelling not mentioned in (i), if in the opinion of the housing authority he/she should be included in the determination of rent, 10 per cent of

Answers to Questions

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2849

guaranteed minimum wage ($130) added to rent payable
(v) children under 23 years of age if unemployed, 10 per cent of benefit is added to rent payable; if employed 5 per cent of guaranteed minimim wage ($130) up to 18 years of age and 10 per cent of guaranteed minimum wage ($130) over 18 years of age is added to rent payable
Full rent is payable after a total of 4 weeks absence in any 12 month period.

Tasmania
The rebate is calculated thus:
The gross weekly incomes of the husband and wife plus 25 per cent of the gross weekly income of any other permanent resident (with a maximum of 25 per cent of the cure rent minimum wage) forms the rebateable income.
The rent payable when income is less than the Tasmanian State minimum wage (unchanged from $117.20 at 30 September 1978) is 18 per cent of the income.

South Australia
The South Australian Housing Trust uses a rent reduction scheme to assist tenants who are unable to afford to pay full rental on their dwellings. Reduced rents are determined by a sliding scale which increases from 16 per cent of an income of $50 or less to 22.5 per cent of incomes equal to or greater than 85 per cent of the average weekly wage. In calculating rent, spouses' incomes are taken into account as follows:
20 per cent of incomes of $50-79 added to rent calculated on tenant's income;
30 per cent of incomes of $80-124 added to rent calculated on tenant's income;
50 per cent of incomes of $125 and over added to rent calculated on tenant's income.
In addition $5.00 is added to the 'rent for each additional income earner over 18 and under 21 years of age and $7.50 is added to the rent for each additional income earner over 21 years of age. The income of an employed member of the household over 30 years of age and not a spouse is taken as that of the breadwinner if it exceeds that of the tenant; if not then $7.50 is charged.
Westem Australia
Rent payable is calculated in the following way:
Assessment
(a) 20 per cent of the family income where such income equated to, or is less then $120.
(b) Where the family income exceeded the Minimum Wage, the percentage is escalated by t per cent for every $5 in excess of such determined wage, up to a maximum of25 per cent.
Family income
(a) Combined incomes of husband and wife plus
(b) 20 per cent of Minimum State Wage (assessed at $120 and remaining current) or actual income, whichever is the lesser, for all other income-earning residents.
Note: (i) In all cases the assessed rent or the standard rent, whichever is the lesser, was applied. (ii) Family income excludes family allowances, maternity allowances, education allowances (except tertiary education living allowances which are considered as part of dependant's income), domiciliary nursery care benefits and handicapped child allowances.
Concessions for larger families
The assessed rebated rent is subject to a reduction by SOc per child beyond the second up to a maximum of $3 per week.
Single lind Married Couple Pensioners
Exceptions have been made for these categories and the assessed rental is determined at:
Single unit-17.71 per cent of basic pension plus supplementary allowance
Married couple-16.74 per cent of basic pension plus supplementary allowance

The rent payable for rebateable income on or in excess of the Tasmanian State minimum wage is determined from a graduated percentage scale which commences with 20 per cent of minimum wage increasing to 25 per cent of the total of the minimum wage plus 75 per cent of the difference between the minimum wage and the Australian Average Weekly Earnings.
The percentage scale is reviewed annually in June and adjustments based on the minimum and average wages and the average market-related rent applicable to the preceding 31 March are implemented on and from the first Monday in July.

Australian Capital Territory
The rebated rent payable is calculated as follows:
(i) where the gross weekly income of the tenant and spouse is equal to or less than the Australian Capital Territory minimum wage the maximum rent payable is one-fifth of the income
(ii) where the gross weekly income exceeds the Australian Capital Territory minimum wage, the maximum rent p~y~ble is one-fifth of the Australian Capital Territory mlllimum wage plus' one-quarter of the amount of inco,nl,e in excess of the Australian Capital Territory mllllmumwage
(iii) an amount of $5 is added to the maximum rent calculated in accordance with (i) and (ii) for each nondependent person living in the household, and
(iv) in addition to the rent calculated in accordance with (i) and (ii), ,a loading is charged in respect of those flats that have central heating, garages and carports.
(3) Not applicable.

Export Incentive Scheme
(Question No. 1943)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :

(1) Has his attention been drawn to the report on page 22 of the Bulletin, of 14 April 1981, that following the convening
of a special meeting of permanent heads, the Government has agreed to cut its export incentive scheme in half which will involve a savingof$IOO million.

(2) Has the Government given consideration to the abol-

ition or scaling down of the export expansion grants scheme: if

so, what is the Government's position now in relation to this

scheme.

'

Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) and (2) The Prime Minister has announced the Government's intentions on export incentives; (reference Hansard Page 1848, of 30 April 1981).

2850 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Refugee Processing Centre on Galang Island, Indonesia
(Question No. 2015)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 30 April 1981:
(1) At what stage of development is the refugee processing centre on Galang Island in Indonesia to which the Australian Government contributed $250,000 in 1979-80.
(2) Can he say whether any other Australian Government contributions were made towards the completion of the centre; if so, for what purpose were they made.
(3) Is the Galang Island Centre operational.
(4) Given the Australian contribution to the Centre what benefits will Australia derive from the Centre.
(5) Is it envisaged that refugees arriving unannounced in Australia will be deported to this camp; if so, will this apply to all refugees or only to South-East Asian refugees.
Mr Macphee -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (4) The Refugee Processing Centre (RPC) at Galang towards which Australia contributed $A250,OOO became fully operational in December 1980 with a capacity of 10,000. The RPC is used to accommodate Indo-Chinese refugees already accepted by resettlement countries who are awaiting movement to those countries. At the end of March this year there were 6,313 refugees at Galang RPC.
The construction of the RPC at Galang has facilitated and rationalised the orderly processing of Indo-Chinese refugees. Furthermore, its existence has encouraged the Indonesian Government to continue to grant temporary refuge to refugees arriving on its shores, thus removing the necessity of refugees attempting the difficult journey to Australia. Our support for the RPC has contributed to mutual co-operation between Australia and Indonesia on the refugee problem.
(5) Decisions on any refugees arriving in Australia without prior authority would be taken in the light of their particular circumstances and whether they were seeking, or were eligible for, entry to Australia or some other country.
Marketing and Sale of Land in the Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2099)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
In relation to the Government's decision to allow the private sector alone to market and sell residential and com merciaI land in the Australian Capital Territory-
(a) will public control of the development and growth of Canberra have pre-eminence over private sector development;
(b) where public and private sector competition arises over particular sections of land, what procedures exist for the resolution of confiict and what appeal mechanisms will apply; (c) how will land prices be determined:
(d) what steps will be taken to ensure that land speculation docs not occur in Canberra;
(e) what steps will be taken to ensure that new home buyers and ordinary families will be able to afford to buy land under the new arrangements;
(f) will steps be taken to prevent more than one block of land being bought by each person;

(g) what was the current average reserve price of blocks in each of he suburbs where land was offered for sale during April 1981 and what component of these average land prices covers the cost of the issue of plants and shrubs to new homes;
(h) will the price of land sold by private developers be reduced by the sum which formerly accounted for the cost of the issues of plants and shrubs;
(i) will land sold by private developers be subject to 99 year leases or will it be freehold;
U) which body will administer the new arrangements, how many staIT will be required to implement the new procedures and will the private sector pay the full cost of implementing the new procedures; if not, what will the cost be to the public;
(k) how many staIT have been retrenched by his Department in the transfer ofland sales to the private sector;
(I) will the full cost of land development already begun be recovered from the private sector; if so, what is the total value which will be returned to his Department and will these funds be committed to Australian Capital Territory projects;
(m) which body will be responsible for setting and supervising a code of standards for land developments; and
(n) will this body be provided with sufficient staff to ensure that high standards are maintained.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) The Commonwealth through the National Capital Development Commission and the Department of the Capital Territory will continue to control the form and timing of development in Canberra.
(b) In vicw of the Commonwealth's continuing role described above, competition between the public and private sector over particular sections of land cannot arise.
(c) Under the new arrangement land will continue to be offered, either at auction, or over the counter, at reserve prices fixed by the Department to ensure that costs are recovered.
(d) Under existing legislation, leases cannot be transferred until such time as development covenants requiring completion of buildings are satisfied. The legislation will continue to apply.
(e) No guarantees of this nature could ever be given but it should be noted that the right to fix reserve prices will be retained by the Commonwealth.
(f) There is no restriction at present on the number of blocks of land a person may purchase and generally this will not change. However, it is proposed that for a short period after each auction counter sales will be limited to one block per person.
(g) Gowrie-average reserve price $8752. Richardsol1average reserve price $9160. Wanniassa ~ ~avera!le reserve price $9500. Monash-average reserve price $11,448. Fadden-average reserve price $13,438.
The cost component of the free plant and shrub issue incorporated in the calculation of reserve prices was $14 per block.
(h) Yes.
(i) 99 year leases will continue to be available. The grant of freehold is expressly prohibited under the Seat of Government (Administration) Act 1910.
(j) The Department of the Captal Territory will administer the new arrangements. The staff that will he required and the costs involvedin implementing the new procedures cannot yet be identified.

Answers to Questions

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2851

(k) Kone,
(1) Reserve prices will be fixed to ensure that the full cost of land development is recoverd. The total amount that will be recovered is not known as the numbers of blocks already serviced that will pass to the private sector for sale cannot yet be identified. Any revenue from this source will continue to be paid into Consolidated Revenue,
(m) The National Capital Development Commission and the Department of the Capital Territory will continue to share this role,
(n) Yes,
Government Housing Construction Program, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2109)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) Is the Government housing administration and construction program to continue in the Australian Capital Territory,
(2) How many houses and fiats will be constructed in the next financial year and what funds will be made available for this purpose,
(3) Will his Department review the policy of applying market rents to Government housing in view of the large numbers of people who will face financial hardship as a result of cutbacks in the public service.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The government housing administration programme is to continue. Resumption of a government housing construction programme and the size of such a programme are matters for consideration in the budget context. In accordance with usual practice advice of the government's intentions are unlikely to be known until the forthcoming hudget is brought down.
(3) No. Tenants on low income can continue to seek assistance under the rental rebate scheme.
Dispersal of Funds, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2152)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
Who will determine the dispersal of funds collected from the amalgamated TAB, the Liquor Licensing Board and the Poker Machine Licensing Board in the Australian Capital Territory (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1842).
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Department of the Capital Territory is developing details for the amalgamation of the TAB and the Liquor Licensing and Poker Machine Licensing Boards. The question of who will determine the dispersal of funds from the composite body proposed will be resolved when administrative and financial arrangements have been worked out and amending legislation framed.
International Labour Organisation Convention: Aboriginal Employment
(Question No.2)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:

(1) Which Australian States have agreed to the ratification of International Labour Organisation Convention No. 65Penal Sanctions (Indigenous Workers), 1939.
(2) With reference to the answers to questions No. 874
(Hansard, 4 October 1977, page 1607), No. 1710 (Hansard, 8 November 1977, page 3163) and No. 136 (Hansard, 3 May
1978, page 1759), which State or Territory laws and practices relating to Aborigines do not yet comply with the requirements of the Convention.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Victoria.
(2) I am advised that there are no State or Territory laws and practices relating solely to Aborigines which do not comply with the requirements of the Convention. However, as has been indicated in replies to previous questions (Hansard, 4 October 1977, page 1607) there are laws which apply to Australian residents generally, including Aborigines, which appear to be inconsistent with the requirements of the Convention. The most recent available information indicates that there has been no further progress towards amendment of the legislation referred to previously.
It should be noted, however, that all States and the Northern Territory are of the view that their Aboriginal popUlations are not dependent indigenous populations within the meaning of the Convention. Against this background, it would appear that the provisions of Convention No. 65 are of limited, if any relevance, to Australia. It has not been the practice of Australian governments to ratify Conventions considered to be inapplicable to Australia.
International Labour Organisation Convention: Aboriginal Employment
(Question No.3)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Which Australian States have agreed to the ratification of International Labour Organisation Convention No. 64Contracts of Employment (Indigenous Workers), 1939.
(2) Can he say which State or Territory laws and practices relating to Aborigines do not yet comply with the requirements of the Convention.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Victoria and Tasmania.
(2) 1 am advised that there are no State or Territory laws and practices relating solely to Aborigines which do not comply with the requirements of the Convention.
I am informed that the Commonwealth-State Consultative machinery on ILO matters has determined that Convention No. 64 has limited application in Australia where the form of employment of indigenous workers is of a different kind from that which the Convention was intended to regulate. (The Convention was adopted to overcome abuses and exploitation found in contracts of employment that are not present in the Australian contexL) Further, all States and the Northern Territory have suggested that their Aboriginal populations are not dependent indigenous populations within the meaning of the Convention.

2852 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Answers to Questions

International Labour Organisation Convention: Aboriginal Employment
(Question No.4)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Which Australian States have agreed to the ratification of International Labour Organisation Convention No. 104Abolition of Penal Sanctions (Indigenous Workers), 1955.
(2) Can he say which State or Territory laws and practices relating to Aborigines do not yet comply with the requirements of the Convention.
MI' Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Victoria and Queensland.
(2) I am advised that there are no State or Territory laws and practices relating solely to Aborigines which do not comply with the requirements of ILO Convention No. 104. However, as has been indicated in replies to questions concerning the earlier adopted Convention on this matter (Hansard, 4 October 1977, page 1607) there are laws which apply to Australian residents generally, including Aboriginals, which appear to be inconsistent with the requirements of Convention No. 65-Penal Sanctions (Indigenous Workers), 1939; and which would also appear to be inconsistent with Convention No. 104.
The most recent available information indicates that there has been no further progress towards the amendment of this legislation. It should be noted, however, that all States and the Northern Territory have indicated that their Aboriginal popUlations are not dependent indigenous populations within the meaning of the Convention. Against this background, it would appear that the provisions of Convention No. 104 are of limited, if any relevance, to Australia. It has not been the practice of Australian governments to ratify Conventions considered to be inapplicable to Australia.
Commonwealth Car Drivers in Victoria
(Question No. 598)
Mr Bourchier asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that the Commonwealth car drivers in Victoria and elsewhere in the Commonwealth are not provided with air conditioning in their cars, except for the Ministerial fleet.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that the car driver's union, the Transport Workers' Union, has called on them to cease work when the temperature rises above 35 degrees C.
(3) Has this directive resulted in many lost hours during the extremely long summer experienced in Victoria this year.
(4) Would the installation of airconditioners enhance the resale valuc of the cars and would the Commonwealth recover almost all of the added expense incurred.
(5) Will he advise what action he proposes to take to ensure that all cars in the future will be supplied with air conditioning.
(6) Have the new Ford LTD six-cylinder cars supplied to the Canberra car fleet air conditioning units fitted.
(7) Will he advise if these vehicles are the standard production cars to be supplied throughout the Commonwealth.
(8) If no action is to be taken to ensure that all cars are supplied with air conditioning, will he agree to providing the same

amenity to all Members and Ministers by deleting air conditioning from all Commonwealth cars.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes, with the exception of one car-with-driver vehicle in Darwin provided with air conditioning in accordance with the criteria, approved by the Government in July 1979, for the air conditioning of Commonwealth motor vehicles. The LTD vehicles used in the Ministerial/VIP fleet have air conditioning as a standard fitting.
(2) Yes.
(3) Some 2,400 driver hours were lost in Victoria from I December 1980 due to stoppages called as a result of the union action referred to in part (2).
(4) The resale value of six-cylinder cars used in the Commonwealth car-with-driver fleet could increase by between $200 and $350, depending upon vehicle age at disposal, according to a recognised dealer's guide to vehicle values. The current tender prices for factory, installed air conditioning units in these cars varies from $500 to $570. Additional opcrating costs, mainly fuel, would also need to be taken into account.
(5) The Government decision in July 1979 establishing the criteria for aircondilioning of vehicles also required these criteria to be reviewed after two years.
(6) There are 62 new Ford LTD six-cylinder cars in the Canberra car fleet and they all have air conditioning units as a standard fitting. These vehicles were introduced in late 1980 and early 1981 as replacements for the 8 cylinder Ford LTD and Fairlane sedans, in the Ministerial/VIP fleet which also had air conditioning as a standard fitting.
(7) The six-cylinder Ford LTD car is the standard vehicle purchased for the Ministerial(VIP fleet but not for the remainder of the car-with-driver fieet.
(8) No.
Expo 88: Estimated Costs
(Question No. 606)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
What was the (a) highest and (b) lowest estimate of (i) total cost and (ii) net cost presented to the New South Wales and Commonwealth Governments for the proposed Expo 88.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following information in answer to the honourable member's question:
From information produced by a joint feasibility study, Commonwealth and New South Wales officials estimated the capital cost of staging a modified Universal Exposition at Darling Harbour, the preferred location, at slightly more than $1,OOOm in outturn prices, that is, the prices at the time when outlays were expected to occur. This figure included an allowance for cost overruns and an adjustment for interest charges. In the course of negotiations, a lower outturn estimate was presented to Commonwealth and State Governments. This, however, made no allowance for interest charges and included an unacceptable cost overruns provision. It assumed, moreover, a method of financing the Expo that did not commend itself to the Governments. Both 'outturn' figures were based on a single cost figure (1980 prices) resulting from the joint study. The feasibility study indicated a number of possible outcomes for operating costs and revenues, but suggested that Exposition revenues would differ by relatively little from operating, as distinct from capital, costs.

Answers to Questions

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2853

1988 Olympic Games
(Question No. 640)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 26 February 1981:
What was the (a) highest and (b) lowest estimate of (i) total and (ii) net cost presented to the Victorian and Commonwealth Governments for the 1988 Olympic Games if they were to be staged in Melbourne.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following information in answer to the honourable member's question:
Commonwealth and Victorian officials estimated the net cost of staging the Olympic Games in Melbourne in 1988, after making allowance for revenue, at about $1,750m in outturn prices, that is, the prices at the time when outlays were expected to occur. In arriving at this estimate, each year's estimated revenue was fully offset against that year's capital and operating costs. For the purposes of the exercise, net cost rather than total cost was the relevant consideration. The net cost figure included a probably conservative allowance for cost overruns and an adjustment for interest charges. A number of lower estimates was put forward from time to time. For several reasons, including differences in the coverage of costs, these cannot properly be compared with the $1,750m estimate quoted above.
Commonwealth Car Transport in Canberra
(Question No. 852)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
How many (a) Commonwealth cars and (b) Commonwealth car drivers are utilised in providing car transport in Canberra for all Ministers during each (i) Parliamentary sitting week and (ii) week that the Parliament that is not sitting..
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(i) During each week Parliament is sitting 21 vehicles and 21 drivers are used to provide Commonwealth car transport to Ministers on a first call basis. In addition, vehicles from the Ministerial/VIP fleet are made available on a specific request basis to the other five Ministers who have not sought a vehicle on a first call basis. Cars and drivers on first call arrangements are available for car pool duties when not required by the Minister.
(ii) During each week Parliament is not sitting the number of cars and drivers utilised in providing car transport for Ministers varies markedly from week to week depending upon whether or not Cabinet is meeting. It is estimated that over a

year an average of (a) six cars and (b) six drivers are utilised in providing car transport for Ministers during these weeks.
Passports
(Question No. 930)
Mr Mildren asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
(I) Is a long delay being experienced for passports at the Melbourne office of his Department.
(2) If so, is it a fact that the delays are the result of staff cutbacks in the Passport Section.
(3) What action will be taken to overcome these delays.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I ) Yes. The delay for applications lodged in person is 15 working days. The delay for applications lodged by mail is 25 working days.
(2) No. There have been no staff cutbacks in the Passport Office. The delays are due to a backlog of applications resulting from staff shortages due to resignations, to legitimate absences on recreation or sick leave and to an initial slow down of procedures on introduction of the new passport application form and measures to improve the security of passports.
(3) To overcome the delays temporary additional staff have been employed and additional overtime funds have been provided. Following a review of processing and issuing procedures by my Department and the Public Service Board new procedures have been introduced and others are planned which will further reduce the time involved in the processing of applications and issue of passports.
Appointments to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Housing and Construction
(Question No. 1025)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on I April 1981:
What are the (a) names, (b) dates and terms of appointment and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under his jurisdiction.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There are two statutory authorities under my jurisdiction: The Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation and The Housing Loans Insurance Corporation.
The names, dates and terms of appointment and salaries of persons appointed to those authorities are listed below:

Office
Director Assistant director Assistant director
Chairman Deputy chairman

Name

Date

Terms of

appointed appointment

D.G.Price RR Neal T.E.Lewis

Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation 18.4.75 30.7.76 20.7.78

7 year term 7 year term 7 year term

J. M. Fitzpatrick F. M. Blundell

Housing Loans Insurance Corporation 8.6.78 18.6.78

7 year term 7 year term

Annual salary $
44,495 44,304 44,304
44,304 35,250

Allowance per annum
$
2,800 1,400 1,400
1,400

2854 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Office

Name

Part time member Part time member Part time member

P.Pearson A. G. Shepherd S. W.Begg

Date

Terms of

appointed appointment

5.5.81 21.2.79 11.2.81

I year term
3 year term I year term

Annual salary
$ 4,300 4,300 4,300

Allowance per annum
$

Underspending of Estimates: Department of Housing and Construction
(Question No. IllS)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(I) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 350-Administrative and (b) 354-Home Savings Grants.
(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, 'Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos. I and 2) 1980-81 '; if so, what are the reasons.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) and (2) See the answer provided by the Minister for Finance to Question No. 1101 which appeared in Hansard of 13 May 1981, page 2374.
Departmental Air Travel: Department of Housing and Construction
(Question No. 1150)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(1) How many travel warrants have been issued for his Departmental officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80, and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The information requC!lted is not readily available from Departmental records. The gathering of it would require commitment of considerable resources that I would not regard as fruitful.
Disarmament
(Question No. 1199)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(l) Did the Prime Minister in his speech of 5 June 1978 to the United Nations encourage study of (a) the relationship between disarmament and development, (b) the idea of an Indian Ocean zone of peace and (c) better methods of disarmament monitoring.
(2) If so, will the Government (a) promote public discussion of these and other subjects vital to world prosperity and peace, including means for international conciliation and arbitration, and expend in this process at least as much as on the Advance Australia campaign or the campaign against the 35-hour week, and (b) issue an education kit on alternatives to the arms race, as it proposes to do on human rights.

(3) Does the Government accept that, in persuading the world that Australia wants equity, prosperity and peaceful self-determination for all, the Government must secure the rights of Aborigines as the record 1967 referendum result would permit.
(4) Will the Government send a delegate from each side of the Parliament to the special disarmament session of the UN in 1982.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) The Government recognises its responsibility to promote informed and constructive public discussion on international affairs, including the issues mentioned in the question. My Department produces publications detailing the Government's activities and attitudes in the foreign affairs field, and, on the specific subject of disarmament, arranges for wide distribution of the annual report of the Australian delegation to the Committee on Disarmament which is also presented to Parliament.
Given the Government's firm policy of limiting public expenditure, the reproduction of this material in an education kit would not be financially justifiable, since it is already available to educational institutes in other forms.
(3) The Government treats with the utmost gravity its obligations to secure on a basis of equality the rights of ail Australians, including Aboriginal Australians. Our commitment in this respect is independent of the wish to present Australia in the best light internationally. We will, of course, continue to be active in informing the international community on suitable occasions of the progress being made in overcoming the state of extreme disadvantage of Aboriginal Australians which has resulted from a history of neglect and injustice.
(4) The Government is aware of the interest shown by members of Parliament in attending a range of international conferences. The inclusion of Parliamentary observers in delegations to conferences depends on the nature and structures of such conferences as well as on the availability of funds. No decision has yet been taken on the composition of the Australian delegation to the United Nations General Assembly's Second Special Session on Disarmament, which is to be held in 1982.
Industrial Action: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 1363)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many officers or employees in his Department have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last 2 years.
(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.
(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.

Answers to Questions

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2855

(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) For the year ending 31 March 1980. There were 322 occurrences of officers on strike spread over five Regional Offices and twelve days. The actual number of officers involved in strike action was less than 322 as many officers were absent on more than one occasion.
(1) (b) For the year ending 31 March 1981. There were 593 occurrences of officers on strike spread over Central Office and six Regional Offices and 26 days. The actual number of officers involved in strike action was less than 593 as many officers were absent on more than one occasion.
(b) The only work restrictions related to a ban on the performance of overtime. During t'is ban, no officer of my Department was directed to perform overtime.
(2) 4,830 manhours.
(3) and (4) No.
Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1413)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) have any officers and employees of his Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that:
(1) Yes; nine.
(2)-

Division

Salary

Nature of outside employment

Third 1 officer
3 officers 2 officers 2 officers Fourth 1 officer

$

18,879
22,359 18,879 15,546

Temporary Graduate Administrative Officer, University of Queensland
Lecturer in Archives Administration, University of New South Wales

12,061 Horse racing

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following ans:wer to the honourable member's question:
Yes. Contracts exist for the removal and recycling of the bulk of the Department's paper waste.
Export Market Development Grants
(Question No. 1622)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many (a) Commonwealth and (b) State statutory authorities or (c) Commonwealth Government owned and (d) State Government owned companies received (i) Export Market Development Grants or (ii) Export Expansion Grants during 1979-80.
(2) What were the authorities or companies which received assistance and what sum did each receive.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) (i) 13, (ii) 5; (b) (i) 17, (ii) 9; (c) (i) nil, (ii) 1; (d) (i) none have been identified; (ii) none have been identified.
(2)-

EMDG

EEC

$

Commonwealth Statutory Authorities

Australian Apple and Pear Corporation . . . . .
Australian Broadcasting Commission
Australian Canned Fruits Board . . . . . . .
Australian Dairy Corporation
Australian Egg Board . . . Australian Honey Board
Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation
The Australian Shipping Commission
Australian Wheat Board
Australian Wine Board Australian Wool Corporation
Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Commission
Qantas Airways Ltd
Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation . . . . .
Trans Australia Airlines (Australian National Airlines Commission)

115,705 35,301 125,000 125,000 18,977 125,000 102,156 100,000 71,579
82,254 125,000 100,000
102,829

$
32,900 116,986
6,289 100,213 146,825

Total Commonwealth Statutory Authorities

1,228,801

403,213

Recycling of Paper: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1574)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Has any action been taken by the Department of National Development and Energy to re-cycle paper; if so, what action.

State Statutory Authorities

Australian Barley Board
The Barley Marketing Board The Cannery Board Central Queensland Grain
Sorghum Marketing Board
Committee of Direction of Fruit Marketing . . . .
The Cotton Marketing Board

13,507 12,214 70,558
5,991
431

624 23,331
74,295 512,626

2856 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Answers to Questions

The Flinders University of South Australia

The Grain Pool of WA

The Navy Bean Marketing

Board

.....

The Oilseeds Marketing Board for the State of NSW

Queensland Fish Board

South Australian Meat Corporation . . . . . . .

The Sugar Board

Tasmanian Film Corporation

University of Melbourne . .

University of Queensland

Western Australian Lamb Marketing Board

Western Australian Potato Marketing Board

Total State Statutory Authorities

EMDG
$
1,030 39,271
1,061
48,311 1,637
6,419 116,117
2,942 4,418 17,092
31,285
4,199

EEC $
103,188 6,950
132,948 163,975
27,327

376,483 1,045,264

Commonwealth Owned Companies Fawms and McAllan Pty Ltd

39,929

200-mile Fishing Zone
(Question No. 1639)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) Has consideration been given to the declaration of a 200-mile fishing zone for the Australian Antarctic Territory?
(2) If so, what decision was made and what was the reason for it?
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Consideration was given to the declaration of a 200nautical-mile fishing zone for the Australian Antarctic Territory at the time of the establishment of tbe Australian fishing zone in 1979.
(2) It was then decided to declare a fishing zone for all waters witbin 200 nautical miles of the Australian coast and the coast of each Australian territory, other than waters within the territorial limits of other countries. Thc zone was proclaimed and came into force on 1 November 1979, and included the waters off the Australian Antarctic Territory. However, against the background of the Antarctic Treaty, and Australia's involvement at that time in negotiations with other Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties for the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, the Government also decided to except the waters off the Australian Antarctic Territory from the Australian fishing zone. Accordingly by a further proclamation dated 2 November 1979 these waters were excepted from the fishing zone.
I refer the honourable member to the statement on this matter made in the House by the then Minister for Primary Industry, Mr Sinclair, on 25 September 1979, giving a detailed account of the establishment of the Australian fishing zone.

Passports
(Question No. 1641)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many instances of false or altered (a) Australian (b) foreign passports have been noted in each of the last 3 years.
(2) Is action being taken to reduce theseabuses; if so, what action.
(3) Are all cases of altered or false passports referred to the Australian Federal Police for pr()Secution; if not, which cases are not referred.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) My Department does not maintain statistics offalse or altered Australian passports that come to its notice. Unless there is a demonstrated need for the information requested by the honourable member, I could not justify the use of the extcnsive resources that would be required to extract it.
(b) This question is a matter for my colleague the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. Inquiries have revealed, however, that the situation -in respect of false or altered foreign passports is the same as in 1 (a).
(2) New procedures have been implemented which make falsification and forgery of Australian passports more difficult and more readily detectable. These procedures were announced by me in a news release of 11 December 1980. For the benefit of the honourable member, the following is an extract from that news release:
From I January 1981, a specially designed security film will be laminated ovcr the photograph and signature of the bearer on page 2 of the passport.
The transparent retro-reflective film is designed to reduce significantly the possibility of forgery and to increase the chances of detection of unauthorised alterations or substitutions.
The passport application form has been redesigned to make it simpler to complete and to include a removable signature label which, when affixed and laminated to the passport, cannot be removed without being destroyed or irreparably damaged.
I would like to add that my Department has, with the cooperation of the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, set up a computerised passport recording system. All passports are recorded on the system. When lost or stolen passports are reported, appropriate entries arc made on the computer system and aid in the detection of malpractices.
(3) All cases of false or altered Australian passports are referred to the Australian Federal Police for investigation. Upon receipt of a report from the Australian Federal Police, my Department refers the findings to the Crown Solicitor for an opinion as to whether or not a prosecution should be launched.
Local Government Authorities: Breaches of Awards
(Question No. 1653)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many breaches of awards were reported by arbitration inspectors inspecting local government authorities in Western Australia during 1979-80.

Answers to Questions

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2857

(2) What was the number and nature of breaches by each local government authority and what action was taken in respect of the breaches.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) The Director of the Industrial Relations Bureau has advised that Bureau inspectors detected 32 breaches of the Local Government Officers (Western Australia) Award, 1975 during 1979-80 as follows:

Authority

Monetary breaches

Nonmonetary breaches

Cottesloe Town Council

1

Wyndam East Kimberley Shire

2

Shire of Roebourne/Karratha

1

Subiaco City Council

1

Shire of Exmouth

1

Mandurah Shire Council

1

Shire of Bayswater

8

8

Kellerberrin Shire Council

2

2

Esperance Shire Council

1

1

Greenough Shire Council

1

All breaches were voluntarily rectified by the authorities.

Overtime Payments to Electorate Secretaries
(Question No. 1756)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) What was the total sum paid for overtime to electorate secretaries and research/electorate assistants of Senators and Members in 1979-80.

(2) What was the highest sum paid during this period to any individual employee.
(3) How many of the employees did not receive any overtime during the year.
(4) Are changes proposed to the current arrangement; if so, what changes.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) $143,398.78
(2) $6,315.28
(3) 174 of 308 available positions.
(4) The use of overtime by the staff of Senators and Members is closely monitored to ensure that claims accord with the procedural rules laid down. To date, it has not been considered necessary to frame proposals to exert tighter control.
Australian Capital Territory Forestry Trust Account
(Question No. 1836)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
What transactions took place in the Australian Capital Territory Forestry Trust Account during (a) 1978-79 and (b) 1979-80.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The major cash transactions were:

(a) 1978-79

(b) 1979-80

Expenditure Salaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . Wages . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Payments to contractors . . . . . . . . Orders for planting, pruning, thinning, fuel, etc. New plant and equipment . . . . . . . Repairs and maintenance to plant and equipment
Receipts Sale of timber . . . . . . . . . . . Miscellaneous-cottage rents, sale of Christmas trees, etc.
Appropriation-plant and equipment . . . . . .

$
398,420 983,813 1,902,852 704,033 215,597 118,555
3,561,176 61,587
244,000

$
452,959 1,027,615 2,677,148
418,516 *98,629 135,332
t4,199,643 99,806
244,000

* Orders have been placed but funds have not been committed
t Book sales of $4.44m occurred, balance of monies not received into account

Industrial Electricity Prices
(Question No. 1927)
Mr Howe asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :

(2) If so, is he able to say whether these prices relate to all industrial institutions.
(3) Is he also able to say whether the respective State Governments will be providing highly subsidised electricity prices to large scale industrial users, particularly the aluminium industry. .
(4) If so, will large scale subsidies go to those industries which provide limited employment opportunities.

(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to a finding of the N.V.S. International Pty Ltd study that industrial electricity prices have risen faster than inflation in most Australian capital cities.

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

2858 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(1) I have noted references to a survey by National Utility Services International Pty Ltd on increases in industrial electricity charges.
(2) While the study concludes that average charges have risen faster than inflation, it also notes that for some tariffs, and at some locations, increases were at lower rates. In general, however, the survey conclusions point accurately to the present rising trends in industrial electricity costs.
(3) Responsibility for setting electricity tariffs lies with State Governments and their respective supply authorities. The New South Wales Minister for Industrial Relations and Energy and the Queensland Minister for Mines and Energy have stated that there will be no subsidising of the price of electricity to aluminium smelters in their States by other users. The Victorian Premier has announced that there will be no pricing subsidy for the aluminium smelter at Portland other than the rebate for Alcoa for 10 years on the SECV turnover tax, currently 5.5 per cent.
(4) See answer to (3).
Malan Aboriginal Community: Water Supply Installation
(Question No. 1989)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 29 April 1981 :
(1) Is his Department involved in the installation of a water supply system to the Malan Aboriginal Community on the Lake Gregory pastorallease in the Kimberley Region, WA.
(2) What funds were made available for this water supply installation and when were the funds released to his Department.
(3) When was the installation commenced and by whom was it commenced.
(4) What Aboriginal labour is involved in the installation project.
(5) Is the water tank to be connected to this water supply system: if so, when.
(6) What is the storage capacity of the tank involved in the system.
(7) What will be the service capacity of the system when completed, and how many housing units and ablution facilities will be provided with water.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) $24,950 in December 1979 and $7,620 in February 1981.
(3) In June 1980 by Kimberley Drillers.
(4) A sub-contract was awarded to the Balgo Mission who provided Aboriginal labour.
(5) Yes. Both the existing water tank and a new tank will be connected to the reticulation system by July 1981.
(6) The existing tank has a capacity of approximately 9 kilolitres. The new tank will have a capacity of 22.5 kilolitres.
(7) Approximately 31.5 kilolitres. The system will be connected to two ablution and three housing units.
Aboriginal Housing Funds
(Question No. 1990)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 29 April 1981;

(I) Does his Department receive directly from the Department of Aboriginal Affairs' housing budget funds that have been allocated to and accepted by Aboriginal communities.
(2) Does his Department provide for those communities and for the Department of Aboriginal Affairs quarterly financial and physical progress reports on the use of these funds.
(3) If his Department does not already provide such reports will he ensure that his Department provides these reports in future.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1 ) Yes in some instances. Arrangements for management of housing funds vary to suit the needs of individual communities. Most communities directly control funds allocated to them and make contract payments on receipt of a valuation certificate from the Department of Housing and Construction or other consultant. When authorised by a community the Department of Aboriginal Affairs provides funds directly to the Department of Housing and Construction.
(2) Reports are made to the Department of Aboriginal Affairs or to a community depending on the source of funds.
(3) Reports similar to those provided to the Department of Aboriginal Affairs will also be given to communities unless they request otherwise.
Aboriginal Housing Program at Balgo Mission, Western Australia
(Question No. 1991)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:
(I) For how many years has his Department been involved in the Aboriginal housing program at the Balgo Mission, Western Australia.
(2) Prior to his Department's involvement, what o!ganisation received the housing funds for the Balgo commumty and what organisation used the funds in the building program then.
(3) How many homes for Aboriginal people were constructed prior to his Department's involvement in Balgo.
(4) Has his Department calculated the cost of these houses; if so, what was the total cost of the housing program prior to his Department's involvement.
(5) Will he supply a breakdown of the total figure into (a) labour and (b) capital costs.
(6) What capital items were purchased from these housing project funds.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Approximately four years commencing in 1977.
(2) The Balgo Aboriginal Housing Association.
(3) Seven.
(4) No.
(5) No records are available to the Department to establish costs prior to 1977.
(6) No records identifying capital items purchased from housing project funds prior to 1977 are available to the Department.

Answers to Questions

28 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2859

Housing Program at Balgo Mission, Western Australia
(Question No. 1992)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 29 April 1981 :
(1) How many homes have been built by his Department at Balgo Mission, Western Australia.
(2) In what years were these houses built and how many homes were built in each of these years.
(3) What has been the total cost of the housing program at Balgo since the involvement of his Department.
(4) What was the average cost of a house in each year in which his Department has been involved.
(5) Will he supply a breakdown of the figures for each house into (a) labour and (b) capital costs.
(6) What capital items have been purchased from these housing funds.
(7) Have capital items been utilised that were originally purchased from funds for the housing budget of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs prior to the involvement of his Department.
Mr MeVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Seven.
(2) Three in 1979-80; fourin 1980-81.
(3) $378,000.
(4) $50,000 each in 1979-80 and $57,000 each in 1980-81.
(5) (a) 1979-80-$23,000; 1980-81-$28,500 (estimated); (b) 1979-80-$27,000; 1980-81-$28,500 (estimated).
(6) Scaffolding and minor hand tools such as screwdrivers, measuring tapes, paint brushes, drill bits at a total cost of $677.
(7) Yes, on a hire basis as required.

Housing Program at Warmun Community, Turkey Creek, Western Australia

(Question No. 2019)

Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 30 April 1981 :

Further to the answer to my Question No. 1063 (Hansard, 29 April 1981, p. 1793) will he provide a further breakdown of the costs involved in the housing units being built in the program managed by his Department on behalf of, and in cooperation with, the Warmun Community at Turkey Creek, Western Australia, indicating the (a) materials used, (b) subcontractors involved, (c) sum paid to each sub-contractor and (d) specific administration costs involved in the construction of each unit.

Mr MeVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(a) Materials used and costs inclusive of transport to the site are:

$

Cement, steel mesh and polythene . .
Steel frames
Wall and ceiling sheeting, roofing and plumbing materials
Doors and windows

625 1,445
1,570 325

Scaffolding, storage and minor hand tools
Miscellaneous items Transport and handling charges
Allowance for materials still to be purchased and transported to the site . . . . . . . .

$
300 150 1,600
2,185 (estimated) 8,200

(b) (i) H. I. Young (ii) Hejeko Pty Ltd (iii) Department of Housing and Construction labour (iv) Community labour (v) Plumbing sub-contract yet to be awarded.
(c) Sums paid or to be paid: (i) H. I. Young-$380 per unit (ii) HejekoPty Ltd-$I,OOOperunit (iii) Department of Housing and Construction -$1,620perunit
(iv) Community labour-$4,600 per unit (v) Plumbing sub-contract-$I,OOO per unit
(estimated). (d) $1,200 per unit inclusive of administration, supervision and travelling costs.
Northern Territory Disabled Persons: Department of Housing and Construction
(Question No. 2057)
Mr Tambling asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) What financial appropriations have been allocated by his Department for use in the Northern Territory for projects to assist the disabled during 1980-81.
(2) For what specific projects has this sum been allocated.
Mr MeVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No special allocation of funds has been made by the Department of Housing and Construction for use in the Northern Territory on projects to assist disabled people during 1980-81.
One of the Department's major activities in support of the International Year of Disabled Persons 1981 is the survey of some 500 Commonwealth-owned and leased buildings throughout Australia to assess their accessibility and use by disab led people.
In the Northern Territory, eleven buildings accommodating Commonwealth Offices used extensively by the public, including airport terminals, were recently surveyed in Darwin, Katherine, Tennant Creek and Alice Springs.
The results of the survey are at present being documented for inclusion in future programs of access modification works.
(2) There are no specific projects identified for 1980-81.
Department of Social Security: Buranda Regional Office, Queensland
(Question No. 2263)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister, representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:

2860 REPRESENTATIVES 28 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(1) Is it a fact that the Department of Social Security counter staff will shortly be required to undergo 26 hours of training before the introduction of a National Benefit Scheme.
(2) Did the Minister state in reply to my question No. 369 that the Buranda Regional Office, Queensland, had suffered staff cutbacks of 7 positions on 4 September 1980 and a further 7 on 22 October 1980.
(3) Have a further 4 positions at this office been abolished recenlly.
(4) What arrangements have been made to supply back-up and replacement staff when the proposed training referred to. in part (1) is being undertaken.
Mi' Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(1) Although details are yet to be finalised, the level of training for Social Security counter staff prior to the introduction of a revised computer system for processing Unemployment, Sickness and Special Benefit payments (known as the National Benefits System) is estimated at a minimum of one hour and a maximum of three hours for each counter officer.
(2) Yes.
(3) A recent examination of all Queensland regional offices, aimed at determining the most equitablc distribution of staffing resources and maintenance of an acceptable level of service to the public, identified certain positions that could be redeployed to eliminate unacceptable shortfalls that had arisen in other areas.
Four such positions were identified in the Buranda regional office. Three positions will be withdrawn shortly with the fourth subject to further consideration.
(4) In view of the minimal training requirements for counter staff prior to the introduction of the National Benefits System, training will be conducted either in the course of normal duties or if necessary through use of overtime.


