House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 125, 1981 Thursday, 29 October 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Petitions

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2665

Thursday, 29 October 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon.- ~ir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10 a.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the proposed sales tax of 2.5% on books, magazines and newspapers represents a tax on knowledge which should not be contemplated in a civilised country. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the proposed sales tax be withdrawn from the budget proposals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley, Mr Campbell and Mr Rocher.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government's decision to impose a tax on books, magazines and newspapers is abhorrent to the notion of the right to information, and that no such tax is levied on any other country with which Australia is usually compared.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will withdraw its announced intention to impose a sales tax on books, magazines and newspapers.
And your petitioners as induty bound will ever pray.
byMrMoore.
Petition received.
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That Librarians and library users throughout the nation call for the exemption of books, periodicals and newspapers from the imposition of sales taxes.
The tax exempt status of libraries and school will not protect them from general cost increases which sales tax and its collection will cause. Indeed, exemption claims on millions of items per year will themselves add to the cost burden of both libraries and suppliers.
This tax is socially injurious and unworkable, and a burden on education, science and culture. Your petitioners therefore pray that your honourable House will exempt books, periodicals including newspapers from the proposed sales tax.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrUren.
Petition received.

Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. the automobile products industry is vital to the livelihood and well being of many thousands of Australian workers and their families.
2. if imported automotive prod'ucts are allowed to flow freely into the Australian market it will deprive over 100,000 workers in the industry of their work opportunities.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament recognise the rights of Australian workers in this industry and that proposals to reduce the level of protection in the future be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent, Mr Milton and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembed. This petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Burke respectfully showeth that:
I. The automotive products industry is vital to the livelihood and well being of many thousands of Australian workers and their families.
2. If imported automotive products are allowed to flow freely into the Australian market it will deprive over 100,000 workers in the industry of their work opportunities.--
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament recognise the rights of Australian workers in this industry and that proposals to reduce the level of protection in the future be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Theophanous.
Petition received.
Aboriginal Land Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the projected repeal by the Queensland State Government of the Aborigine Act 1971-1979 and the Torres Strait Islander Act 1971-1979 will almost certainly lead to the degazettal of all Aboriginal reserves in Queensland, as has already been the case with Aurukun and Mornington Island.
That if, as is likely, the Aboriginal communities from these reserves are placed under similar shire council legislation on fifty year leases, they will be exposed to serious encroachment on their land by mining and tourist interests.
That it is also quite clear, on past evidence, that these interests will have the full backing of the Queensland Government and the rights of Aboriginal people to land rights and self-management will not be granted by that Government.
That the Commonwealth Government has the power to legislate and acquire land for AboriginaLpeople under its constitutional powers since the amendments to the Constitution in 1967, but it is your petitioners' sincere belief that it failed to act in 1978 and thus, failed in its duty before the people of Aurukun and Mornington Island.

2666 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Petitions

That the Aboriginal people of Queensland have stated that they wantland rights and self-management.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government make use of its constitutional and legislative powers to grant full land rights and self-management to the Aboriginal people of Queensland.
And your petitioners as in cluty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley and Mr Dawkins.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That the Government's sales tax legislation imposes an unreasonable burden on the community generally, especially pensioners, families, those in receipt of smaller incomes and small businesses.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will withdraw or repeal its sales tax legislation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cross.
Petition received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. The Government proposes to impose a sales tax of l7t per cent on manufactured pet foods which were previously exempt.
2. That this new tax will impose an unreasonable burden on pet owners, many of whom are pensioners and citizens in receipt of a small income.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will withdraw or repeal its sales tax legislation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrCross.
Petition received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To-the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens showeth that:
We wish to protest on a non-party political basis against the 2t per cent increase in sales tax because:
(1) it is inHationary;
(2) it will be a further imposition on families, pensioners and small business organizations;
(3) it will be an issidious tax on education.
We wish to inform our political representatives that we will be forced at the next election to vote against all those who do not speak and vote against the increase.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Groom.
Petition received.

Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is increasing Interest Rates on Home Mortgage Loans without due concern for its impact on the general community and ask that the Government re-consider its attitude to Low and Middle income earners.
Your Petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert any further effects of increases in interest rates on Home Mortgage Loans which cause Financial, Social and Psychological pressures on families.
And your petitioners as in duty bound wilfever pray.
by MrDuffy.
Petition received.

Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not protecting family home buyers from the severe effects of increased and increasing rates by interest on home mortgage loans.
Your Petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action through tax relief and other measures to avert any further effects of increases in interest rates on home mortgage loans which cause detrimental financial, social and psychologrcal pressures on families, and in many cases, positive hardship.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Peacock.
Petition received.

Food Aid to Polish Government

To the .Rt. Honourable the Speaker and members of the

House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The pet-

ition of. the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully

showeth that recent events in Poland are of such seriousness

as to justify Australia's direct involvement in attempts to re-

lieve tension there.

.

Your Petitioners note that food shortages are a major cause of civil unrest.

Your Petitioners, further note that Australia has the capacity to make direct donations of food at short notice.

Your Petitioners, therefore humbly pray;

That the Federal Government make the Polish Government an immediate and substantial offer of food aid.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Beazley.

Petition received.

Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
That we request that the Government take immediate steps to relieve us of the burden of increasing mortgage costs resulting from increasing home loan interest rates.
We find that the resultant increases in our mortgage payments have unduly caused a reduction in our standard of

Petitions

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2667

living, reflected in the severe difficulty we are experiencing meeting our household budgetary commitments.
Your Petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should-
Amend the relevant taxation Acts to provide for deduction of home loan interest payments with the necessary adjustments to P.A.Y.E. deductions to give immediate relief to home buyers.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not fulfilling its responsibility in ensuring an adequate standard of living for all Australians, which is causing untold hardship on relief agencies' limited resources, and require the following steps to be taken as a maller of urgency:
I. That the Commonwealth Government raise the level of all pensions and benefits at least to the poverty line.
2. That the Commonwealth Government reconsider its recent decisions in relation to the health System and cuts to Commonwealth activity.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert further poverty and suffering in our community by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles.
Petition received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the proposed changes to assistance to the passenger motor vehicle and components industries after 1984 shall lead to the collapse of the vehicle manufacturing industry in Australia. Your petitioners therefore pray that the Industries Assistance Commission report be not given effect.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles.
Petition received.
Defence Service Home Loans
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That members of the Women's Services of the 1939-45 War not at present considered eligible for Defence Service Home Loans should qualify as 'Australian Soldiers' under the Defence Service Homes Act. They volunteered for service with the Naval, Military and Air Forces, serving wherever they were sent in whatever capacity they were required and yet are refused Defence Service Home Loans.
They took the oath to resist His Majesty's enemies which meant to fight His Majesty's enemies, and although not used in actual combat in war zones, they were available for that use

and had a sufficiently grave need arisen would have been used, to serve with distinction as have women of other lands.
In accordance with the Acts and Regulations of the period, the women of the Military Forces had enlistedror service anywhere, some of the Naval women were to sail in any waters, other with service on warships optional, while the women of the Airforce could have been sent to Papua New Guinea or other territories under the control or care of Australia.
Ex-servicemen of the Royal Australian Navy, the Australian Imperial Force and the Royal Australian Air Force who volunteered in the 1939-45 War but were not sent to War Zones are granted home loans. Not to grant eligibility to all Ex-servicewomen of 1939-45 War is unjust and unfair.
YOUr petitioners therefore humbly pray that you favourably consider amending the Defence Service Homes Act by repealing Sub-section 4 (2A) (b) (c) (d) of the Principal Act as amended by No. 137 of 1978, and grant eligibility to all members of the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service, the Australian Women's Army Service, the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force, the Australian Army Medical Women's Service, and the VoluntaryAid Detachment of 1939-45 War.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles.
Petition received.

Plant Variety Rights

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of
Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth Government:

I. Note that legislation establishing plant vllriety rights in other countries has had adverse effects, namely:

(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has

passed into the hands of a few large international

corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights

over plant genetic materials created by such

legislation. (b) The varieties of seeds availablehave been restricted

mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and

will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilizers and

pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without

regard for the interests of growers and cons.umers.

(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, render-

ing them vulnerable to. disease and other 'erivironmen-

Wili~~

..

2. Recognise that maintenance of the genetic diversity of

plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the

Australian nation, and take 'all necessary steps to preserve and

promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to pre-

vent exclusive control over plant malerial from falling into

private hands.

.....

3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seen companiesa(ld their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate fOf the establishment of plant variety rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Dobie. Petition received.

Narellan House, Australian Capital Territory
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled; the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

2668 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Petitions

That the lease on Narellan House is due to be handed back to the Department of the Capital Territory on 4 December 1981.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that Members should:
Act to lease Narellan House to the Canberra College of Technical and Further Education so that Narellan House will remain as a student residence.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fry.
Petition received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens showeth that:
We call on you to support the Senate's requested amendments to the Sales Tax Bill concerning such essential items as clothing, footwear, building materials, wrappings, newspapers, magazines and books.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Groom.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament as assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia who respectfully showeth their anger and condemnation at the Fraser Government's decision to abolish all Community Support Schemes on 31 st October 1981.
Further they denounce the decision for the disastrous effects it will have on growing numbers of unemployed young people around Australia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government immedIately and fully reverse its decision and restore complete funding to the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howard.
Petition received.
Epping North Post Office
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the Non-Official Post Office at Epping North is under threat of closure and the Postmaster, Mr R. Rowley, has been told by Australia Post that if he retires in order to transfer the office to another person, that the office would be closed. He has also been informed that even if he remains as Postmaster the matter of closure will be reviewed in twelve month's time.
We submit that the office has been serving a community need for many years. The area is in a cul-de-sac so that the residents only alternative would be to travel three kilometres by bus to the nearest Post Office at Epping. At least four schools in the area use the office for banking and the office is not far from the group of small shops used by the community who would be inconvenienced by the loss of postal and banking facilities. There are many pensioners in the area using the Post Office and plans have been approved for a hostel to be built nearby to house 100 aged people who would certainly require an accessible Post Office.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Epping North Post Office be retained and that the office be reclassified as one to remain in the Post Office Network.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howard.
Petition received.
La Boite Theatre, Brisbane
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. The decision by the Australia Council to discontinue the General Grant of $20,000 (which is in the nature of recurrent funding) to La Boite Theatre, Brisbane, will jeopardise the continued viability of the theatre, and in particular, the Main House Theatre; Adult Theatre Workshops; Youth Theatre activities and the existence of the professional core of the theatre.
2. The decision has been taken without sufficient consultation and without giving sufficient notice to La Boite Administration.
3. The absence of Federal Government funding will mean the loss to Brisbane of genuine community-oriented and community-based projects and of the regular presentation of Australian plays.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to cause the Theatre Board's General Grant of $20,000 to La Boite Theatre to be reinstated without delay.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Eagle Farm Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth:
(a) That residents of densely populated suburbs in the vicinity of the airport and residents of other suburbs in the Right path of international and domestic jets are experiencing an unreasonable degree of aircraft noise.
(b) Further, that these same residents will be subjected to prolonged bouts of such aircraft noise if a decision is taken to extend the curfew at both the domestic and international airports.
(c) That this decision has been foreshadowed on two occasions as follows:
(i) In Submissions to the Public Hearing held by the Public Works Committee of this Parliament in regard to Stage One-Redevelopment of Brisbane's International Airport; these submissions proposed an extension of the existing curfew when the new runway is completed (approx. 1986). This proposal received the full support of the Queensland Government.
(ii) TAA's request for an extended curfew to coincide with the introduction of the Airbus.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will refuse to extend the existing curfew and will reconsider its siting plans for the proposed new runway so as "to minimise noise pollution over high density suburbs.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Petitions

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2669

Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:

(c) It abandons means testing and the re-introduction of charges at public hospitals which will severely disadvantage low and middle income groups.
(d) Every effort will be made to meet the health care needs and demands of the Australian community.

That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by . the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free

Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled will give earnest consideration to this most vital matter.

public hospital care;

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programs will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a system of health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need. .
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Jenkins.
Petition received.

by Mr Barry Jones.
Petition received.
Trans Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of.the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.

Taxation and Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
We, the people who have signed this petition ask all parties, Labor, Liberal, Democrats and others, to stop the latest increase in taxes and the Forever increases in taxes which hit all people of the country of Australia in all goods and consumer goods and we call for a referendum on taxes and interest rates.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Jenkins.
Petition received.

Sale of Trans Australia Airlines would inevitably result in-
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.

Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
There is an urgent need For the provision of Australia Post facilities in the area of West Sunshine and your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will do whatever it can to assist in this matter.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Barry Jones.
Petition received.

Rights of Disabled
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. The failure of the Federal Government to seek inFormation from the census re disabled people-i.e., partial or total disability-to enable For adequate planning of, and For, types of services needed by disabled people to be undertaken.
2. The failure of the Federal Government to lead the way in employment of disabled people by employing a greater number of such people within the Commonwealth Public Service-note the small number currently employed within the Service.

Health Care Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully request that the Federal Government ensures that:
(a) It honours its 1975 election promise to maintain Medibank-a Free, universal health insurance scheme, and instigate methods of improving hospital and health services for the Australian people.-
(b) The community health programme remains a Federal Government responsibility, with increased Funding and expansion of services.

3. The wastage of the Federal Government funds perpetuating large, bureaucratic institutions and organisations where there are often few disabled people on their boards and litt1e emphasis is placed on consumer participation in decision making.
4. The failure of the Federal Government to encourage independence of disabled people, or to develop "normalised" support systems-attendant care.
5. The failure of the Federal Government to provide "non institutionalised" specialised accommodation for those people who would not be able to benefit from, or cope with at' tendant care.
6. Failure by the Federal Government to alter, or create a "disability" allowance means test Free For all disabled

2670 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Petitions

people-this would assist with necessary equipment and mobility costs.
7. Failure to provide a nation'al compensation scheme thus saving time and enabling people to be automatically covered in the event of a disability.
8. Failure by the Federal Government to abolish tariffs on all equipment available to the disabled-e.g. Optacon.
9. Mismanagement of Federal l.Y.D.P. Funds-e.g. nonreceipt by some States of funds through unresolved negotiations.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that immediate action be taken to remedy the above stated and that the Federal Government recognise that disabled people are citizens who should have equal rights.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
This humble petition of citizens of this country are concerned with increased house interest rates and that this Government has not taken action to peg increases in such rates. We ask that the Government establish a maximum fixed
interest rate on a First Mortage that would cover the entire
period of time for which the loan is taken out. The rate of interest to be set at the time of signing the contract.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scott.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble' petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Mitchell respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of RAAF. Richmond 2755 post office places in jeopardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cadman.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the. Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Kalgoorlie respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of Southern Cross 6426 post"office places in jeopardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Bennelong respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of Hunters Hill post office places in jeopardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howard.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Calare respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of a post office places in jeopardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Aus~ tralian Postal Commission laking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.
And your' petitioners as induty bound will ever pray.
by Mr MacKenzie.
Petition received.
Australian Broadcasting Commission: Melbourne Showband
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the Australian Parliament as in Parliament assembled. The. humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth that:
As regular viewers and listeners of the ABC Medbourne Showband we were disappointed to learn of the dismissal of seventeen members of this outstanding orchestra.
We have had a great deal of pleasure over the past eight years viewing and listening to this band's fine music. It is the only full-time light orchestra in Australia and we are disgusted to think that such talented musicians should be dismissed in this manner.
We therefore call on the Federal Government to rescind this decision and make more money available for the continuance of the full Showband.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles.
Petition received.
Education.
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the

Petitions

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2671

undersigned members of parents and citizens associations respectfully showeth:
That retention of the Schools Commission and the Curriculum Development Centre in their present forms is essential for the balanced and progressive allocation of educational resources and facilities in the Australian community.
That serious concern has been generated by the decision within the Schools Commission guidelines, to cut funds to the general recurrent and capital programs by reallocation to transition, the decision not to 'implement the school improvement program; and the diviseness created between government and non-government schools due to increases of $43.25 million to non-government schools while government schools funds have not been increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray: That the Government will reverse these decisions~will retain the Schools Commission and Curriculum Development Centre in their original forms; retain the schools commission proposals including recurrent and capital funding proposals; basket of services and the schools improvement program.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrCross.
Petition received.
Multicultural Television: Australian Capital Territory
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
We, the undersigned residents of the ACT, request that multicultural TV, be introduced in the ACT as soon as possible keeping in view that~
I. The ACT is the capital of Australia 2. The television signal already comes through Canberra 3. The multicultural nature of the population of Canberra
makes it highly desirable.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFry.
Petition received.
Housing Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Ballarat respectfully showeth:
I. That the proposed imposition of 2% sales tax to building materials will have a disastrous effect on the already seriously depressed industry.
2. That the latest interest rate rise of I% to home mortgages will now end the hopes of many intending first home buyers. We believe the Federal Government must initiate a scheme of assistance to first home buyers, as proposed by building industry representatives.
In conclusion we reject the Federal Government's lack of genuine interest in the home industry. We also clearly state that the effects of points I & 2 above are not acceptable to us.
Your petitioners humbly pray that the Government give immediate attention to an already seriously depressed industry.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mildren.
Petition received.

Nuclear Power
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble 'petition of the undersigned citizens of Ballarat respectfully showeth that Australia be recognised as nonsupportive of the neutron bomb and nuclear power generally.
Your petitioners humbly pray that the Government of Australia clearly states the policy of non-support for the neutron bomb and nuclear power.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mildren.
Petition received.
Institute of Early Childhood Development
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of Citizens in Victoria showeth that at a general meeting concern was expressed as to the necessity to retain the Institute of Early Childhood Development as an autonomous institution.
Your petitioners therefore pray that you would make note of the following resolution passed at a public meeting held in Melbourne on 12th August, 1981:
"We request that the Federal Government continue funding the Institute of Early Childhood Development as an autonomous specialist institution recognizing that it is unique in its capacity to serve the needs of the early childhood field in Victoria and throughout Australia."
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Theophanous.
Petition received.
AIS KWINANA STEEL OPERATION
Notice of Motion
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That the House calls on the Government to--
(l) take urgent action to prevent the closure of the AlS Kwinana steel operation and the consequent retrenchment of 700 workers; and
(2) report to the House on what action-
(a) it has taken or intends to take to assist AIS to find alternative markets for its product, and
(b) ;t intends to take to require an expansion of secondary processing of Australian mineral output in order to provide continuing employment for these workers.
BARRIER INDUSTRIAL COUNCIL
Notice of Motion
Mr CONNOLLY (Bradfield)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That the House-
(l) notes the decision of the Supreme Court of New South Wales to award Mr Noel Latham $110,000 damages resulting out of his dispute with the Barrier Industrial Council of Broken Hill,
(2) reaffirms the right of every individual worker to offer his services to his employer free from the fear of trade union action against him, and

2672 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Questions Without Notice

(3) c?mmends ~he honou~able member for Phillip, Mr BIrney, for hIS courage In supporting Mr Latham at the time of his victimisation by sections of the trade union movement at Broken Hill.
QANTAS AIRWAYS LTD
Notice of Motion
Mr MORRIS (Shortland}-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
This house deplores the failure of the Minister for Transport to table the 1980-81 Annual Report of Qantas Airways Ltd, some seven months having elapsed since the financial year of the airline concluded.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
SALES TAX
Mr WILLIS-I address my question to the Treasurer. I remind the Treasurer of his statements on several occasions during the debate on the proposed imposition of sales tax on previously untaxed items that this measure was an integral part of the Budget and essential to the Budget strategy. In view of these statements, how is he now able to forgo 60 per cent of projected revenue ~ro~ this source this financial year? Is he now saymg It was only $53m that was essential to the Budget strategy rather than the $132m he expected to raise this year? If not, will he be atte~pting to make up the loss of $79m by raising additIOnal revenue elsewhere or, by forgoing such revenue, is he now introducing some change in the Budget strategy?
Mr HOWARD-I have already told the House of the reasons why the Government has decided that the commencement date of the sales tax legislation will be 29 March. They are very good and practical reasons, governed by the fact that, until this Parliament has passed that legislation, it would be a contempt of the Parliament on the part of the Executive to act as though the legislation had in fact been passed. In no way does the deferment of the commencement date alter the integral role of the sales tax measures as part of the overall Budget strategy. The full year gain of the broadening of the taxation base will be preserved and, in a total revenue collection approaching $40,000m, it has been suggested that the deferment for a period of only three months of the collection of $79m represents a fundamental deferment. The argument of the Opposition was that it should be totally abandoned. That was the Opposition argument; it was not an argument about deferment. The Opposition does not even remember its own argument. Its own argument was that we should totally abandon it, not that we should defer it. The Opposition has totally contradicted its own argument.

JOB WEEK '81 CAMPAIGN
Mr RUDDOCK-I ask the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs whether there is any sign of community support for his Department's Job Week '81 campaign and the associated media efforts being made this week to identify job opportunities for young people.
Mr Barry Jones-A very spontaneous question!
Mr RUDDOCK-I am surprised that there is so little interest on the other side, Mr Speaker. I ask the Minister: Has there been any response to the campaign by employers so far? Will the Commonwealth Employment Service be able to place young unemployed people promptly or quickly in all such newly available jobs?
Mr N. A. BROWN-The honourable member for Dundas indicated that he was sorry that there was so little support from the Opposition for this campaign to identify jobs for young people during this week. However, I must draw his attention to the fact that some very commendable support was given this campaign by the honourable member for Wills. I wish to acknowledge the fact that at least the honourable member for Wills-although the same cannot be said of his leader-has in substance supported the campaign, and I give him full credit for that. I would have thought that this was the sort of campaign for which there would be unqualified and united community support for a very commendable objective, namely, to identify more job opportunities for the young people of this country.
There has been virtually universal community support for the campaign. That campaign has received very wide-ranging support including the contribution made by various media interests, particularly the television channels. It is very commendable that already we are seeing signs of the success of this campaign. It is, in effect, a joint campaign by the Government, through the Commonwealth Employment Service, and a number of television stations. For instance, by the end of the second day of the campaign, the Channel 0-10 network, which is endeavouring to identify 10,000 jobs for young people, had been notified of some 3,000 vacancies. That was a very commendable result after only two days.
So far as Tasmania is concerned-and I mention it because the Tasmanian Minister for Community Welfare and Child Care was moved to describe this campaign as a cruel and cynical hoax-we find that after the first two days 147 jobs had been found for young people in Tasmania. No doubt the Minister will have something to say to those young people and their parents. A

Questions Without Notice

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2673

great degree of success already has been identified and I would urge the whole community to support the campaign, particularly employers, in an endeavour to identify within their own staff force additional vacancies for young people. We urge also that attention be drawn to those schemes and opportunities which are available through the Commonwealth Employment Service for subsidies for work experience and the other training and work skill programs which have been identified and which I have mentioned on previous occasions.
AUSTRALIAN DAIRY CORPORATION
Mr WALLIS-I preface my question, which is directed to the Prime Minister, by quoting what was said by the honourable member for New England in this House on 9 July 1975. H~ said:
There is a significant discrepancy-a discrepancy which puts one law for those who are in office against that applied to the man who has been dismissed.
I ask the Prime Minister: In view of the disclosures of Tuesday and yesterday that the Deputy Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation is to be dismissed and that certain files within the Australian Dairy Corporation are missing or have been tampered with and the implication that some officers of the Corporation were 'acting under instruction', will he ensure that when dealing with the most recent disclosures the concern of the honourable member for New England for equality before the law is applied consistently not only to scapegoats in the Australian Dairy Corporation but also to the two Ministers for Primary Industry who are ultimately responsible?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Minister for Primary Industry will be making a detailed statement about the Australian Dairy Corporation later today. I suggest that the honourable gentleman contain his impatience until that point.
GLEBE ESTATE
Dr EDWARDS-My question is directed to the Minister for Housingand Construction. I refer to decisions and announcements made earlier this year by the Government following the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions which, among other things, decided the future of the Glebe Estate. Has the Government been able to allay fears held by many residents that their interests would not be looked after in any negotiations between the New South Wales and Federal Governments by the funding for the Estate announced in the Budget? Has the New South Wales Government accepted its responsibilities for housing by taking over the administration and upkeep of the Estate? Finally, when is it expected

that the Commonwealth will receive a reply from New South Wales following its decision to offer that State Government the first opportunity of taking over the Estate in line with established procedures?
Mr McVEIGH-The answers in sequence to the three questions asked by the honourable member are: Yes; no; and I do not know.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Cunningham proceeding to address a question to the Prime Minister-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is entitled to seek information on matters for which a Minister is responsible in the chamber. From the way in which he is phrasing his question, I cannot see any relevance. If he is seeking information, he should ask for that information.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. If you are prepared to listen to the development of the question you will find that it relates to the standards--
Mr Dean-Did you write it?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! Honourable gentlemen on my right will remain silent.
Mr Hayden-I must confess that there is a difference between the Prime Minister and myself. I am able to talk to my colleagues behind me.
Honourable members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! When the House comes to order we will be able to proceed with the day's business.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I think that if you listen to the development of the question you will find it crucial to the standards of conduct of the Ministry for which the Prime Minister is responsible. That is a matter of concern to this Parliament. The Prime Minister must be answerable to this Parliament on that matter. The quote is entirely relevant and crucial to that point.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition is not taking a point of order. He is making a point of explanation about something of which he has knowledge and I do not. The honourable member for McMillan will have to put the question in order. It is out of order at present.
Mr Hayden-I take a point of order, Mr Speaker. With respect, you confess that you have no knowledge of the matter, but because it is embarrassing to the Government, particularly the Prime Minister, you are prepared to rule it out of order. I suggest that in those circumstances the Opposition is justified in feeling irritated.

2674 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

is being offensive to me by suggesting that I am

ruling the question out of order for any reason

other than the fact that it is not within the Standing Orders. When the honourable member for McMillan puts it within the Standing Orders, if he can,it will be in order.

PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN AUSTRALIA: AUSTRALIAN DAIRY
CORPORATION
Dr EVERINGHAM-In the absence of the

Mr Cunningham-I take a point of order. The Prime Minister, I direct my question to the

question which I am ready to ask is now in order Deputy Prime Minister. I remind the right

and nothing needs to be added.

honourable gentleman of the Prime Minister's

Mr SPEAKER-I will call the honourable gentleman later if he is the only one to stand from the Opposition side.

statement in his electorate broadcast of 12 March 1978 when he said:
My Government has demonstrated again and again our fundamental commitment to restoring integrity to public

PATERSON'S CURSE

administration in Australia. Our record in this regard is without parallel in our history. As long as [ lead the Government,

Mr EWEN CAMERON-Can the Minister for Science and Technology inform the House of

there is no way known that anything less than the highest code and practice of public administration will be tolerated.

the current position regarding the biological,conI ask: What steps has the Government taken to

trol of paterson's curse?

defend its commitment record and code of prac-

Mr THOMSON-I am aware of the great concern of the honourable member for Indi about this matter. He has approached me on a number of
occasions, as have other honourable members from both sides of the House. The House will be aware that in June last year the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial' Research Organisation released an insect predator to help to control

tice in the cases of the Australian Dairy Corporation and Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd?
Mr ANTHONY-I have no reason whatsoever to disagree with that statement of the Prime Minister. I think the majority of Australian people would agree exactly with what the Prime Minister said.

paterson's curse. This was in accord with a decision made by the Australian Agricultural Coun-

RETIREMENT OF MR GORDON PIKE

cil. Unfortunately, immediately after the release Mr KATTER-I direct my question to the of the predator, legal proceedings to stop Leader of the House. Despite the heavy demands

CSIRO's field release were taken by representaof today's proceedings could a time slot be made tives of certain grazing and beekeeping interests. I available for the House to pay tribute to one who understand that this is a very complex matter. I has dedicated a lifetime to each and everyone of

have been advised that the earliest date on which us, one who, indeed, is an institution in himself? I

this matter can be heard by the courts is 31 May refer to Mr Gordon Pike who will soon retire.

1982. I share the honourable member's concern at the great delay in this matter. It may i,nterest the House to know that when legal proceedings were instituted the insects that had been released at the larval stage were caged to prevent their dispersal. The CSIRO has advised me that all those insects have died and that their remains have been returned to quarantine. It is most unlikely that any insects which were released survived as free-flying insects.

Mr SINCLAIR-I would be very happy to set aside time for that purpose. I think all honourable members in this place have been greatly indebted for the services rendered by Gordon Pike. He is one of those people who, behind the scenes, have ensured that we leave Parliament to go to our destinations and come back to Parliament on time. Few have served the members or the parliamentary institution better. I wish him well in his retirement. I am happy to try to ensure thllt later on

DISTINGUISHED VISITOR

this day and certainly before the House rises there will be an opportunity to wish Mr Pike well in his

Mr SPEAKER-I wish to draw the attention imminent retirement.

of the House to the fact that we have present in the gallery this morning Mr Speaker Shah of the Gujarat Legislative Assembly in India.. On behalf, of the House I extend to Mr Speaker Shah a very warm welcome.

Mr SPEAKER-According to the Clerk the House is likely to resume its sittings before the retirement of Mr Pike. I would not like any anti-. climax to occur. I think I should check that before we set aside any time today to wish Gordon fare-

Honourable members-Hear, hear!

well before he is ready to depart.

Questions Without Notice

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2675

ASIA DAIRY INDUSTRIES
Mr CUNNINGHAM-My question relates to the Prime Minister's repeated pledge to uphold ministerial responsibility. Despite this, is the Prime Minister concerned at allegations that standards of propriety, honesty and integrity in .his Government have fallen? Is this reflected in his failure to take action against two successive Ministers for Primary Industry entangled in the Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd scandal?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable gentleman must have been absent when there was a debate in the Parliament on this matter, because that showed quite plainly what the position was in very emphatic terms indeed.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There is one political party that has constantly-;--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the Prime Minister to resume his seat. Question Time this morning has been a continual level of noise from my left on the Opposition benches. I ask all honourable gentlerrien to behave with greater decorum and not to continue that noise.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There is one political party that has constantly degraded standards in this Parliament, and that is the Australian Labor Party under the Leader of the Opposition. It is not only the Australian Labor Party that has constantly degraded those standards. The honourable member for Wills has now embarked on the greatest betrayal of the only thing which he ever had a really sincere belief in in his whole life, and that is the state of Israel.
Mr Hawke-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I find offensive the remarks of the Prime Minister that I have engaged in an act of betrayal in respect of the state of Israel. I ask that he withdraw. It is a totally despicable statement. It is untrue. I find it offensive and ask that it be withdrawn. If the Prime Minister has the guts to keep the debate going, he will find out how untrue it is.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! On my right there is too much noise. The honourable member for Wills has said that he finds it offensive, and that may be so. I accept that it is offensive but I can only require a withdrawal if the expression used was unparliamentary. It is not unparliamentary and therefore I do not require a withdrawal.
Mr Hawke-Mr Speaker. I raise another point of order. Am I to understand from your observation that it is not unparliamentary for one member of the Parliament to accuse another of an act of betrayal?

Mr SPEAKER-In the circumstance in which it was used, it was not unparliamentary.
Mr Hawke-All I can say is that you have malleable standards.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-Mr Speaker,--
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the Prime Minister to resume his seat.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order.
Mr SPEAKER-No. I indicate to the honourable member for Wills that he is being unparliamentary. Because I give a decision which he does not agree with, is no reason for him to therefore accuse me of bias, and I find that offensive. I pa~s it over. Does the Prime Minister wish to proceed with the answer or a point of order?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-No, Mr Speaker. I have finished.
Mr Holding-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I ask you to rule that the statement by the Prime Minister that members of the Opposition have degraded the Standing Orders and the processes of this Parliament is an unparliamentary statement and that he should withdraw it.
Mr SPEAKER-It is not an u~parliamentary statement.
HONEYMOON URANIUM DEPOSIT
Mr PORTER-I direct my question to the Minister for Trade and Resources. I refer to the Minister's announcement on Tuesday' approving the development of the Honeymoon uranium deposit in the north of South Australia. Can. the Minister inform the House of the likely impact of that decision on the development of South Australia?
Mr ANTIJONY-I was able to announce the other day approval for the development of the Honeymoon uranium deposit in South Australia. I think that signals the commencement of a new industry in South Australia. It is an industry that could have considerable significance to the economy of that State. Whilst the Honeymoon deposit is a relatively small one, the technique that will be used is new-it is the in situ leaching techniqueand could apply to a number of other small uranium deposits in that State. I know the Beverley deposit is one that is being examined to see whether it could be developed in the same way.
South Australia has a number of uranium deposits, the most notable of which is that at Roxby Downs, the Olympic Dam deposit, which could mean to South Australia. the same as the Pilbara has meant to Western Australia 'or Bowen has

2676 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Questions Without Notice

meant to QueenslanO. It is, undoubtedly, a deposit of world significance, particularly for its uranium and copper but also for rare metals such as gold. I think if this industry can proceed, as certainly those honourable members on this side of the House hope it will, it will have a tremendous bearing on the economy and job opportunities for people in South Australia. South Australia, for a long time, has been interested in uranium development. Even the previous Government had a keen interest in seeing whether the enrichment industry could be developed in that State. The present South Australian Government is foIlowing those interests and keeping in close contact with the Uranium Enrichment Group of Australia to see whether the commencement of uranium enrichment could be in South Australia. But it all adds up to a very significant--
Mr Jacobi-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. The Minister for Trade and Resources is misieadingthe House and South Australia. He has denied the State the right--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hawker will resume his seat.
Mr Jacobi-I am speaking to a point of order.
Mr SPEAKER-It is not a point of order.
Mr Jacobi-He is misleading the Parliament. He has denied South Australia the right to be involved in uranium enrichment.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hawker will resume his seat.
Mr Jacobi-He should not mislead the House..
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hawker will resume his seat.
Mr JacobiYou can please yourself.
Mr SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member.
Mr Jacobi-But he is teIling lies.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hawker will withdraw that last statement.
Mr Jacobi-He should be honest with the chamber and I will.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hawker will withdraw.
Mr Jacobi-Tell him to teU the truth. Why should I withdraw? He has misled this place, his Government has.
Mr SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Hawker. I ask him to withdraw. I give him a last opportunity to do so.
Mr Jacobi-If he puts his last statement right, I will.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member will withdraw unqualifiedly.

Mr Jacobi-I withdraw. The Minister should make his statements right in future.

Mr ANTHONY-Mr Speaker,--

Opposition members interjecting-

Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman will resume his seat. If the House continues in this mood I will be forced to suggest to the Prime Minister that he ask that al\ further questions be put on the Notice Paper. Honourable members on my left will remain silent. The Minister was asked a question and is entitled to answer
in silence.

Mr ANTHONY-The honourable member for Hawker displays the utter confusion that exists within the Australian Labor Party about the development of the uranium industry.

Mr Jacobi-I have no confusion--

Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman will proceed with his answer and ignore the interjections from the honourable member for
Hawker.

Mr ANTHONY-With my temperament it is
very hard not to respond to the Labor Party's interjections.

Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman will proceed with the answer to the question.

Mr ANTHONY-There seems to be a fine point which the honourable member has tried to distinguish, that the Commonwealth Government is not aIlowing South Australia to be involved with the enrichment industry.

Mr Jacobi-That is not so.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for

Hawker will remain silent. The Deputy Prime

Minister will ignore the interjection.

.

Mr ANTHONY-We are giving encouragement to the South Australian Government to become as knowledgeable as possible in relation to uranium enrichment so that if a decision is made by the uranium group--

Mr Jacobi-You handed it all over to UEGA--

Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman will resume his seat. I call the honourable member for Maranoa.

DOMESTIC SATELLITE
Mr IAN CAMERON-My question is addressed to the Minister for Communications. What assurance can he give me that the 3D-watt strength of the transponder in the domestic satellite and

Questions Without Notice

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2677

the two-way v.ideo system intended to provide low cost receiving and educational facilities for the first and second Homestead and Community Broadcasting Satellite Service systems will be maintained?
Mr SINCLAIR-The Australian satellite was designed predominantly to ensure that there would be an adequate strength of signal to areas throughout Australia, particularly those areas where communications were very difficult. In order to achieve that, 30-watt transponders were installed in the design, it being apparent that with the use of 30-watt transponders it would be possible, with a far more economic earth station, to receive signals and that it would also be possible to put in a transmit signal at a much lower cost. The basic concept of the satellite use remains that there should be, through it, a capacity to communicate right throughout the length and breadth of this country. The cost of installing terrestrial communications is inordinately high. The satellite use will certainly enable not just broadcast facilities but also telecommunication facilities, including School of the Air and other educational facilities, to reach those in the far removed and isolated areas of Australia in a much more economic way than would otherwise be possible.
The Government is quite firm in that continued resolve. Nonetheless, there is a significant advance in technology. The Government is conscious that as the demand for earth stations increases so the manufacture of them will become more economic. It is possible that by the time the AUSSAT satellite is in orbit the technicalities of the transmission of messages will be different from what they are today. In spite of that, the cost of now modifying the tender to have other than a 30-watt transponder would be not really practical. It would involve both a time cost and a monetary cost. Therefore, the 30-watt transponders will remain in the AUSSAT satellite.
RETIREMENT OF MR GORDON PIKE
Mr SINCLAIR-If I might respond to the question asked earlier by the honourable member for Kennedy, I have been advised that Mr Gordon Pike will turn 65 on 27 February 1982. I think no honourable member of this House would wish him to leave the services of this place prematurely. I expect that there will be an adequate opportunity, as you yourself have intimated, Mr Speaker, for us to have adequate valedictories early next year.

AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE
Mr .MILDREN-I refer the Acting Minister for Administrative Services to the Minister's responsibility to the Australian Federal Police. I ask: In what circumstances does the Minister relinquish to other Ministers his responsibility to the Federal Police? Did he formally relinquish this responsibility to the Minister for Primary Industry in the Federal Police investigation into the Australian Dairy Corporation and Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd? In this instance, have the Australian Federal Police reported only to the Minister for Primary Industry and not to the Minister for Administrative Services? Is it a regular practice that Ministers other than the Minister for Administrative Services are responsible for the conduct of police inquiries into activities for which those Ministers themselves are ultimately responsible, or was special exemption made for National Country Party Ministers?
Mr WILSON-In the absence of the Minister I will treat the question as being on notice and will provide the honourable member with a detailed reply.
FAMILY BREAKDOWNS
Mr DONALD CAMERON-I ask the Prime Minister a question which is truly without notice. Is he aware that the number of recipients of supporting mothers benefits, which excludes widows, has increased from 26,000 in 1974 to 102,000 this year and that the number of the children so affected has risen from 43,000 to 185,000 in that same seven-year period? Putting aside the money costs and referring mainly to the cost iIi people, I ask: Does the Prime Minister agree that these figures are cause for alarm as to the breakdown of the traditional family unit and its likely effect upon the nation's future? Will the Prime Minister cause an examination to be made to see whether something can be done to correct this worrying trend?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-This must be a matter that causes very significant concern to a large number of members of this House. The family unit is integral to Australian society and to the well-being of this country. In most civilised societies that same view would be held. It is not only unfortunate for the single parent concerned but also very unfortunate for the children who would find it very difficult to establish a circumstance in which they really would get an equal chance in life. That is not implying criticism of the individuals involved; it is just a commentary on the circumstances established by single parenthood. The Commonwealth has instituted a number of policies to strengthen the family. There will be a

2678 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Questions Without Notice

debate on the Family Law Act within this Parliament on a non-party basis, on a conscience basis. I believe that that might well provide an opportunity for honourable members to devote some attention to these problems and to try to contribute to a situation in which the trends indicated in the honourable gentleman's question do not continue, and indeed may well be i"eversed.
JOB WEEK '81 CAMPAIGN
Mr HAWKE-I address my question to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs. I refer to the launching on 25 October of the national youth job drive to which reference has already been made. I ask the Minister: Can he provide .some precise details concerning the nature of the promotional activities to be undertaken by the Commonwealth Employment Service, the promotional costs incurred and the extent of CES staff involvement? Will there be any way of ensuring that employers offering additional jobs for young people are not merely substituting young workers for older workers? Will there be an explicit appraisal of what types of jobs are notified to the CES during the promotional week? Given that some vacancies for young people would probably have been lodged with the CES anyway, will there be any attempt to ascertain what proportion of vacancies lodged with the CES during the promotional week are actually attributable to the campaign? Finally, will there be any follow-up analysis of how many of .these vacancies are actually filled by young job seekers and how long successful job seekers actually stay in their jobs?
Mr N. A. BROWN-I understand that the honourable member for Wills was one of the few members of the Australian Labor Party who supported this campaign to find more job opportunities for young people. It is unfortunate that we see now that the honourable member for Wills is joining with the Leader of the Opposition and that rather foolish Minister from Tasmania who tries to describe the campaign as a hoax. I would have thought, as I said before-I will repeat it at the outset of the answer to this question-that this is a campaign that should be approached on a unified basis throughout the whole community. There is only one objective. It is not to gain marks for the Government. The objective is to find more jobs for ouryoung people.
With respect to costs, about which the honourable member asked, a number of television stations and radio stations have joined in the campaign without any cost to us at all. In fact, my understanding is that the value of the publicity has been assessed as being in the vicinity of $2m. I

will check that information, but that is my understanding. That is a service provided by the television stations and radio stations, not for the Government but in the interests of young people in this country. I think it is a very commendable effort. So far as staff are concerned, the staff will be those who are normally employed in the Commonwealth Employment Service. They are applying themselves to this campaign with the same vigour, enthusiasm and professionalism that the Commonwealth Employment Service staff always apply to their activities.
Finally, I refer to the attemptsI think, with respect, they are somewhat transparent-of the honourable member and some other honourable members on the Opposition side to point to this exercise as some exercise under which new job opportunities will not really be provided for young people. The evidence that I have suggests that this sort of campaign does encourage employers to identify new job opportunities within their own staff forces. Many employers are not aware of some of the subsidies that are available. When these subsidies are drawn to the attention of employers they quite readily agree to take on a young unemployed person so as to give that young person a training opportunity and work experience. Let me remind the House that the only time there has been experience of anything phoney or anything transparent about a proposal to create jobs in the history of this country so far as I know was during the Labor Party's period of government when there was a phoney job creation scheme called the Regionai'Employment Development scheme. The Labor Government created some 64,000 jobs under the RED scheme. Not one of them was a permanent job.
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister must remain relevant to the question.
Mr N. A. BROWN-At the time when that scheme was in operation employment numbers in this country went down by 81,000 and unemployment doubled.
DOWN'S SYNDROME
Mr STEELE HALL-I direct my question to the Minister for Health. I refer to the importation of therapeutic substances for the treatment of Down's syndrome, which greatly concerns some parents in Australia. Why is it that, whilst no harm can be attributed to the use of these substances in what is termed 'cell therapy', their importation is banned and yet cigarettes and alcohol, which are assessed to be dangerous to health, can be imported?

Questions Without Notice

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2679

Mr MacKELLAR-The honourable gentleman has asked a question which is of the utmost significance to a large number of people in Australia who are the parents of Down's syndrome children. There has been a lot of publicity in recent times relating to the alleged beneficial effects of certain treatment knows as Siccacell treatment which has its origins in Germany. That is not the only country which manufactures these sorts of products, but it is the principal source of supply at present. Australia has a very proud record in relation to its control over the entry of therapeutic goods. It is, I believe, of the utmost importance that this Government and successive governments maintain a very effective control over the importation of such substances to ensure that the general public in Australia is protected from claims which may be fraudulent or from ill effects of medicinal substances which could come about if that control were in any way lessened.
An enormous amount of investigation has been done as to the manufacture and the purity of this particular product and as to the claims made about its therapeutic effects. As far as I am aware there is no subtantiated evidence relating to the beneficial effects which are claimed for it. I have asked those who would promote its use in Australia to go through the normal requirements which people who wish to import drugs need to do-that is, to provide scientific evidence backing up the therapeutic claims made in relation to the product. That has not yet been done. The suggestion by the honourable member that no harmful effects have been reported-I am not sure whether that is the case-does not mean that the conditions of entry which operate in Australia should be relaxed. We need to ensure that the therapeutic claims made in relation to the product are backed by scientific evidence.
I have had the scientific advisory bodieslooking into this matter in very great detail. All the advice that I get from professionals engaged in the evaluation of drugs and therapeutic products recommends very strongly that the importation of this product at present, without the scientific backing which other products are required to produce, should not be allowed. It is a matter of great moment to a number of people. My offer still stands. If people wishing to import the material can provide me and my Department with the scientific evaluations which are required of all drugs which are imported into Australia, obviously we will consider the matter again.
GREAT BARRIER REEF
Mr WEST-My question is directed to the Prime Minister. Is it a fact that on 17 May 1979

Commonwealth officials told Queensland officials that the whole of the Great Barrier Reef region will not be declared a marine park? Is it a fact that on Monday last, 26 October, the Prime Minister informed the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation's World Heritage Committee that it was not just a matter of whether the Barrier Reef Marine Park would be declared, but when it would be declared. In view of the Committee's consequential decision to place the reef on the World Heritage List and the UNESCO conditions of establishing buffer zones, if possible, will the Commonwealth now declare the entire Great Barrier Reef region a marine park, or will it allow the Queensland Government to control the strip five kilometres east from the Queensland coast and thus place the reef and its parameters at risk from the oil drilling aspirations of the Queensland Government?

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Queensland

Government has been actively co-operating with

the Commonwealth in relation to the Great Bar-

rier Reef. Some considerable time ago the Premier

and I issued a joint statement about the arrange-

ments that would prevail for the successive dec-

laration of sections of the reef as a marine park. I

have pointed out on a number of occasions that

the Great Barrier Reef is protected under Acts of

this Parliament, and that provides a total protec-

tion for the reef and for the region of the reef. I

have also pointed out that we want a co-operative

approach with the Queensland Government in re-

lation to successive declarations of regions of the

reef as a marine park. That is precisely what was

said to the World Heritage Committee. An appli-

cation for world heritage listing goes forward not

just in the name of the Commonwealth but also

with the support of the State governments or the

Territory government concerned, and there is no

conflict in this whatsoever.

.

I do not know what some officials might have said at some particular point, but what needs to be understood is that Commonwealth policy has not deviated. The reef is protected absolutely under Acts of this Parliament. It is also protected under decisions of the Queensland Government and the Australian Government. We have already declared one part of the reef as a marine park and are in the process of coming to arrangements in relation to a second part. Quite obviously the Australian Labor Party would ignore the need for cooperation within a federal system. We know what that did to this country some time past. It makes no sense, and certainly makes very bad government, to ignore the need for co-operation between governments when sensible objectives which both governments can support are to be achieved.

2680 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Unparliamentary Language

FM COMMERCIAL RADIO
Mr FISHER-My question is directed to the Minister for Communications. Has the Department of Communications completed its report into the procedures and guidelines relating to the introduction of supplementary licences and FM commercial radio in non-metropolitan regions? Are there any technical difficulties delaying the development of these guideline's? When will the Minister be able to make a public statement on this issue?
Mr SINCLAIR-I am advised by my Department that there are involved very substantial issues of policy, including clearance of the very high frequency FM band. That, of course, substantially affects the television industry. The difficulty in completing the report into the procedures and guidelines really is a result of the extent to which a number of conflicting interests are occupying the same part of that band. It is necessary for new priorities to be set between different sections of the broadcasting industry and also to take count of the possible introduction of new competitive FM services in selected areas. All these have meant an unfortunate delay in the presentation of the paper, but a draft is before my Department at the moment and I am hopeful that it will be possible, taking into account the long term development of FM radio and the clearance for the VH/FM band, for a statement to be made fairly shortly. I know that there are many applicants for licences around Australia who are waiting on this report, but it is a technical area. While I can ask my Department to expedite its consideration, it is essentially a matter of the engineers who advise us presenting their report before any policy decisions can be taken.
UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I wish to raise a point of order. I wish to canvass with you rulings you gave earlier in the course of Question Time. I do so now, rather than raising it earlier and taking up time which is limited and should be restricted to members' questions.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman must move dissent from a ruling at the time when the ruling is given.
Mr Hayden-I would not like to move dissent, but I think it has almost reached the point where I will have to if I cannot speak in any other way.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman cannot move dissent from a ruling that was given some time ago.

Mr Hayden-But I can move something else substantive, and I would not care to do that. I have asked for a point of order.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman has to take his own choice of action. If he is taking a point of order, I will hear the point of order.
Mr Hayden-I raised a point of order, Mr Speaker, and it is in relation to your rulings earlier. I wish to canvass them with you because I believe it is necessary that we establish clear and consistent practices in relation to what you define as unparliamentary language.Mr Speaker, I draw your attention to Standing Orders 75, 76, 77 and 78. You will note that these are the parts of the Standing Orders which deal with matters that come under that rubric of unparliamentary language. However, they do not refer to unparliamentary language but to offensive words. Standing Order 75 states:
No Member may use offensive words against either House of the Parliament or any Member thereof, against any member of the Judiciary, or against any statute unless for the purpose of moving for its repeal.
Standing Order 76 states:
All imputations of improper motives and all personal reflections on Members shall be considered highly disorderly.
Standing Order 77 states:
When any offensive or disorderly words are used, whether by a Member who is addressing the Chair or by a Member who is present, the Speaker shall intervene.
Mr Speaker, I ask you to recall that the references are to offeflsive words and to look at the word 'offensive' in the Oxford English Dictionary. It states: 'Aggressive; intended for use in attack; meant to give offence'. The word 'offence' is defined as 'wounding of the feelings-, wounded feelings, annoyance, umbrage'. This matter is fairly important and I think it is about time we started to clear up the cause of a fair degree of irritation on this side of the House. It is felt unanimously here that there is an inconsistency in the way in which these Standing Orders are being applied, and this morning was a classic case. Honourable members will recall that this morning the Prime Minister made, among many provocative comments, two specific ones which created disruption in the Parliament. The first accused the honourable member for Wills of betraying the state of Israel and the second accused the Opposition generally of degrading the Standing Orders. Mr Speaker, I remind you that the Standing Orders refer to offensive terms. I have defined what offensive terms are. I think we ought to look up the word 'betrayal' to see whether or not it is an offensive term. The definition of 'betray' in the dictionary states: 'Give up treacherously; be disloyal, to reveal treacherously'. I would think that

Unparliamentary Language

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2681

that definition makes it clear that the word 'betray' is as offensive as any word could imaginably be. Mr Speaker, I refer you to May's Parliamentary Practice, which gives a list of unparliamentary expressions. It does not pretend to be exhaustive, and in fact declares that it is not. We find that words such as 'treason,' charges of treason or the word 'traitor' are described as being offensive. Betrayal and treason can be traced through from their derivation to have a fairly common purpose. If it has been upheld in the House of Commons that to describe someone as a traitor or as being treasonable in his conduct is unparliamentary and offensive. I would argue, Mr Speaker, it is no less offensive to describe the honourable member for Wills, given his well-known attitudes, especially in relation to the state of Israel, as being guilty of an act of betrayal.
I will not refer directly to the references in May; you will be familiar with them. I give them to you in precis. The effect of May is to declare that the purposes of the Standing Orders in relation to unparliamentary words or offensive words is to prevent, or at least try to prevent, the development of heat and passion in a parliament through the use of words which give offence to members of the Parliament and, in the wake of that, create disruption. It is incontestable that the term betrayal was grossly offensiveand calculatedly so-to the honourable member for Wills this morning. In all the circumstances the Prime Minister approached the matter in a premeditated fashion with the explicit intent of creating disruption in the Parliament. One would have to be a fool of the highest order to ignore the obviousthat the Prime Minister, in his usual confrontationist style, had set a course of conduct aimed at creating division in the Parliament and the reaction and sort of disruption which we have seen. Within all of the terms of the Standing Orders, the words used by the Prime Minister in relation to the honourable member for Wills were offensive. Any red-blooded person would feel offended and would react with great vigour. I compliment the honourable member for Wills who, although he reacted with obvious passion, nonetheless restrained himself. Other people--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman should address the Chair.
Mr Hayden-I can understand the humour of the honourable members on the Government benches because they have betrayed every principle they have ever enunciated to the people of this country.
Mr SPEAKER~The Leader of the Opposition will proceed with his point of order.

Mr Hayden-I return to the point. Mr Speaker, in the terms in which the word 'betrayal' was used by the Prime Minister, it was grossly offensive and I suggest to you that it is necessary for you to recognise this and to take action to ensure that that sort of thing does not happen again. If it does happen again, it will be with the greatest reluctance that the Opposition will have to resort to the only course of action left to it in the Parliament that is, a substantive motion. I recall that it has been used some years ago. I would be most unhappy to see the Opposition forced to revert to the use of that sort of procedure in this House. Mr Speaker, you have a difficult position. We are asking you to act with consistency. Similarly, the comment about the degrading of standing orders by the Opposition, is offensive. I remind you of the background outlined in May, that the offensiveness must be to a person and must be calculated or its consequence must be to create disruption in the Parliament and therefore impede the proper flow of conduct in the Parliament and what is regarded as proper conduct, not just in Parliament but by average and decent members of the community. That is what is at stake. Mr Speaker, I ask you to consider this and to give me your judgment on it in the light of Standing Orders 75, 76 and 77.

Mr Holding-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order.

Mr SPEAKER-I have to consider a point of order from the Leader of the Opposition. It is not a question before the Chair and I do not recognise the honourable member for Melbourne Ports.

Mr Holding-I want to speak on the same point of order. There is a question I want to take up which I want you also to consider.

Mr SPEAKER-I will hear the honourable member on his point of order.

Mr Holding-On the point of order, I direct

your attention to the wording of Standing Order

76 which states:

'

All imputations of improper motives and all personal reflections on Members shall be considered highly disorderly.

Standing Order 77 states:

When any offensive or disorderly words are used, whether by a Member who is addressing the Chair or by a Member
who is present, the Speaker shall intervene.

Mr SincIair-You had better read 78.

Mr Holding-That is all right, I will read it. It states:

When the attention of the Speaker is drawn to words used, he shall determine whether or not they are offensive or disorderly.

If I might remind you, sir, the allegation that was made was made under Standing Order 76 relating

2682 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Unparliamentary Language

to improper motives. When the honourable member for Wills took offence, as he was entitled to do, and informed the Chair that he found the use of the words offensive, you then ruled that they were offensive but that they were not unparliamentary. The point of order. I want to raise, because I think this raises a serious precedent, is that if the Prime Minister is not required to withdraw words which are offensive to an honourable member and which the Chair so finds offensive, then it would seem to me that we are getting to a situation where the precedent is created that a member can use offensive terms in the Parliament in relation to another member but that so long as the terms are merely offensive but not unparliamentary as so found by the Chair, he will not be required to withdraw them.
Having regard to parliamentary usage and precedent as it has occurred in this Parliament and in other parliaments in the Westminister system, it is the usual practi<;e for the Chair first of all to intervene when a term which is offensive is used, and if the Chair so finds it to be offensive it is the practice and the precedent of the House that the member who has made the offensive remark is required to withdraw it; otherwise, the House is in the odd situation that one member can be as offensive as he likes to another member and so long as he chooses his words carefully and they do not fall within the ambit of unparliamentary expressions, there is no requirement to withdraw. With great respect, I put it to you, Mr Speaker, that that is not the precedent that has been practised by the Chair. For the better usage and good conduct of the Parliament, terms which are found to be offensive by a member, and which the Chair in fact finds to be offensive, should be withdrawn.
Mr Steele Hall-Mr Speaker, may I address myself to the point of order. If the Leader of the Opposition was addressing himself to the position in general as it may have applied to any member of his party, I suggest it would be indeed a fairly convincing argument. However, he is addressing the House on behalf of a member who is far from innocent in the use of words which insult and injure and if there is to be an application of what the Leader of the Opposition--
Mr SPEAKER-Order!
Mr Steele Hall-Mr Speaker, I speak to the point of order.
Mr SPEAKER-I will not permit the honourable member for Boothby to proceed upon this line.
Mr Steele Hall-Mr Speaker, may I refer to the use by the Leader of the Opposition-of the word 'consistency' and, on the use of consistency

to apply this rule, I suggest that the member on whose behalf he takes it up has been far from con-
sistent with the point that the Leader of the Opposition is now making. The word 'liar', and
worse, has been consistently used by the honour-
able member for Wills, unchallenged in this
House.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for
Boothby will resume his seat. The Leader of the Opposition has raised this matter and I do not find it undesirable that it should be raised. On the con-
trary, I am pleased that it has been raised because I must say that the standard of behaviour and de-
bate in the chamber has concerned me for a considerable time. I think that if all honourable members were to raise their standards we would not have incidents of the kind. I would like all honourable members, out of courtesy and propriety, to undertake to cease using offensive terms. What I have to do is to apply the Standing Orders. If the House will bear with me I will take honourable members to the Standing Orders. The Leader of the Opposition referred t,o Standing Order 76, which states:

All imputations of improper motives and all personal reflections on Members shall be considered highly disorderly,

I hope that whenever I hear such an imputat'ion

that I require it to be withdrawn immediately. Of

course that is the genesis of the reason why I will

not allow allegations of untruthfulness or lying. In

relation to Standing Order 77, 'When any offen-

sive or disorderly words are used

.', it is

my belief that I have to draw a: distinction be-

tween a member being offended by a statement at-

tributing to him a change of attitude in philosophy

or something of that kind. I would not tolerate the

use of the word 'betrayal' if it reflected upon the

personal character of a member.

Mr Hawke-What do you think it does?

Mr West-What does it reflect?

Mr SPEAKER-I listened to the Leader of the
Opposition in silence; I required the House to
listen to him in silence. I am responding to him. If I am not given silence I will cease attempting to respond. When a term is used which, in my judg-
ment, relates to a point of view, an attitude, an expressed policy, or anything of that kind, then it is
difficult for me to intervene and to say that that cannot be said. This, after all, is a Parliament in which views are held strongly and passionately.
Those views must be able to be expressed strongly and passionately. If we try to prevent that from occurring then the Parliament would not in fact be the vehicle to which people are elected on
specific issues. People come to this Parliament to
speak as strongly and as firmly as they wish.

Unparliamentary Language

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2683

Honourable members are able to present a point of view as passionately and as strongly as they can. But it cannot be expected that every other honourable member of the House will listen to that expression of view and not contradict it. The contradiction of it can very often be offensive-if I can use the term in that sense-in that the contrary view is taken equally passionately. That is the way in which I interpreted what the right honourable Prime Minister said today. That is why I did not require it to be withdrawn. I did not believe that, in terms of Standing Order 76, there was an imputation of improper motive.
If we were to have a situation where, whenever an honourable member declared that something said was offensive to him and, therefore, it had to be withdrawn, then the procedures in this Parliament would be continually punctuated with demands for withdrawal and claims that it was offensive. It is difficult for me to draw distinctions. If I err then I say only that the error will not be by intent but as a result of my inadequacies. If I am to be criticised for my inadequacies so be it. But I do not want to be criticised on the basis of deliberately adopting different standards, for that I do not do. If it is judged tht I have adopted different standards then it is only because of my inadequacies and for that I apologise in advance and for the past.
My Hayden-Mr Speaker, I ask you specifically to attend to Erskine May's Parliamentary Practice and to the Concise Oxford Dictionary.
Mr SPEAKER-I have given my ruling.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, you may well have given your ruling but it is wrong in fact and inconsistent with the record of May and of the Concise Oxford Dictionary. I raise a point of order in relation to it and ask you to consider it. At page 455 of Erskine May's Parliamentary Practice, under the heading 'Personal Allusions and Unparliamentary Expressions', we find that, for instance, the term 'treason' is unparliamentary. If we look up the term 'treason' in the Concise Oxford Dictionary it states that it is a breach of faith or disloyalty to a cause, which is exactly the same meaning as the word 'betrayal'. The Prime Minister used the word 'betrayal' in relation to the honourable member for Wills. I find it a curious notion indeed, and one totally unacceptable to any principles that I think would be held by reasonable people, that that could not be offensive to a person to whom it was directed, especially as it was clearly directed in a temper which reflected the purpose of the Prime Minister to be aggressive, seeking to offend the honourable

member for Wills and seeking to create provocation and disruption on this side of the Parliament. In those terms it is an offensive and unparliamentary term. Mr Speaker, you would be offended if you were accused of having betrayed a particular cause which you hold dear to your heart. You would require that a person in this Parliament withdraw such a statement. You are punctilious in your demands about respect being shown to the Chair. This is a parliament of equals and you must expect no more or no less deference in respect to you than that to which ordinary members of this Parliament are entitled. We are asking for the same entitlement that you anticipate that you should receive.
Mr Hawke-Mr Speaker, would you permit me to speak to the point of order? I find what has happened beyond the bounds of belief in term.sof the Standing Orders of this House. I refer particularly to Standing Order 75, which states:
No Member may use offensive words against-either House of the Parliament or any Member thereof . . .
It seems to be the case that the Prime Minister of this country can say, as he did this morning, that the honourable member for Wills has betrayed--
Mr SPEAKER-I interrupt the honourable gentleman to pick up the words used by the Leader of the Opposition. We are speaking of honourable members and not the distinction' between 'the Prime Minister' and 'any honourable member'.
Mr Hawke-Yes, but the point that has been raised by the Leader of the Opposition goes back to the statement of the Prime Minister: As far as I am concerned, it is a totally unsatisfactory position and one that I would like you to consider further. Otherwise we are going to be left; apparently, in a position where that statement that an honourable. member has betrayed the only thing in which he has ever believed can be made. Naturally enough, I am indebted to the Leader of the Opposition for pointing out that I reacted to the Prime Minister's statement reasonably quietly. However, quite understandably I found it to be offensive. As I understand it, Mr Speaker, you have indicated that you regard it as offensive. Yet the position is to stand and you are not going to require the perpetrator of that action, the Prime Minister, to withdraw and the matter will remain recorded in Hansard. If the situation is that you are not prepared to ask the Prime Minister to withdraw, which any reasonable standard ofpractice in this Parliament or any other Parliament would require, then perhaps some action will be

2684 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Unparliamentary Language

taken by you to have the matter withdrawn from the Hansard greens.
Mr Tuckey-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for O'Connor will resume his seat. I allowed the honourable member for Willis to speak on this matter. I want to answer a couple of points. Firstly, when I spoke earlier, I decided not to take the particular words used and apply them. But I am bound to do so now because the Leader of the Opposition has drawn an analogy between the use of the word 'treason' and the use of the word 'betrayal'. I think there must be a difference between the two, as applied. Of course, their derivation may be similar but, as used, they were different. If an allegation of treason were made then, most certainly, it would be unparliamentary and, most certainly, it -would have to be withdrawn. But,as I have indicated, the concept of a betrayal of a point of view or of an idea seemed to me not to be unparliamentary. That it was offensive is a different point. I made the point to the House that if I were to punctuate the proceedings of the House with requirements for withdrawals-so often there is very considerable difficulty in obtaining a withdrawal-on every .occasion on which an honourable member claims that words are offensive then there would be very considerable difficulties. As to requiring now that the words be withdrawn, I adhere to the ruling I gave at the time. Even if I did not, I could not turn the clock back and ask for a withdrawal at this stage. If there is a disagreement with my ruling then the disagreement must be expressed at the time.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I raise a final point of order.
Mr SPEAKER-I think this matter has gone as far as it need go.
Mr Hayden-I want to give you a reference from the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary which the honourable member for Lalor was able to locate for me.
Mr SPEAKER-The matter has gone far enough.
Mr Hayden-I merely give you the definition of 'treason'. It is: 'The action of betraying; betrayal of the trust undertaken, by or reposed in anyone; breach offaith'.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat.
Mr Hayden-I have quoted from May.
Mr SPEAKER-I have disposed of the matter. It may be unsatisfactory to certain members but the matter has ended.

REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Department of the Parliamentary Library
Mr SPEAKER-I understand that the honourable member for Melbourne Ports intends to lodge a request for detailed information relating to the administration of parliamentary departments.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports)-I seek information -in respect to the operation of the Department of the Parliamentary Library.
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman will hand his request in writing to the Clerk it will be recorded in Hansard and, in due course, a reply will be given.
POPULATION SERVICES INTERNATIONAL (AUSTRALASIA) LTD
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister for Transport has indicated to me that he requests my indulgence to add to an answer.
Mr HUNT (Gwydir'----Minister for Transport) -Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence. On 17 Sep~ tember I was asked a question by the honourable member for Barton about the ownership and operation of an establishment at Arncliffe by Population Services International (Australasia) Ltd. In reply I said that I had been informed that certain people were associated with that company. I am informed that the information I gave the honourable member related to the ownership of a company known as Ceil Services Pty Ltd. I am informed that Ceil Services Pty Ltd owns the property in Arncliffe which Population: Services International (Australasia) Ltd operates. If there is no connection between the people named and Population Services International (Australasia) Ltd, the information I was given earlier was incorrect. In the circumstances I apolOgise for any embarrassment that may have been caused to the people named.
CLOTHING ITEMS: SALES TAX
Mr SPEAKER-I understand that the Treasurer seeks my indulgence to add to or correct an answer.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to that effect. Yesterday, in answer to a question by the honourable member for Tangey regarding sales tax, I made the statement that any claim made by any trader anywhere in Australia that any price increase in recent times was due to a sales tax rise is blatantly and totally false. Let me correct that to this extent: I make it clear that that statement of mine referred to any price increase attributed to

General

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2685

those items which are first to be made subject to sales tax when the legislation which the Government will reintroduce early next year is passed by the Parliament. Naturally, I was not suggesting that price increases as a result of increases in then existing rates on items now subject to sales tax were in any way to be criticised. Obviously the sales tax rises resulting from the measures that have already been passed by the Parliament would have led to price rises. To the extent that I may have inadvertently unfairly criticised anybody for doing that I apologise. But I do not apologise for those remarks so far as they relate to the items that are first to be subject to sales tax as from 29 March.
REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL
Mr SPEAKER-I present the report of the Auditor-General on a efficiency audit of the administration of Australia's bilateral overseas aid programs.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair)-by leave-agreed to:
(I) That this House, in accordance with the provisions of the Parliamentary Papers Act 1908 authorises the publication of the report of the Auditor-General on an efficiency audit of the administration of Australia's bilateral overseas aid programs, and
(2) that the report be referred to the Joint Committee of Public Accounts for inquiry and report.
AUSTRALIAN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications)-On behalf of the Prime Minister, for the information of honourable members, I present the Australian Science and Technology Council annual report for 1980-81.
DECENTRALISATION ADVISORY BOARD
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications)-On behalf of the Deputy Prime Minister, for the information of honourable members, I present the Decentralisation Advisory Board report for the period 1 July 1980 to 30 April 1981.
AUSTRALIAN .BR,OADCASTING COMMISSION
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications)-For the information of honourable members, I present the final version of the report entitled. 'The ABC in Review', volume 1, and the report entitled 'Summary and Recommendations', volume 2.
Mr Dawkins-I wish to ask the Minister a question in relation to this matter. Is that report

exactly the same as the report which appears on the Notice Paper? .
Mr SINCLAIR-It is exactly the same report but within it there are a few corrections. I understand that there were some printer's errors in the first copy.
Mr Dawkins-May I remind the Minister that he did give an undertaking to the Estimates Committee that he would make time available for a debate on that matter.
Mr SINCLAIR-I have been hoping to do so. I intend to do so as soon as possible, subject to the availability of time.
COMMITTEE ON DISARMAMENT Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report of the Australian delegation to the 1981 session of the Committee on Disarmament, Geneva, 3 February to 21 August 1981.
DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRY Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Pri-
mary Industry)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Department of Primary Industry annual report for 1980-81.
AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL COUNCIL
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-For the information of honourable members, I present the resolutions of the 112th meeting of the Australian Agricultural Council held in Melbourne on 4 September 1981.
DAIRY RESEARCH COMMITTEE Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 16 of the Dairying Research Act 1972, I present the ninth annual report of the Dairy Research Committee for the year ended 30 June 1981.
DRIED FRUITS RESEARCH COMMITTEE
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 18 (1) of the Dried Fruits Research Act 1971, I present the Dried Fruits Research Committee 10th annual report for 1980-81.
.POULTRY RESEARCH ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-For the information of

2686 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

General

honourable members, I present the Poultry Research Advisory Committee report for the period 1 July 1979 to 30 July 1981.
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)- Pursuant to section 14 of the Income Ta,x Assessment Act 1936 and section 140 of the Taxation Administration Act 1953, I present the sixtieth annual report of the Commissioner of Taxation for 1980-81.
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-For the information of honourable members,l present the Treasury Department's report for 1980-81.
AUSTRALIAN BUREAU OF STATISTICS Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-
Pursuant to section 24 (1) of the Australian Bu-, reau of Statistics Act 1975, I present the Australian Bureau of Statistics annual report for 1980-81.
AUSTRALIAN STATISTICS ADVISORY COUNCIL
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)- Pursuant to section 24 (2) of the, Australian Bureau of Statistics Act 1975, I present the Australian Statistics Advisory Council annual report for 1980-81.
PRIMARY INDUSTRY BANK Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)- Pursuant to sub-section 10 (2) of the Primary Industry Bank Act 1977, I present the report on operation of Part II of the Act, to 28 October 1981.
DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Department of Industrial Relations annual report for 1980-81. The final printed version of the report will be circulated to honourable members as soon as possible.
AUSTRALIAN SHIPPERS' COUNCIL Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Australian Shippers' Council annual report for 1980-81.
QANTAS AIRWAYS LTD Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport)-For the information of honourable

members, I present the annual report for 1980-81 financial year of Qantas Airways Ltd.
Mr Morris-I raise a point of order. Through you, Mr Speaker, I ask the Leader of the House whether he will move that the House take note of the report of Qantas Airways Ltd.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House)-For the benefit of the honourable member, with regard to the annual report for 1980-,81 of Qantas Airways Ltd, I move:
That the House take note or the papeL
Mr Morris-In moving that the debate be adjourned may I say that that is the quickest action I have ever seen to a notice of motion, and I sheet home that the losses of Qantas Airways Ltd are the responsibility of this Government.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) and the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) were present in the House when a point of order was raised by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). There was a considerable debate about it. I take this first opportunity of reminding both honourable gentlemen that henceforth I will require that the Standing Orders be observed strictly and that no offensive words be used. The honourable member for Shortland well knew that he was entitled to move the adjournment of the debate but not to speak after he had done so. His action brought forth from the Minister a response which, had the honourable member for Shortland heard it, he might have found offensive. I draw attention to the fact that there are many occasions when the Speaker deliberately overlooks certain things and deliberately does not hear others. In the future I would just be glad if all honourable members would take away from me the onerous responsibility of making the judgment and behave punctiliously.
Mr Morris-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I trust that the comments that you just made were not directed solely to the Minister for Transport and me.
Mr, SPEAKER-No. Indeed, I was using it as an example.
Mr Morris-I did not hear the offensive comment, if it was offensive, by the Minister for Transport so I cannot seek its withdrawal. But I know of no specific requirement in the Standing Orders that, when debate on the motion that the House take note of a paper is to be adjourned, no

General

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2687

comment whatsoever can be made. I seek your indulgence for the manner in which I framed my comments or the manner in which I put them to you. You were aware that I was going to say a few words. I do not think they were offensive remarks; they were factual remarks.
Mr SPEAKER-They were certainiy not offensive. The point is that they were not in ac- ~ordance with the Standing Orders.
COMMONWEALTH SERUM LABORATORIES COMMISSION
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health)-Pursuant to section 44 (4) of the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Act 1961, I present the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Commission's Annual Report for 1980-81.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF HEALTH
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Annual Report for 1980-81 of the Director-General of Health.
REPORT ON CITIZENSHIP REVIEW AND APPEALS SYSTEM 1981
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Acting Attorney-General)-For the information of honourable members. I present the report on Citizenship Review and Appeals System 1981 prepared by the Administrative Review Council.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY CONSUMER AFFAIRS COUNCIL AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS BUREAU ANNUAL
REPORT
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-Pursuant to section 17 of the Consumer Affairs Ordinance 1973, I present the Australian Capital Territory Consumer Affairs Council; Consumer Affairs Bureau Annual Report for 1980-81.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE SUPERVISING SCIENTIST FOR THE
ALLIGATOR RIVERS REGION
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-Pursuant to section 36 (5) of the Environment Protection (Alligator Rivers Region) Act 1978, I present the Annual Report for 1980-81 of the Supervising Scientist for the Alligator Rivers Region.
AUSTRALIAN ENVIRONMENT COUNCIL
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-For the information

of honourable members, I present a report on the Australian Environment Council Thirteenth Meeting held in Madang, Papua New Guinea, on 30 June 1981.
COUNCIL OFNATURE CONSERVATION MINISTERS
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-For the information of honourable members. I present a report on the Council of Nature Conservation Ministers Tenth Meeting held in Madang, Papua New Guinea on 1 July 1981.
AUSTRALIAN DAIRY CORPORATION
Ministerial Statement
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister, for Primary Industry)-by leave-The purpose of this statement is to advise the House on the action taken by the Government on the audit inspection carried out by the Commonwealth Auditor General of the accounts and records of Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Limited-AD!. I will also deal with aspects of the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations on 'The Australian Dairy Corporation and its Asian Subsidiaries'. In addition, I will outline the arrangements that the Government has put in train for the study of the balance of that report. Honourable members will recall that I have previously undertaken to make a detailed statement to the Parliament once all investigations arising from an audit of the operations of ADI were completed.
Background to Auditor-General's Reports
The background to the issues relating to the audit inspection 'of ADI should be well known. However, for the benefit of honourable members, I will briefly reiterate the salient points. ADI is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Australian Dairy Corporation-ADC. It was established under Hong Kong law in 1964, primarily to provide technical and management expertise to the ADC's joint venture dairy' product recombining plants in Asia, coupled with the supply of materials to those plants, and so provide stable long term outlets for surplus Australian dairy produce. Currently, joint venture plants operate in Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Hong Kong.
In 1979, the then Minister for Primary Industry decided that a review of the role and functions of ADI and the joint venture operations should be undertaken. Two major considerations influenced this decision: First, the declining export availability of Australian bulk dairy products such as

2688 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Australian Dairy Corporation

skim milk powder and butteroil, which are the basic materials used by the recombining operations; and, second, a proposal for ADI to diversify into ventures not solely involved with dairy food manufacture. There was also concern about the.accuracy of the financial records of ADC and AD!. It was in this context that the then Minister sought an inspection and audit of the accounts and records of ADI by the Commonwealth Auditor-General under section 63p of the Audit Act 1901. It was considered that the information made available from such an audit could be of considerable assistance to the Government in making a decision on the various options available in respect of the future structure and activities of the company. An initial report was forwarded to the then Minister by the Auditor-General on 3 August 1979, and a further letter was subsequently.forwarded on 19 September 1979. The reports disclosed certain deficiencies in the management and operation of the ADI and its dealings with ADC.
Government Action on Auditor-General's Reports
Following receipt of the Auditor-General's Reports, the Government, through the Department of Primary Industry, has taken a great number of initiatives to ensure that the matters raised by the Auditor-General were thoroughly and properly investigated, and that appropriate action was taken. The reports were dealt with on two distinct aspects: Firstly, managerial control and accounting practices of ADI; and, secondly, the appropriateness of certain expenditure by the former Chairman of ADI, Mr A. A. S. Webster. With regard to the first point, the ADC established a special Management Committee to examine all aspects of the Auditor-General's reports dealing with managerial and accounting practices of AD!.
The ADC reported to me on 26 October 1979 recommending courses of action that could be taken to meet the Auditor-General's requirements. After close examination of the recommendations, I concluded that the following action was immediately required to overcome the deficiencies in the management and financial control of ADI: A clear definition of the powers, authorities and delegations of ADC and ADI boards and management; an upgrading of systems documentation and approval processes; procedures and controls in the Hong Kong office to be streamlined and made efficient; all future variations to the salary rates and conditions of service of Hong Kong staff and expatriate staff employed by ADI to be considered and determined by the full board

of ADI, as opposed to the previous practice where these were determined by the Chairman; future borrowings by ADI to be subject to guidelines developed by me and the Treasurer (Mr Howard); investments by ADI to accord with guidelines determined by me; procedures to be clearly established to govern the conditions of overseas travel and aquittal of travel expenses for the Chairman, board members and staff of ADI; a clear policy to be stipulated for the payment of dividends and retained earnings of ADI; the chargiflg of expenditureand the allocation of costs between ADC, ADI and the joint venture. companies be delineated; annual fees paid to Directors of ADI to be approved by the board of the ADC and advised to me; guidelines for meeting and accounting for entertainment expenses to be determined by the board of AD!.
Action has been taken to implement all of the foregoing measures. However, the guidelines for future borrowings and investments by ADI are awaiting final approval. The current situation with regard to the borrowing guidelines is that they are now the subject of final consideration between me, the Treasurer and the boards of the ADC and AD!. In the meantime, no borrowings can be approved without the specific approval of both me and the Treasurer. Similarly, investment guidelines are currently in the process of final consideration between me and the boards of ADC and ADI and no investment is being undertaken without my specific approval.
I now turn to the second part of the Auditor General's reports, namely that dealing with the appropriateness of certain expenditure by the former Chairman of the ADI, Mr Webster. In doing so, I want to stress 'to honourable members that I have been determined to ensure that this matter be handled properly and fairly and in the interests of justice to all concerned. It is for this fundamental reason that the Government chose to treat the Auditor-General's reports as confidential until all investigations were completed. I appreciate that the matter has taken a long time to bring to finality. However, it was necessary to have all matters investigated fully which, at times, involved my Department in obtaining legal advice, and I was determined to ensure that nobody should be pre-judged. After receiving i<.:gal advice, I asked the Secretary of my Department to seek investigation by the Australian .Federal Police into this aspect of the Auditor-General's reports. This was done on 13 August 1980. The final police report was received by my Department on 24 September 1981, and following receipt of legal advice, I am now in a position to address the House on the details of this entire issue.

Australian Dairy Corporation

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2689

The Australian Federal Police, the Crown Solicitor and Counsel are all of the view that there is insufficient evidence available capable of establishing beyond reasonable doubt the commission of any criminal offence by Mr Webster.
While on this subject, I wish to refer to a question that the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) asked me on 13 October 1981 concerning an article that appeared in the 3 October issue of Business Review Weekly and implied that I had agreed to the repayment by Mr Webster to the Australian Dairy Corporation of some $6,400 in June of last year. The facts of the matter are that the Board of the ADC decided at a meeting on 8 May 1980 that Mr Webster should repay an amount of $6,276.46 to AD!. I learned of the decision on 10 May. The decision that Mr Webster should repay that amount was made by the ADC Board. The amount included expenditure claimed in connection with travel and accommodation of Mr Webster's family in 1978 and 1979, and the replacement of clothing lost on overseas visits in 1978.
The Acting Chairman, in a letter of 19 May, advised me that he had put the Board's decision to Mr Webster on 18 May, and while Mr Webster did not agree with the decision, he had handed to Mr Pyle a cheque payable to ADI covering the amount in question.. Subsequently, in a letter dated 5 June 1980, Mr Pyle advised me of some inaccuracies in the original calculations, and that the amount of money repayable by Mr Webster should have been $6,426.20. In that same letter, Mr Pyle advised me that he had received from Mr Webster the full amount of $6,426.20.

basis that they would only be used for police purposes. Clearly, should material obtained under such circumstances becomes public knowledge, it would have a damaging effect on the capacity of the Australian Federal Police to carry out its responsibilities and duties. I have therefore concurred with Sir Colin's request that the 'brief of evidence' not be made public. However, I propose that other documents relating to the police investigation be tabled, including, in view of the particular circumstances of this case, the police reports.
It is also my intention that other documents relating to the Auditor-General's reports be tabled. These will provide honourable members with the details, and will enable them to make a meaningful assessment of the circumstances surrounding the audit inquiry, and the subsequent investigations and remedial actions that have been taken. Because of the amount of documentation and the great number of issues involved, it would be impractical from me to cover every individual item in this statement. Therefore, to facilitate members' understanding of the issues, I have had a special document prepared by my Department listing all of the matters raised by the A~ditor General on managerial and financial control of ADI, and indicating the action that has been taken in each case. I now table this document. I also table the reports of the Auditor-General, the reports of the Australian Federal Police, and other correspondence, together with an index of this material for the benefit of honourable members.

All this information was passed on to the Crown Solicitor's office on 19 June 1980. The fact that Mr Webster had made the repayment in no way exonerated him and had no bearing on the subsequent decision to refer certain matters to the Australian Federal Police. The point in referring these matters to the police was to establish whether or not there was any criminal conduct on Mr Webster's part. The fact that the ADC Board had resolved that he should make a repayment, and the fact that he did subsequently make a repayment, in no way prejudiced or impinged on the police investigations.
A final point that I want to make on the matter of past expenditure by the former Chairman concerns the documents that I intend to table. The Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, Sir Colin Woods, has indicated that witness statements included in the 'brief of evidence' collected by his officers were made in confidence and on the

Overlapping Aspects of Auditor-General's and Senate Committee Reports
There are a number of aspects that were raised in the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations on the ADC and its Asian subsidiaries which were also covered by the Auditor-General's reports, and on
which Government action has already been taken. Broad aspects referred to by the Committee relate to payments of daily allowances in addition to expenses actually incurred, apparent excessive payments to Hong Kong staff fcir entertainment and other expenses, credit card expenditure for which there was no documentation or verification, lack of supporting documentation or justification for overseas travel of ADI directors and staff. As these matters are covered in the documents I have just tabled, and as action has previously been taken to rectify each of those issues, I do not intend to take them further.

2690 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Australian Dairy Corporation

There are also speCific matters raised in the Auditor-General's reports which have been referred to in the report of the Senate Committee and in the media. First is the. arrangement ADI entered into with the ADC subsidiary in Thailand, Thai Dairy Industry Co. Ltd, which resulted in the possible evasion of Thai taxation. Until the arrangement was queried by audit, the management of ADI had considered, based on legal advice obtained in Thailand, that it was within Thai law. After the audit, however, the boards of ADI and ADC considered the issue and took it up with Thai taxation officials, who indicated that taxation was payable. Following assessment by the Thai authorities, an amount of $215,247 in due taxation, and $10,825 in interest arising from the late payment, was paid in July 1980. I would like to put on public record that the Government is most concerned that the agencies of statutory authorities abide by the letter and intent of the laws of the countries in which they are operating. To this end, the ADC and ADI have been instructed to ensure that the taxation requirements of foreign countries are adhered to at all times.
A payment of approximately $5,000 to a retiring ADI director, Mr E. G. McCartney, was commented upon by the Senate Committee. The payment was made in accordance with a practice established over many years that ADI directors who held executive office were provided with a facility for a farewell visit to the operating
companies in South East Asia. For the purpose of making the visit, the ADI Board approved the payment to Mr McCartney on 1 September 1980. While Mr McCartney was unable to undertake the visit at that time, because of family circumstances, he undertook the visit in the following year.
The appropriateness of sponsorships in Australia by ADI was raised by the Auditor General in view of the company's limited activities in this country. This matter was also reported on by the Senate Committee and, as noted in paragraph 4: 13 of its report, detailed guidelines were decided upon in July 1980 by the Board of the ADC with respect to the provision of any further sponsorships. The guidelines which define clear conditions under which sponsorships may be offered were approved by me on 20 August 1980.
The Auditor-General also reported, and the Senate Committee has commented on, a $US 10,000 overpayment in retirement benefits to Mr Yetsenga, a former employee of Thai Dairy Industries and ADI, and also to payments amounting to $245 made by ADI on behalf of a Mrs Kent. The Auditor-General reported that Mr

Yetsenga had been overpaid $US 10,000 under a severence settlement and that this amount was written off by ADI without documented evidence of any attempts to effect recovery. This matter has been considered by the Boards of both ADC and AD!. Solicitors advised the ADC that they did not believe that the risks and expenses of litigation in connection with the matter were justified when compared with the chances of success. My Department was advised of this opinion on 24 February 1981 and took action to obtain the views of the Commonwealth Crown Solicitor as to whether he was in agreement with the opinion a-nd whether any action should be taken against the former Chairman of ADI who authorised the writing off of the amount. The Crown Solicitor advised that on the information available to him, he did not think it possible to reach any conclusion that an amount was or was not recoverable by AD!.
In the meantime, the Boards of ADC and ADI had already decided, in the light of the legal advice received from their solicitors, .to take no further action. The Senate Committee report also notes that certain expenses, totalling some $A245, of a Mrs E. Kent had been met by AD!. These costs were met by ADI on the authorisation of the then ADI Chairman. Such authorisation was within the limits of the Chairman's authority at that time and it was therefore not considered appropriate to reverse the decision. However, authorisations of this nature must now be made by the full board of the AD!. This requirement came into force on 19 October 1979.
The Senate Committee also pointed out that in respect of some functions the ADI had powers greater than its parent body, the ADC. The matter of borrowing powers was instanced. This had also been referred to by the Auditor-General. I have already mentioned that guidelines are presently being prepared by the Treasurer and myself, to ensure that future ADI borrowings conform with Government policy, and that in the meantime any borrowings by ADI are subject to the approval of the Treasurer and myself.
Issues Raised by Senate Committee Report
i now turn to specific issues which have been
raised in the Senate Committee report, but which were not mentioned by the Auditor-General's reports. First is the special account which was set up for the purpose of receiving moneys associated with rebates, including the $A25 per tonne rebate paid on skim milk powder sales to Holland Milk Products, Inc., known as HOMP!. Many questions have been raised in respect of the rebate and the rebate account. Obviously, after such a length

Australian Dairy Corporation

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2691

of time difficulties can be anticipated in obtaining certain documents and relevant information. This
will be particularly so in view of the fact that the
agreement was negotiated outside Australia and many of the relevant documents may never have
been brought into this country.

Nevertheless, the Government is determined to obtain as much information as possible about the
arrangement. To this end, the Chairman of the ADC, Mr Malcolm Vawser, visited Manila for
discussions with Mr Uytengsu on 9 October 1981.
Mr Uytengsu has advised that the amounts standing to the credit of the special account were distributed in full to shareholders in the HOMPI
enterprise, following which the account was closed. Nevertheless, I want to find out whether
the ADC's involvement in this account was ap-
propriate. I have therefore decided to request the Auditor-General to undertake an examination of
all aspects of the rebate arrangement, including
the accounting procedures by which the money was transferred from Australia; the amount and nature of funds remitted overseas by the ADC to be paid into the account; the agreement by which
the original Australian equity was disposed of; and the ultimate disbursement from and closure of the account. To assist him in this task the
Auditor-General will be able to co-opt other
expert assistance as he considers necessary.

Another matter referred to in the Senate Com-

mittee report and one which has attracted public

comment was the provision of an ADC vehicle for

the Deputy Chairman, Mr W. H. Pyle and what

Mr Pyle has said in respect of the disconnection of

the speedometer of that vehicle. The Chairman of

the ADC, Mr Vawser, has reported to me that Mr

Pyle advised him that he, Mr Pyle,

-

disconnected the speedometer for

reasons best understood by himself.' It seems clear

that Mr Pyle would have received certain dupli-

cate payments in respect of the use of the ADC

vehicle but, as the Senate Committee has

indicated, it is not possible to verify the extent of

overpayment. The Senate Committee found, in

paragraph A2.32 of its report:

The Committee concludes that it is impossible to establish the validity ofMr Pyle's claims for running costs in 1979.

The Senate Committee also stated in paragraph A2.33 of its report:

We are not able to conclude whether Mr Pyle did in fact disconnect the speedo or whether he used this statement to attempt to explain the duplicated claims for expenses. Certainly, it makes it impossible to establish the extent of the duplication. The Committee considers that Mr Pyle's behaviour in relation to the disconnection of the speedo speaks for itself. We are not concerned to decide whether Mr Pyle's actions were, in his words, 'stupid more than dishonest,' or

whether they were dishonest more than stupid, they were certainlya combination of both.
The Government has given careful consideration to this matter and has decided that it is not appropriate for Mr Pyle to continue as Deputy Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation and be in a position where he would from time to time act as Chairman of the Corporation. I have, therefore, terminated Mr Pyle's appointment as Deputy Chairman of the Corporation. However, the Government does not regard Mr Pyle's actions to be of such a nature as to warrant the extreme step of removing him from the Board of the Corporation. Mr Pyle has made a very significant contribution to the Australian dairy industry. He will be able to continue that contribution as a member of the ADC Board, and in the elected positions as President of the United Dairyfarmers of Victoria, and Vice-President of the Australian Dairy Farmers Federation. The Government guidelines applying to the purchase and use of motor vehicles by statutory authorities have been re-emphasised to the current Chairman of the ADC and are now being strictly observed by the ADC. Moreover, administrative procedures have been tightened to ensure proper accountability, so far as the use of Corporation vehicles is concerned.
The third matter raised by the Senate Committee refers to the question of the ownership of the Dairying Industry Stabilisation Fund. I have asked my Department to meet with representatives of the ADC and the dairy industry to consider the Senate Committee's recommendations and report to me on this matter.
Goyernment Responses to Senate Committee Recommendations
As honourable members would know, the Senate Committee has made a number of recommendations in-its report on the Australian Dairy Corporation and its Asian subsidiaries. Several of these recommendations relate to general issues of principle, such as ministerial control of statutory authorities, including powers of direction; rules governing the relationship between statutory authorities and any associated companies; the duties and responsibilities of departmental members on the boards of statutory authorities; the duties of other members of boards of statutory authorities and of nominees of statutory authorities on the boards of associated companies; financial and staffing arrangements for statutory authorities; and requirements for reporting by statutory authorities and any associated companies. These issues were already

2692 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Australian Dairy Corporation

being considered by an inter-departmental committee.
It is generally accepted policy that the Government undertakes to give a detailed response to the recommendations of parliamentary committee reports within six months. In line with this policy I will be requesting the Auditor-General to report on the HOMPI rebate arrangement, and my Department to report on the ownership of the Dairying Industry Stabilisation Fund, in time for the Government to further respond to the Senate Committee report during the 1982 autumn sittings of Parliament. By that time, the Government should also be in a position to comment on the general issues of principle relating to statutory authorities raised by the Senate Committee following consideration of the IDC report.
Additional Submission by the ADC on GATT Issues
I would also like to take the opportunity to refer to a matter which, although not related to the reports of the Auditor-General and the Australian Federal Police, has received some publicity recently. This matter dealt with the question of whether any breaches of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade skim milk powder minimum pricing arrangement had occurred apart from those made under the HOMPI arrangement. The ADC has prepared a report on this matter and a copy of it has been made available to me. I table this document.
The advice from the Corporation is to the effect that it is not possible to determine precisely whether or not the actual net FOB price for skim milk powder sold between April and October 1976 was in breach of the GATT minimum price for skim milk powder. On the basis of information supplied by shipping companies it appears that no breach occurred. However, two aspects of the matter are of particular concern. The first relates to conclusions reached by the management of the ADC that a deliberate effort had been made by past ADC management to establish incorrect records in order to be able to demonstrate that the GATT minimum price had not been breached. The second is the inability of ADC management to locate certain documents in respect of this matter. The report states that during the period in question~probably in 1975 or 1976~the then Chairman of the ADC, Mr Webster, abolished the central filing system. While that system has since been restored, the earlier action has resulted in difficulty being experienced in locating some documents relevant to that period. I have asked my Department to investigate all aspects of the

report and will make further information available at the appropriate time.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that the Government has been determined to ensure that this entire issue be brought to a proper and satisfactory conclusion. I personally have wished that it could have been brought to finality well before now. However, I have also wanted to ensure that all steps taken have been taken properly and with due consideration to all the issues involved. It is for these reasons that I have been prepared not to rush the matter and to seek legal advice whenever and wherever I have thought it appropriate. I believe the documents now before the Parliament clearly demonstrate that the Government has tackled this issue both properly and thoroughly. I also believe the decisions that have been taken have been the correct and proper decisions, and that the operations of both the Australian Dairy Corporation and Asia Dairy Industries will be much improved as a result. I appreciate that this issue has created a lot of concern and worry for the Australian dairy industry, for the Corporation, and for Asia Dairy Industries. I hope that those concerns can now be put to rest, and I would like to express the Government's continuing confidence in the futlire of the Asia Dairy Industries operation. I present the following papers:
Australian Dairy Corporation-Ministerial Statement, 29 October 1981-and related documents.
Motion (by Mr Wilson) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Suspension of Standing Orders
Motion (by Mr Wilson)~by leave~agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member for Werriwa speaking for a period not exceeding 30 minutes.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (12.3)~1 thank the House. The Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) has made a very long statement about matters going back over five years, if not nine years. It relates to very serious matters that have occurred within the Australian Dairy Corporation and its subsidiaries. These matters are variou~ly known as a scandal, a bungle or a blunder. There have been allegations of criminality and of Ministers being involved in breaches of international trading arrangements. The situation is very serious. The matters that the Minister for Primary IlJdustry has canvassed bear out in full a lot of the speculation, the work of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations, the Rae Committee, on this matter and all the attendant publicity.

Australian Dairy Corporation

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2693

I think most people will be disappointed with this statement in terms of some of the more dramatic aspects of the issue. Some people are now believed by all members of this House to have been guilty of the falsification and burning of records. Records have been pulled out of the Australian Dairy Corporation and the Department of Primary Industry. People will be very concerned that after five years of knowledge within the Department and the Australian Dairy Corporation of problems with the Corporation and its . Asian subsidiaries, all that will happen is that Bill Pyle is to be half sacked because he disconnected his speedo. That is a rather damning indictment of the powers of this Government to bring to account those people guilty of putting the Australian dairy industry at so much risk and for possibly ruining Australia's reputation in the eyes of our international trading partners.
This morning we were talking about the standards of the House and the Government. The standards of the right honourable member for Wannon, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) are what is bringing the parliament into disrepute. The statement by the Minister for Primary Industry is a complete abdication from the concept of ministerial responsibility. Under the present Prime Minister the concept no longer prevails in any way, shape or form. All his fine words of the past are for nothing. He practises double standards. I will quote from an interesting discussion on the principle of ministerial responsibility, especially as it affects relations between Ministers and officials. It took place in 1972 at the summer school of the Australian Institute of Political Science. The orthodox view of the relationship, as stated by the right honourable member for Wannon, who was then the Minister for Education and Science, was that there must be a confidential relationship between Ministers and public servants and that this relationship was contingent upon a proper system of ministerial responsibility.
He said:
It is certainly true that ministers cannot be aware of everything that occurs in their departments . . . But iF a major blunder occurred ina department, of real importance to Australia, and iF the minister were unaware of it, that minister should take responsibility For the mistakes of his department and offer to resign.
Those were the fine words of the past. They were spoken when, as the records show, some of these things were being perpetrated for the first time. Of course, this has been a major blunder and it is of real importance to Australia because it concerns our. international trading obligations and responsibilities. We all accept that no Minister can be responsible for everything that goes on in

his Department. I think the Minister for Primary Industry has 27 statutory authorities under his control-and ministerial responsibility, to use the words that we no longer take any notice of. I draw the analogy of the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) and the mustard gas issue. No one says that he can be responsible for what happened all those years ago. But if he has knowledge of the matter and has taken no action on it, or has misled the House about it, he certainly is guilty. By analogy, I believe that the present Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) must now accept ministerial responsibility for what went on during the time he. was Minister for Primary Industry, and the present Minister for Primary Industry, who is also at the table, must also accept some responsibility for not having acted sooner on all these matters.
It is clear now that these statements are still only preliminary; they are a stop gap. Many, if not most, of the questions raised by the Rae Committee still remain unanswered and the Minister has freely acknowledged that. I welcome the processes he has put in train within the Australian Dairy Corporation, but they should have been done in 1977 and 1978 when some of these problems were known. That was the responsibility of the previous Minister for Primary Industry. It is also clear now that we will never learn wha.t happened. We will never learn the truth of some of the matters because the records are missing. I will quote from the transcript of an interview conducted by Simon Nasht on the A.M. program yesterday morning.
Mr Cadman-Is that your authority?
Mr KERIN-It is. Malcolm Vawser of the Australian Dairy Corporation agreed. to what Nasht was putting to him. The transcript states:
An internal investigation within theOairy Corporation completed just last month shows that crucial records of the event surrounding the GATT breach are inexplicably missing. Their whereabouts unknown. The internal investigation outlined in a letter to the Committee by the General Manager of the Corporation and approved by the entire Board also says there were attempts to deliberately Falsify records covering the GATT breaches.
If it's just coincidence that these records are the ones that are missing then its made more astounding by the Corporations conclusion that there was a deliberate attempt to Falsify official export documentation concerning the crucial GATT breach. it's alleged that the two men then in charge of the Corporation's International Marketing Division, Mr Peter Foster and Mr Al Page, were acting under instructions and have further information on this matter. Neither are with the Corporation any longer.
I believe one is with a private dairy company. The transcript continues:
The much maligned Department of Primary Industry is now investigating these findings.

2694 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Australian Dairy Corporation

That statement was agreed to by Mr Vawser, the Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation. It supports my point that it is clear now that the truth on many of these matters will never come out. Just as Mr Wallace gave evidence before the Rae Committee that records of the Department of Primary Industry were missing or never created, it is quite clear that records within the Australian Dairy Corporation will never see the light of day. This is a major scandal. It seems a great pity that one man not involved with ministerial responsibility-it was Mr Pyle's responsibility for disconnecting his speedo-is to be the scapegoat in this sordid affair. I suppose it will be portrayed in the Gippsland area as the Peacock and Rae group versus the Prime Minister and the National Country Party. We all know that the National Country Party Ministers never get sacked by this Prime Minister. I do not know how true that is but it bears a lot of truth. We know that there are elements of tension within the coalition on this matter. It is a pity that one man should be made a scapegoat when we look at the real issues in this question such as the missing millions of dollars which the Minister says in his statement have just simply disappeared. We will never know the truth of all these matters.
Mr Young-The same as the funeral parlours-moneys misappropriated by persons unknown.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) -Order!
Mr KERIN-That may be too.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order!
Mr Sinclair-Mr Deputy Speaker, I ask that that remark be withdrawn.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Werriwa is required to withdraw the reflection.
Mr Sinclair-It was the interjection, Mr Deputy Speaker.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I beg your pardon. There was. a confusion of interjections. The honourable member for Port Adelaide will withdraw the remark.
Mr Young-I understand that a new precedent has been set in the House. You can say anything about members now and if Sinclair is a crook you can call him a crook; that is what the Speaker says.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member compounds his offence. I ask him not to do so but to withdraw the interjection.
Mr Young-I withdraw.

Mr KERIN-What I am saying is that the real issues, the missing millions of dollars and the question of who purged those documents from the Australian Dairy Corporation, probably will never see the light of day, and that is a great pity. I say that the most serious issue is the whole idea of ministerial responsibility. The standards have fallen pretty badly. Once upon a time a Liberal Minister made a phone call that he should not have made and he was sacked. We now have abundant evidence of massive irregularities involving National Country Party Ministers and we all know, before we even start a debate on this matter, that nothing will be said to either of them. Only Liberal Ministers are sacked by this Government. In many ways, I think we can say that Peter Nixon makes Richard Nixon look like a bit of a--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member knows full well that he should address members and Ministers of this House either by their electorate or by their portfolio. I also remind the honourable member that he should maintain strict relevance to the matter before the House. I have permitted him to digress somewhat on matters which are more relevant to a substantive motion.
Mr KERIN-Mr Deputy Speaker, I think we can say quite plainly that National Country Party Ministers in this House rely on the rural establishment not to come forward, but I think they may have made a mistake by picking on Pyle. But let us get back to the matter before us.
Mr Lloyd-You wanted him sacked a minute ago.
Mr KERIN-No one is defending what Pyle did. I am simply saying that in terms of the seriousness of the issues which we aU know about it is a great pity that we are riot going to get to the truth of the matter. It is rather disappointing to all of us and to the public that one man is singled out as a scapegoat just because he disconnected a speedo. So Mr Webster gets off. I accept the authorities referred to by the Minister for Primary Industry. They have made their legal decision. Quite frankly, I have not had time to read the 155 dOyuments in the two hours in which they have been in my possession. But I take it that what is in those 155 documents is a faithful representation of what is in the Minister's statement. I accept those things. The Minister says that these authorities say that Mr Webster cannot be charged with any criminal offence because there is insufficient evidence. Of course there is; aU the records within the Australian Dairy Corporation have been purged. Or is a fact that a deal may have been

Australian Dairy Corporation

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2695

done with Mr Webster? Is it a fact that Mr Webster has documents that he knows may implicate Ministers in this House? We have to ask this question very seriously indeed, and that has been put to me by many people within the dairy industry.
During the debate on the recent censure motions concerning the Minister for Primary Industry and the Government a lot was said about the findings of the Rae Committee. That report was not discussed properly and the Opposition welcomes what the Minister has said about parts of it. It welcomes the chance to debate those matters in the report in greater detail at a later stage as the Minister has promised. But by and large that report is still to be discussed. The debate at that time centred on the knowledge of the continuing breach of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of the former Minister for Primary Industry, the present Minister for' Communications. Mr Webster gave evidence on oath to that Senate Committee. The Minister for Communications refused to go to that Committee. In connection with that breach of GATT I will quote evidence given by Mr Webster. He said:
. . . I reported it to the Minister; . , . I did it and reported what I had done.
It~~
That is the Government-
was aware.
He gave that evidence under oath. The Government has backed the Minister for Communications and has said that it accepts his version. The Minister for Communications has given what evidence was put to the Committee to back him; that is, evidence from the Department of Primary Industry and the departmental officers who gave evidence to that Committee. But the Minister for Communications refuses to answer any question that will directly implicate him in this House, and I suppose we do not blame him for that. But is the Government fair dinkum? It cannot lay charges on missing amounts of money-I think it was about $6,426-and whether he breached parts of the law with respect to the statutory corporat"ions in some of his activities, because of insubstantial or insufficent evidence, but if the Government is fair dinkum, why does it not charge Mr Webster with perjury? What we have here is a clash between the evidence of the Minister for Communications and the evidence of Mr Webster before that Committee. The Government has to ask this question seriously if it really does believe and back the Minister for Communications. The Government says that it cannot pin Mr Webster in terms of the money and his activities ,in the Australian Dairy Corporation and Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd. Why does it not charge him

with perjury because quite clearly both Mr Webster and the Minister for Communications cannot both be telling the truth. So why does the Government not charge Mr Webster with perjury for the evidence he gave before the Senate Committee?
Due to the arrogance of the Minister for Communications the breach of GATT has not become the main issue; the main issue is whether he misled or possibly lied to the Parliament and whether he knew of the continuing breach. I say that the breach is not the main issue because it was about only $10 a tonne, or at the most about $25 a tonne, which was the rebate being paid. After all, it was an arrangement and other countries, including New Zealand, were breaching the agreement. There was a mountain of skim milk powder at that time. But the arrogance of the Minister for Communications leads him to say that he knew nothing of the breach; that when he found out about it he stopped it and then it was not his responsibility any more. Yesterday, when a question was asked of him, he took refuge in saying that there were many discussions on these things but that it was a matter for the Australian Dairy Corporation to put in order after he issued that original instruction. It was the Corporation's responsibility from that time on. That may be fair enough but we really have to know if we are to find out the truth about that. The Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) came into the debate on the censure of the Government and said that there was not a mountain of skim milk powder. Yesterday the Minister for Communications said that there was. I accept the version at that time of the Minister for Communications.
There are really significant issues remaining on this matter. They first of all centre on the Minister for Communications. We still do not know whether he deceived the Parliament. We do not know when he knew about the breach of the GATT arrangement. We do not know fully yet what Mr Webster's role in the breach was. Did Mr Webster inform the Minister for Communications, and if so when? Did the Minister for Communications ask Mr Webster to renegotiate? Mr Webster said at one stage that the issue was settled. The Minister said that he assumed that this meant 'fixed'. So there is a lot of conflict between them. Mr Webster 'assumes' in one case, in terms of the evidence in the transcripts, that the Minister knew what had" happened. Or did Mr Webster deceive the Minister for Communications and in fact not discharge the job that the Minister for Communications had given to him? We still do not know anything about all those matters. I really do think that the main issue is

2696 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Australian Dairy Corporation

ministerial responsibility. I must harp on that because we have a major blunder on our hands in this matter.
There are issues concerning Mr Webster quite apart from whether he perjured himself before the Rae Committee. Let us go through some of the issues that have been raised by the Minister in his report to the House today. Let us take some of the issues concerning Mr Webster, and I have already canvassed some of them. Take his knowledge of and the continuance of the breach of GATT. Why? Then there is his improper claim on ADI for travel expenses. The Minister has answered that today; it cannot really be worked out. There was one delightful remark in the Minister's statement that the Attorney-General did not know whether Mr Webster had or had not improperly claimed. So it looks as though there was not much evidence around on that one. The $6,400 claim was a result of Mr Webster being called to Geneva by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources for a day, a stay which extended to a week. This was probably-but we do not know-because of the very GATT breach about which we have been talking which is central to this matter. But, of course, the Deputy Prime Minister will say nothing about that. Mr Webster repaid this $6,400 or so but we really do not know at whose behest. The Minister was very careful in his statement today to say 'regardless of whether or not Mr Webster repaid that money' but that still does not say anything about the criminality of him doing it. We do not know at whose behest he paid back this money. We do not know also where that leaves him legally with the ADI. Most important in this matter with which we are dealing is the Minister for Communications' knowledge of Mr Webster's actions. That very clearly is in the orbit of ministerial responsibility.
If we look at the Australian Dairy Corporation, Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd, at the breach of the GATT arrangements and at the arrangements entered into, going right back to Mr McCartney's time, we are missing millions of dollars as a result of the rebate arrangements, the bank acounts that were used and the arrangements entered into with the Hong Kong and Singapore banks. The Opposition wishes to know whether or not the Minister for Communications had a continuing knowledge of this. If not, we want to know whether he endorsed a continuance of the breach. This clearly is a case of Ministerial responsibility, just as the abundant evidence of the complete incompetence of the Australian Dairy Corporation and Asia Dairy Industries is also a case for ministerial responsibility.

The next thing at which we need to look is the purge of records. When evidence was given before the Senate Comittee it appeared that records were missing from the Department of Primary Industry for the very important times.
Mr Nixon-No. No records were missing from the Department of Primary Industry.
Mr KERIN-I am relying on the evidence given by Mr Wallace who said that some records were missing. I will return to that matter later. Certainly, if the information which was made available to Mr Simon Nasht yesterday morning on the program AM is true, it would appear that Mr Norwood has written to the Senate committee saying that the relevant records, the export certificates in the Australian Dairy Corporation, are missing and that other records have been manipulated or falsified.
Mr Nixon-That was not done in the Departc ment of Primary Industry.
Mr KERIN-I am not saying that. I am talking about the purge of records. I am asking: At whose behest were these records purged? Were they purged at the behest of Mr Webster or the Minister for Communications? I do not think the Minister for Communications has any access to those records so we cannot blame him. I do not know whether or not Mr Webster had acces' to the records of the Department of Primary Industry. But, as I understand it, even this scandalous behaviour falls within the ambit of ministerial responsibility.
The last matter with which I wish to deal is the double claims for the car allowance paid to Mr Pyle by the Australian Dairy Corporation and Asia Dairy Industries; in all, less than $200, which amount is subject to argument. I just do not kow the exact figure or how many miles were involved. The Senate committee said that it could not really work it out in any case. It simply said that Mr Pyle's actions were stupid and dishonest. But this at least is not a case of ministerial responsibility. We cannot get any really hard evidence from the Minister for Communications. Perhaps no real hard evidence exists. I think the House must be very seriously worried about all the allegations and all these matters when they all were clearly under the Minister's control.
Today, during Question Time, some honourable mem:bers quoted from what the honourable member for New England (Mr Sinclair) had to say in this House on 9 July 1975. He stated:
There is a significant discrepancy-a discrepancy which puts one law for those who are in office against that applied to the man who has been dismissed.

Australian Dairy Corporation

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2697

We are talking about millions of dollars which are missing, documents which are missing and brea,ches of international trading agreements, yet the only scapegoat is a bloke who disconnected his speedo. The Prime Minister continues making these fine statements of principle on ministerial responsibility. I thought that by now I would have convinced the House that if a massive scandal has not been unearthed as a result of the Senate inquiry we certainly have a bungle on our hands.
I have been stressing ministerial responsibility. While this may be a floored concept and observers in the media, academia and the public may be cynical about it, we have a duty in this Parliament to adhere to the concept until clear guidelines are laid down. I remind the House once again of what the Prime Minister said about ministerial responsibility. He stated:
It is certainly true that ministers cannot be aware of everything that occurs in their departments . . . But if a major blunder occurred in a department, of real importance to Australia, and if the minister were unaware of it, that minister should take responsibility for the mistakes of his department and offer to resign.
I wish to quote another statement made by the Prime Minister. In his electorate broadcast on 12 March 1981 he said:
My Government has demonstrated again and again our fundamental commitment to restoring integrity to public administration in Australia. Our record in this regard is without parallel in our history. As long as I lead 'the Government, there is no way known that anything less than the highest code and practice of public administration will be tolereated.
I have quoted from three statements-all fine words-but where is all that now with all that has gone on in the statutory corporation under the responsibility of the Minister for all those years? We all know that no National Country Party Minister gets sacked while the present Prime Minister leads this Government. I really put to the House very seriously that this is a case of ministerial responsibility. The Minister of that day should have offered to resign or should now offer to resign. I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'this House lacks confidence in the Ministers for Communications and Primary Industry because of their failure to carry OLlt their Ministerial responsibilities, because of their cover up of and inaction with respect to activities known to them over months and years, because of the Minister for Communication's complicity in the continuing breach of the GATT arrangement and because of the Minister for Primary Industry's failure to bring all people to account in the Asia Dairy Industries and Australian Dairy Corporation scandal.'
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (12.29)- Mr Deputy Speaker, I second the amendment. Today in this House we received a report that possibly could have been delivered many months

ago. For some reason we have had to wait for a very long time to see it. The Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) claimed that the reason for the delay was to ensure that everything was done correctly and properly. But, of course, for all that time very well known men in the dairy industry, such as Mr Webster and many others, have had hanging over their heads the possibility that charges would be laid against them. All sorts of innuendoes and rumours have been put forward. The Minister has now come forward with his reportand has clearly stated that even though some $6,400 have been paid back by Mr Webster, the former Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation, no offences have been committed by Mr Webster.
Mr Fisher-That was a legal view, not the Minister's view.
Mr CUNNINGHAM-The honourable member for Mallee stated that that was a legal view. This view has been hanging over the heads of men within the dairy industry for a long time. Now the Minister has suddenly decided that Mr Bill Pyle, the Deputy Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation, is to be dem()ted. The Government has taken the decision that Mr Pyle will no longer be Deputy Chairman of the Corporation. This raises some interesting points. A long time ago, perhaps as far back as last November, Mr Pyle let it be known, in documents made available through the media-I have been reading them-that he paid back money because of overcharging. There is no doubt that at that stage the Minister was well aware, as was the whole dairy industry, that these things had been going on. Mr Pyle had admitted that he had disconnected the speedo of an Australian Dairy Corporation car. All of a sudden at this stage we find that it is a serious offence according to the Government and that he has to be dismissed. It has been announced to Parliament today that he has been dismissed from his position. Had action been taken when the Minister first knew about the matter in November, I wonder whether Mr Pyle would have been re-elected to the position he held and whether he would still be on the Board of the Corporation. Or will this be the way that the Country Party Ministers will continue to run their departments?
It has taken them 12 months to make a decision. Many things have happened in the industry in that time which it will not be easy to reverse. Had Mr Pyle been asked to resign 12 months ago would he have stood for the positions that he stood for and would he have been'elected to those positions? All that has happened after all the investigations, after five years of mismanagement by

2698 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Australian Dairy Corporation

the Minister for Primary Industry and the previous Minister for Primary Industry, and after five years of knowing what was going on one man has been dismissed-partly dismissed, at that!
Mr Young-Gee, Pyle Was unlucky, wasn't he?
Mr CUNNINGHAM-He has to be unlucky when one considers what has come out in many of the reports that have been before this Parliament.
Mr Lloyd-The previous speaker said he was lucky. He said he should have been sacked.
Mr CUNNINGHAM-He has been half sacked so one could say that he has been lucky and unlucky because the Minister cannot make up his mind which way he wants to go. He cannot make up his mind whether he should have fired him completely. Many pressures came from farming interests. They hopped into the Minister over the weekend. Perhaps he thought that Mr Pyle could have been fired but when the phone ran hot perhaps he decided that he would not dismiss Mr Pyle completely but only half sack him. So, as honourable members say, he is lucky in one way and unlucky in another way. He is unlucky to be the scapegoat for the Country Party blokes who
r are more intent on the fighting between the Minis-
ter iind the Country Party in my electorate. am well aware of the sorts of fights that are going on within the Country Party in that area. It is no wonder that they had to find a scapegoat and they found the right scapegoat.
The person who should be seriously investigated in this matter is the present Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair). We must remember that we would not have heard anything about this matter had it not been extracted from the Minister and his predecessor. The information has become known not because of their competence but because there have been leaks and because people have been able to discover that things were going wrong. So, by the process of extraction over many months and many years we have been able to find out little bits and pieces about this matter. Another matter has turned up in the last couple of days. It was reported on the AM program and clearly indicates that the problem is not over yet. The last page of this saga has not been written. Maybe we will hear a lot more aboutthis matter.
I refer to the difference between the Auditor General's approach to this matter and the police reports. On 22 Septemberin this House the Minister for Communications said:
When I was Minister for Primary Industry. the Auditor General advised me that the initial report be provided ,to me could not be"labled in this House.
On.24 September I asked the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) a question

relating to this very matter. 1 was not back in my office for five minutes when 1 received a phone call from the secretary to say that, quite clearly, the Minister had not answered the question correctly, that he was of the opinion that the reports would not be tabled and that they had to go to the Solicitor-General. That was what the Minister for Communications was telling everybody when he was in charge. Now we find that the present Minister has decided that the reports can be tabled. He said there are certain parts of reports that can be tabled. Why is it that the previous Minister who was responsible when all these problems were going on is now being backed up and sup,- ported by the present Minister and why is the
present Minister taking the opposite approach? The previous Minister did not see it as being within his position to do something about it but the present Minister is making some effort to overcome the situation.
That does not get down to the real basis of what the problems are in this matter. Vast sums of money were misappropriated. Apparently this happened under the rules set down by the Ministers running the Department of Pri'mary Industry. Certain amounts 'of money were documented in the Minister's statement. An amount of $6,000 had to be paid back by Mr Webster, an amount of $245 by Mrs Kent and 1 think an amount of $98 by Mr Pyle. Were all these things done in a way that was wrong and dishonest? Why was the
money paid back? Was it paid back because it was a mistake? Was it paid back because the Ministers who were in charge had not laid down proper ground rules? Are there Ministers in charge of statutory authorities who for many years have allowed things to go on in such a way that amounts of $6,000 can be misappropriated and paid back. In the normal running of my business, I cannot do something like that and say: 'I am sorry about it. I was wrong, I should not have done it. I will pay the money back'. There are many people walking around the streets today and many more behind bars who would love to have the opportunity to pay money back.
Whose responsibility is it in the Government to see that proper regulations are laid down. The proper use of travelling allowances, credit cards and these types of things are the responsibility of the Government. The Minister for Communications was aware of those things at the time. Why did he allow them to go on? He said that he could not table the report when he was in charge. Is that the reason why these things were allowed to go'on and why Mr Webster and Mr Pyle were allowed to proceed under the clear impression at the time that what they were doing WaS quite legal? Is that

Australian Dairy Corporation

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2699

the reason for the Minister now saying that he will half sack one of them and that the other was forced to resign at the time? They were doing, at the time, what was considered to be appropriate under the system by which this Government runs statutory authorities. There is no other way in which one can look at it.
Money has been spent by Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd on promotions in this country. The two Ministers, at various times, have sat at and were guest speakers at these dinners put on by Asia Dairy Industries: That statutory corporation paid thousands of dollars for dinners and for conferences. Guests at those dinners were addressed by the Minister for Primary Industry. They were addressed by the previous Minister for Primary Industry also. They were addressed always by Country Party or Liberal Party spokesmen who were invited. Yet the Ministers now say that the people who misappropriated funds were wrong and that they have no responsibility for what happened. As Ministers they took part in it. They ate at the tables when these dinners were served and then made speeches. Now they are saying that it was inappropriate for this sort of approach to be taken by Mr Webster and Mr Pyle. There is the hypocrisy. Where is the honesty in government when this type of thing can take place?
Apart from that, information is now available to which the Minister addressed himself at the end of his statement. I turn to the section of the statement headed 'Additional Submission by the ADC on GATT Issues'. The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade issues and whether the Minister for Communications at the time was aware of what was going on is probably the crux of the whole matter. He certainly was aware of the minor and trivial things. If he was not he was totally incompetent. If he is totally incompetent he should resign from his position in the Government.
Mr Campbell~Or both
Mr CUNNINGHAM-Yes, or both. The GATT situation is very interesting when one considers the fact that for six months of the year~I will get my dates correct here-the price of skim milk powder fell to the GATT minimum and problems were being encountered. Here I am not talking about Holland Milk Products, Inc. or the Philippines. I am talking about the fact that the minimum price of skim milk powder had collapsed around the world. From 2 April 1976 until 29 October 1976 there were serious doubts about whether the Australian industry was trading below the GATT minimum. In fact an exhaustive search which has been made of the Corporation

records shows that no trace can be found .of certificates of authorities to export skim milk powder for the period in question.
.Mr Fisher-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. I request that the document from which the honourable member for McMillan is reading be tabled.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-I think that rule applies only to Ministers. No doubt, if he wishes to table the document he can seek leave to doso.
Mr CUNNINGHAM-It is clear that at that time it was well known that the GATT arrangement was being breached. I now turn to Hansard of 22 September where the Minister, in his speech in this ,House, when talking about Mr Norwood's evidence to the inquiry, had this to say:
I have said that it was the arrangement entered into under GATT that was breached and was not a breach of GATT. [ draw the attention of the I-[ouse similarly to my letter of 16 March 1981 at page 139 of the report which states:
I recall discussing the situation with tlie then Chairman of the ADC, Mr A. A. S. Webster.in November 1976 and requesting him to take action to rectify the situation so that the GATT minimum price would be observed.
That happens to be the end of the period in relation to which some of these documents are now apparently very hard to find. That occurred during a six-month period in 1976. The Minister has admitted, in his own words:
I recall discussing the situation with the then Chairman of the ADC, Mr A. A. S. Webster in November 1976 and requesting him to take action to rectify the situation so that the GATT minimum price would be observed.
Mr Vawser indicated on the program AM the other morning that he considers this to be a very serious situation. In the period between April 1976 and 29 October 1976 the price, if it was not
under the GATT price, was very close to It. On 29
October the Corporation advised the industry that the Australian minimum price had been raised to $400. Two things can be said of this. The Minister went to the industry and said either, 'You had better do something about fixing this up and then notify the authoritories that it has been fixed up' or, 'We had better'do something to see that the minimum price is observed'. From the document, and the fact that some falsification apparently has taken place, the question could be asked: On whose instructions did this take place? Was the Minister involved? Did he know that these sorts of things were going on at the time? Are documents' still available that might show that things were not what they should have been? From the Minister's statement it appears that he has asked his Department to investigate all aspects of the matter. The saga will probably continue. I do not think that this great report that we

2700 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Australian Dairy Corporation

have waited for will end it. The only thing we have found out so far is that one little scapegoat has been half sacked from the Corporation for taking the speedometer off his car.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications) (12.44)-We are debating an . amendment which has been moved to the motion that the House take note of the paper. First of all, I want to talk about-----.:
Mr Nixon-There are not too many Opposition members present.
Mr SINCLAIR-Yes, that indicates the level of their interest in the dairy industry and, I might add, in rural matters generally. We are debating predominantly a statement that has been presented in this Parliament by my colleague, the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon). It pertains to a very important industry which has been through very considerable economic difficulties. The creation of a statutory authority to operate the affairs of that industry and to ensure that international marketing was carried out in an efficient way was something that had bipartisan support at the time that it occurred.
The Australian Dairy Corporation took over from the Australian Dairy Produce Board. The appointment of the first Chairman of the Dairy Corporation and the establishment of the Corporation took place during the days of the Labor Government. The Chairman, about whom a good deal has been said today, Mr Tony Webster, was appointed by the then Government in July 1975. He took up office in September 1975. The reason I have risen to speak in support of my colleague's statement is that a number of assertions have been made that in some way suggest that the Government, and I in particular, did not act in such a way as to ensure proper controls of the finances and accounting records of the Australian Dairy Corporation or its subsidiaries and that in some way I was responsible for actions that were taken by the then Chairman, Mr Tony Webster, to whom I have just referred. I want to pick up the remarks that have been made by the two members of the Opposition who have spoken in the House today. It does seem to me that there are very real questions that need to be asked. I think it is most unfortunate that the result of the Auditor-General's inquiry, the Australian Federal Police reports and the reports of the Attorney-General (Senator Durack), in spite of very serious actions which have demonstrably not been in accordance with what any of us would regard as proper bounds of responsibility, is that the only action that can be taken is that which has been outlined by my colleague this morning.

The first matter that needs to be identified is that the statements with respect to ministerial responsibility, which have been quoted several times this morning, have one fundamental criterion-that is, if there was knowledge and no action then certain ministerial responsibility should flow. There has been nothing said to indicate that knowledge in the reports that have been presented in this place. I urge those honourable members who wish to pursue the matter further to analyse the great volume of reports that my colleague has tabled. I might point out the fact that everything has been tabled other than some reports which the Australian Federal Police Commissioner has suggested should not be tabled, and they relate only to some evidence obtained by the Federal Police. If one looks at these reports one sees that at no stage did any member of the Ministry or the Government have any knowledge of these matters. As .soon as there was knowledge, of course, action was taken. I draw the attention of all honourable gentlemen to the comments made by the Minister for Primary Industry on page 2 of the ministerial statement. He stated:
There was also concern about the accuracy of the fi nancial records of ADC and ADI.
At the time the section 63p of the Audit Act reference was made to the Commonwealth Auditor General, there had been a report made to me, to my then permanent head of the Department of Primary Industry and to officers of the Department of Primary Industry by officers of the Australian Dairy Corporation which, aligned with the other two reasons which are set down in the Minister's statement, led to our concern as to whether the accounts of the Corporation were totally in accord with what we had believed was a total and honest appraisal. It was with that in mind that we sent the initial inquiry to the Auditor-General and it was as to those matters-my colleague referred to this-that we received an initial report. The Minister noted that an initial report was forwarded to the then Minister, which was, of course, myself, by the Auditor-General on 3 August 1979.
All the documents have been tabled. I do not want to go into them today because I have not had an opportunity to read them and to find them in the volume of papers. Let me point out that in that report from the Auditor-General there was reference to these deficiencies in the management and operation of ADI and its dealings with ADC. As a result of that I asked that the Auditor General's report be tabled in this Parliament. Honourable members will See that in the Auditor General's response to my request the advice from the Auditor-General was that special audits of

Australian Dairy Corporation

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2701

this kind were not normally to be made available in the Parliament. In fact, he recommended that it be not tabled. It is for that reason that I have consistently said it was the advice of the Auditor General that the report was not to be published here.
Secondly, there has been some suggestion that in some way I and the Government should have had knowledge of what was happening within the functions of ADC. Again, I draw the attention of honourable members to a very material circumstance-that is, the action by the then Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation with respect to the central filing system of the Corporation. The documents that are missing are documents within the Australian Dairy Corporation. The documents that were altered with respect to the pricing policy and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade minimum price were within the control of the Australian Dairy Corporation. The position with respect to the Department of Primary Industry was that 'its records depended upon advice being proffered to it from the statutory corporation. The fact that there was no central filing system-demonstrably where records were present some have been alteredmeant that neither officers of the Department of Primary Industry, I, as its ministerial head, nor the Government had any knowledge of the circumstances of that time.
It is true that one of the first assistant secretaries to the Department of Primary Industry in an answer before the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations mentioned a note that he made at a particular time with respect to some of these matters and that that note was missing. It was not a formal note. It was not a formal advice in the sense that it contained advice and documents that needed to be preserved. He said that he had not been able to locate it. There was no suggestion that it had been deliberately mislaid or destroyed. Yet today there has been a suggestion not only that these documents were destroyed, as they were, on the advice of the Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation at that time, but also that in some way I was involved in a conspiracy to conceal evidence, that in some way I was responsible for entering into an arrangement with the then Chairman to ensure that these records were not there. I completely deny that assertion.
If the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) has evidence of this or somebody about the place says that he knows how this happened then I urge that person to come forward. Let him bring that knowledge forward to the Federal Police. Let him bring it forward to the Attorney-General. Let

him bring it forward to anybody in responsibility. Let us have a look at it to see just how and why that central filing system was destroyed and why the organisation did not maintain the records. Let us see just how and why there was falsification of those export documents. In no circumstance was there any knowledge by the Govermment or the Department of Primary Industry that that took place. It was because of our concern that the Auditor-General was requested to present a report. It was because of the implications of the Auditor-General's report that we sent the reference off to the Federal Police. Acting totally within the bounds of ministerial and governmental responsibility, appropriate actions were taken to ensure that as soon as possible the recommendations of the Auditor-General would be implemented.
I -draw the attention of the House also to the fact that immediately on receipt, not the final Auditor-General's report but from the time of the receipt of the first Auditor-General's report, there were changes in the practices and procedures with respect to the Australian Dairy Corporation and its Australia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd subsidiary. Indeed it is true, going back a little before that, that we had been concerned about the degree to which each of the milk reconstruction" plants was operating and the degree to which there had been a proper relationship between the directorate and the ADC. There were a number of instances when the officers of the Department of Primary Industry were uncertain as to whether sufficient information was coming through from those subsidiaries to the Australian Dairy Corporation. We instituted procedures to ensure that, to the maximum, that information was provided.
Throughout, the difficulty was the relationship between the then Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation and the members of the Australian Dairy Corporation and the officers of the Department of Primary Industry. In no way do I condone the actions of the then Chairman over that period. It seems to me that consistently he sought to conceal from all those in responsibility actions for which he demonstrably needs to accept responsibility. However, no charge can be laid now because nothing can be done other than after a consideration of the recommendations of the Federal Police and the Attorney-General. I believe that in many instances it was a deliberate act by the then Chairman that led to the failure of information being made available to the Government and the fact that the Government found itself in the position in which it had to implement a specific Auditor-General's report.

2702 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Australian Dairy Corporation

There is behind all of this ~ fundamental problem in the structure arid nature of a statutory authority of this kind. There is no doubt that the authority does have prime responsibility to the dairy farmers. of Australia. It is their product which this statutory authority markets. It is their product which at this time was in very severe economic difficulties. There were problems beCause of the European Economic Community's pricing policies. There were problems in the extent to which surpluses were dumped from time to time on Third World markets where Australian exports had traditionally shared a place. There are difficulties in determining to what degree a Minister should interfere in matters in which there is already a direct relationship between the industry concerned and the management of that particular marketing authority. However, wherever there were breaches or wherever there appeared to be breaches of matters that were within Government policy, the issue was quite different. For that reason, immediately I learned of the GATT breach-first through my officers and then by personally interviewing Mr Webster-I requested that any sales below that GATT minimum be terminated.
There has been a suggestion, which I have read, of a number of corridor discussions between my colleague the Deputy Prime Minister. (Mr Anthony) and various people. There have been suggestions of people coming to see me seeking concessional sales. As I have said before, frankly my memory of telephone conversations and of interviews without documentary evidence of them is not absolutely precise. Indeed, some of the charges made in this place today suggest an omniscience on my part which I think is truly remarkable. Frankly, I do not remember many of the details concerning who approached me and whose applications I then referred to the Australian Dairy Corporation. Certainly whenever there was an application to me for sales, if I believed that there was reason for the matter to be consideJ;'ed, I would refer it to the statutory marketing authority with the responsibility for issuing export licences and with a continuing marketing responsibility of its own. Indeed, it is quite remarkable that some of these suggestions have been made regarding people who were themselves then members of,the' Australian Dairy Corpor-
or ation and who, Mcourse, would have been privy
and party to all the discussions.
If there had been adequate information passed on to the then Chairman of the ADC as Chairman of the ADI about sales and pricing arrangements, he would have had a knowledge of the fact that some of these contracts may have been in breach

of an arrangement entered into not under GATT but within the GATT format. Certainly, the Government at no stage condoned any sales under the GATT pricing arrangements or under the ar~
rangement made within GATT. Certainly, there was no approval on my part of any of those arrangements and no direction issued by me to the Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation to negotiate sales on that basis.

On a number of occasions I referred inquiries for sales at a particular price. I believe that if there was an interest-I can recall one instance when it was suggested that the cost to the Government of underwriting would be significantly lest if a sale of skim milk powder could be made overseas instead of an underwriting being made on the milk being converted into butter in Australia-it was certainly my responsibility to refer that sort of a sale to the Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation for consideration. It was not for me to do other than to direct that the sales should not be made under the GATT arranged price. At no stage did I in any way accept that there should be international sales by ADC, its subsidiaries or any
other private organisation that might have breached that direction.

The amendment to this motion claims a series of neglects-I guess one would call it-by the Government and certainly by me. I reject that suggestion. I believe that the history of this product has been a most unhappy chapter in the record of marketing authorities. I commend my colleague the Minister for Primary Industry for the way in which he is endeavouring to ensure that everyone of the errors that have been com~ mitted by those responsible is corrected. I believe that the action he has taken demonstrates that the Government is completely upholding its proper rights and responsibilities in accordance with the law that it administers.

Sitting suspended from 12.59 to 2 p.m.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-I call the honourable memQer for Kalgoorlie.

Motion (by Mr Hodges) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

56

Noes

42

Majority

14

Adermann, A. E. Anthony,}. D, Birney. R. J.

AYES

Hodgman. W. M, Howard. J. W. Hunt. R. J. D.

Australian Dairy Corporation

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2703

AYES
Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. O. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Chapman, H. O. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.O. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, w.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Oiles,O.O'H. Oroom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, O. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. e.

Hyde,J. M.
Jull,D.F. Kaller,R.e. Killen, D.J.
Lloyd, B. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L.
Peacock, A. S. Porler, J. R. Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. Mce. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage,J. L.- Blewell, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, Robert Campbell,O. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross,M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. e. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A.

Jones, Barry
Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.e.
Klugman, R. E.
McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les (Teller) Mildren, J. B. Millon,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. O. Scholes, O. O. D.
Scoll,J. L. Theophanous, A. e. Uren, T.
Wallis,L.O. West, S. J. WiIIis,R. Young, M.J.

PAIRS

Bourchier, J.'W. Lusher, S. A.

Johnson, Les Kelly, R.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative,

Question put:

That the words proposed to be omitted (Mr Kerin's amendment) stand part of the question.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr p, C, Millar)

Ayes

58

Noes

42

Majority

16

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D.
Birney, R. J. Bradfield, J. M. Bmithwaite, R. A. Brown. N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A.

AYES

Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Jull,D.F. Kaller, R.e. Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B. MacKellar, M. J. R.

AYES
Cadman, A. O. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Chapman, H. O. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A.O. Dobie,J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Oiles, O. O'H. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, O. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. e. Hodgman, W. M.

MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.e. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter,J. R. Robinson, Ian Rochei, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair,l. McC. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Blewell,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, Robert Campbell,O. Cass,M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A.

Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.e. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo . McMahon, Les (Teller) Mildren, J. B. Millon, P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, O. O. D. Scoll, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis, L.O. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young, M. J.

PAIRS

Bourchier, J. W. Lusher, S. A.

Johnson. Les Kelly,R.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Amendment negatived.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

COMMISSIONER FOR TAXATION
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY CONSUMER AFFAIRS COUNCIL
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY CONSUMER AFFAIRS BUREAU
Reports
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (2.14)-by leave-I move:
That the sixtieth report of the Commissioner for Taxation be printed and that this House, in accordance with the provisions of the Parliamentary Papers Act 1908, authorises the publication of the report of the Australian Capital Territory Consumer Affairs Council and the Australian Capital Territory Consumer Affairs Bureau for the year 1980-81 and that the reports be printed.

2704 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Australia's Migrant Assessment System

I apologise to the House for not moving this

motion immediately the reports were tabled, but

because of the number of papers tabled this morn-

ing it was inadvertently overlooked. The motion

is, of course, necessary to enable the reports to be

distributed.

.

Question resolved in the affirmative.

AUSTRALIA'S MIGRANT ASSESSMENT SYSTEM
Ministerial Statement
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs)-by leave-I wish to inform the House of decisions taken by the Government resulting from the review of the migrant selection system, the Numerical Multifactor Assessment System. The review was one of the Government's 1980 election commitments and fulfils an undertaking, made at the time NUMAS was introduced, to review the system in the light of operational experience. As part of the review process, an independent Committee of Review on Migrant Assessment was given the task of reporting to me on the views of the Australian community and on a number of studies of the operation of NUMAS. Honourable members will recall that I tabled the Committee's findings on 9 September.
The Review was conducted in a most open manner with as much public involvement as possible. Community views were obtained through a series of forums around Australia and through written submissions in response to advertisements. The Committee of Review noted that important contributions came from Australian-born as well as overseas-born individuals and from nonmigrant-based as well as migrant based organisations. The Government is indebted to the Committee for its examination of the range of opinions the community brought forward and for its analysis of the various studies. In addition to the Committee's report the Government has had the benefit of a range of other advice, including the views of the Australian Council on Population and Ethnic Affairs, the Australian Council of Trade Unions and the Confederation of Australian Industry. Needless to say, very considerable weight has been given to the views expressed by those bodies.
At anyone time the numbers of people wanting to migrate to Australia far exceed our capacity to receive migrants. In the year just past, 1980-81, for an intake of just over 110,000 new settlers our overseas posts had to process more than one million inquiries and applications. Selection is therefore essential. Before the present selection

system was announced in June 1978 a great deal of time and effort was put into examining the philosophy which should lie behind our immigration program. Honourable members will recall that the Government published a Green Paper as part of that examination. The present review and the changes I will be announcing today should be seen as building upon that work. The nine principles of our immigration policy-including the important global non-discriminatory nature of our programs-remain unaltered. The changes that will be made to the actual selection process have been made in the light of ongoing experience.
In line with its terms of reference the Committee of Review reported a wide range of community views on' ways in which the present program might be altered. In responding to these, the Government was mindful that whatever the balance of its composition, the immigration program has an economic and cultural impact on the total community. In considering what changes needed to be made the Government did not see its task as one of reconciling minority views but rather as serving the totality of the national interest. There are a number of important issues which can be distilled from the Committee of Review's report. The report highlighted the fact that family and friends are important to settlement success and noted a strong demand for an acceptable family reunion system. It also highlighted concern that migrant entry criteria should be sensitive to current and foreseeable demands for labour. It underlined evidence that ability to get a job is vital to settlement success. In developing its proposals the Government was particularly mindful of these considerations. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a summary of the new migrant selection system.
Leave granted.
The document reads as follows-
IMMIGRATION CATEGORIES AND PROCEDURES
From 19 April 1982 applicants for immigration to Australia will be considered in one of five eligibility categories. These are as follows:
FIRST CATEGORY-FAMILY MIGRATION
Sub-Category A ,
(i) spouses;
(ii) I unmarried children if part of the family unit;
(iii) children for adoption from overseas under 18 years of age;
(iv) orphaned unmarried relatives under 18 years of age provided guardianship arrangements have been approved by the relevant authorities;
(v) a relative able and willing to assist on a continuing basis in a situation of permanent or long-term need brought about by death, disability, prolonged illness or some other serious circumstances.

Australia's Migrant Assessment System

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2705

Persons falling within (i) to (v) above will be admitted subject to:
sponsorship by the spouse or the appropriate relative 18 years of age or over who is a legal permanent resident of Australia;

an Assurance of Support except for (i) and (ii);

a satisfactory assessment of settlement prospects, where necessary;
good health (criteria may be relaxed); and

good character.
In the case of children who are to be adopted, eligibility will also depend on:
Either-

the adoption proposal having the support of the child welfare authorities in the State of residence of the adoptive parents;
Or-

if the child has already been adopted overseas, the recog-
nition of the adoption order by an Australian court or the
adoption authorities in the State of residence of the adoptive parents; or the existence of a child-parent relationship
of long standing such that refusal of entry would be contrary to the welfare and best interest of the child.

(vi) Fiance(e)s (male and female) will be admitted subject

to:

.

sponsorship by the fiance( e) who is a legal permanent resident of Australia;

there being no legal impediment to the proposed marriage under Australian law;

the sponsor and fiance(e) being personally known to

each other. Where both the sponsor and the fiance(e) over-

seas have not met and an arranged marriage is proposed,

the application will be considered if both the sponsor and

fiance( e) are from countries or a background in which ar-

ranged marriages are common;

.

a genuine intention of marriage;
Fiance(e)s will be admitted initially on a temporary basis for a period of three months. Proof of bona fide marriage will be required before change of status to a permanent resident. Evidence will be required, certified by an authorised marriage celebrant, that arrangements have been made for the marriage to take place within the three months period (in sufficient time to enable change of status to be granted before the expiry of the temporary entry permit);

an Assurance of Support, where necessary;
a satisfactory assessment of settlement prospects, where necessary;

good health; and good character.

Sub-Category B
(i) parents of retiring age (60 for females, 65 for males);
(ii) parents of working age (under 60 years for females and under 65 for males);

(iii) aged close relatives (over 60 years for females and 65 for males) who have been wholly or largely supported on a permanent or indefinite basis by the sponsor and who will continue to be so supported by the sponsor in Australia;
(iv) last remaining brother or sister or non-dependent child if he or she has no parent, brother or sister or nondependent child resident outside Australia; if married, the same requirements apply to the spouse.

Persons in groups (i) to (iv) will be admitted subject to:
sponsorship by the appropriate relative 18 years of age or over who is an Australian citizen or legal permanent resident of at least two years standing (the sponsorship to include provision of financial assistance and accommodation where necessary);
in the case of (ii) and (iv), an employment offer, if likely to enter the workforce;
an Assurance of Support normally would be required;
a satisfactory assessment of settlement prospects, where necessary;
good health (criteria may be relaxed for some groups); and
good character.
Sub-Category C
(i) non-dependent children; and
(ii) brothers and sisters will be admitted subject to:
sponsorship by the appropriate relative 18 years of age or over who is an Australian citizen or legal permanent resident of Australia of at least two years standing;
a satisfactory Economic/Employment Assessment (additional points will be given on the assessment if the sponsorship includes the provision of financial assistance and accommodation) ;
a satisfactory assessment of settlement prospects;
an employment offer, if the applicant's occupation is not in demand;
good health; and
good character.
SECOND CATEGORY-LABOUR SHORTAGE AND BUSINESS MIGRATION
(i) Occupations in Demand
Applicants whose occupations are in demand in Australia will be admitted subject to:
a satisfactory Economic/Employment Assessment;
a satisfactory assessment of settlement prospects;
good health; and
good character.
(ii) Employment Nominees
Applicants who are covered by an Employment Nomination will be admitted subject to:
a satisfactory Economic/Employment Assessment (additional points will be given for the employment nomination);
a satisfactory assessment of settlement prospects;
good health; and
good character.
Employment Nominations will be accepted only when the nominating employer has demonstrated:
inability to recruit or train a suitable employee in Australia; and
a satisfactory record of training and that the intake of migrant workers will not lead to any lessening of training efforts.
(iii) Business Migration
(a) Applicants with proposals for substantial enterprises to be set up in Australia will be admitted subject to:
satisfactory assessment of the viability and desirability of the proposed enterprise;

2706 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Australia's Migrant Assessment System

satisfactory assessment of the business experience or expertise of the applicant in relation to the proposed enterprise;
a satisfactory assessment of the potential for the utilisation of technologies or expertise which will benefit Australia by any of the following:
introducing a new industry improving an existing industry expanding Australia's exports promoting employment opportunities in Australia;
available capital being
adequate to meet the equity requirements of the proposed enterprise
personal capital, free of encumbrance and legally transferrable according to the exchange control regulations of the country from which it is intended to be transferred;
the capital to be left in Australia once it has been transferred;
the applicant's intention to take an active part in the proposed enterprise;
the proposal must not violate Australian foreign investment policy;
a satisfactory Economic/Employment Assessment;
a satisfactory assessment of settlement prospects;
good health; and
good character.
(b) Self-employed applicants who intend to be selfemployed in certain areas of expertise in Australia will be admitted subject to:
considerable experience and a record of success in the proposed activity;
sufficient capital for the proposed activity in Australia;
the capital being personal capital, free of encumbrance and legally transferable;
evidence of having investigated opportunities for using their expertise in Australia and having a knowledge of local conditions, regulations, markets and other aspects affecting prospects of success;
a satisfactory Economic/Employment Assessment;
a satisfactory assessment of settlement prospects;
good health; and
good character.
THIRD CATEGORY-INDEPENDENT MIGRATION
A limited number of applicants who are not eligible to apply under other categories but who possess outstanding characteristics which would make them of obvious gain to Australia, will be admitted subject to:
a satisfactory Economic/Employment Assessment;
a satisfactory assessment of settlement prospects;
good health; and
good character.
FOURTH CATEGORY-REFUGEES AND SPECIAL HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMS
Refugees, displaced persons and other applicants seeking entry to Australia on humanitarian grounds will be admitted subject to:
criteria established under individual refugee and special humanitarian programs;
recognition of refugee status by the Australian Government, where entry under a refugee program is involved;

good health, except in instances when strong compassionate factors are present when health criteria may be
relaxed; and

good character.

FIFTH CATEGORY-SPECIAL ELIGIBILITY

(i) Trans-Tasman Arrangement
Persons holding New Zealimd passports are generally exempted from the visa requirement.

(ii) Patrials
An applicant who is the child or grandchild of a person born in Australia will be admitted subject to:

evidence of an Australian-born parent or grandparent;

a satisfactory assessment of settlement prospects;

good health; and

good character.

(iii) Self-supportil)g Retirees
Applicants who-Jin" tend to retire in Australia and have reached retirement age, i.e. 60 years for females and 65 years for males, will be admitted subject to:

possession of substantial transferable assets and/or income sufficient to establish a home in Australia and to provide adequately for their living costs and care and support
services likely to be required;

a satisfactory assessment of settlement prospects;

good health; and

good character.

(iv) Creative or Sporting Talents

Applicants who have creative or sporting talents which would be of benefit to Australia will be admitted subject to:

a continuing record of outstanding achievement in creative or sporling endeavour;

a satisfactory assessment of settlement prospects;

good health; and

good character.

CHANGE OF STATUS

As a result of ~mendments to the Migration Act 1958,

which came into effect in January 1981, the grant of perma,

nent residence to an immigrant subsequent to arrival in

Australia is prohibited, unless:

..

(a) he has been granted territorial asylum in Australia;

(b) he is the spouse, unmarried child or aged parent of an Australian citizen or of the holder of an entry permit fo~ permanent residence in Australia;

(c) he is the holder of a temporary entry permit and the Minister has determined he is a refugee within the meaning of the United Nations Convention and Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees;
(dl he is the holder of a temporary entry permit and ther~ ~re strong compassionate or humanitarian grounds for the grant of permanent residence to him; or .

(e) he is the holder of a temporary entry permit, is authorised to work in Australia and is not-

(i) a person who acknowledged when seeking a visa for travel to Australia that he would leave Australia on the com-pletion of his studies or training or is the spouse or child of such a person; or

(ii) a foreign diplomat or consular representative, a member of the staff of such a representative

Australia's Migrant Assessment System

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2707

or the spouse or dependent relative of such a representative or staff member.
Mr MACPHEE-The term 'new migrant selection system' will be the' title of the new policy. The new policy will strongly favour skilled applicants and those with close family in Australia. Under the new arrangements, selection criteria have been revised and will comprise two groups-an economic/employment assessment and a settlement assessment. Only the first group of factors will be numerically weighted.. This meets the majority view detected by the Committee of Review that some form of weighted system should apply uniformly throughout the world. While there was widespread support for numerical weighting to yield an overall point score, there was also widespread criticism of attempts to assess settlement factors numerically, in particular such subjective factors as initiative and adaptability. In practice, we found that use of discretion by immigration officers gave the settlement assessment the .human face its numerical structure seemed to belie. By abolishing Part B of NUMAS, the new system formally recognises the human factors involved in the selection of people. It is intended that under the settlement assessment applicants will be assessed as 'outstanding', 'good', 'satisfactory', 'unsatisfactory', or 'serious settlement risk.'
The economic employment assessment will be broadly comparable with the existing P~rt A of NUMAS, although, as I have said, the term NUMAS is no longer appropriate to what is really a new migrant selection system. The economic employment assessment will, however, drop the previous assessment of transferable assets and of ability to communicate in proposed employment, while adding extra points for ability to learn English. Precise distributions of points will be determined after field testing. In line with the increased emphasis on labour market requirements consideration is being given to expanding and upgrading the occupational demand schedule which is used as the basis of migrant selection.
In considering selection criteria generally, the Government was mindful of any potential towards discriminatory effects. This was a major concern of some contributors to the NUMAS review. The weighting given to English language requirements particularly was considered to favour Anglo-Saxons. In fact, the Committee of Review found agreement amongst migrants, settlement staff, researchers and experts that the ability to speak English is crucial to a number of aspects of short and long term settlement. The Commonwealth-States survey of settlement experience, cited in the Committee's report, showed

English to be important for obtaining a job. As migrants who were unable to find employment acknowledged, lack of English diminishes prospects of successful settlement. The Government has therefore taken the view that competence in English and the ability to learn English demonstrated, for example, by knowledge of other languages, are important indicators of settlement prospects. Ability to learn English will therefore
be reflected in the economic/employment assessment.
A further change which the Government has decided upon is that applicants for migration will gain concessional points when they wish to settle in designated growth areas. Growth areas will be decided in consultation with States and Territories and relevant departments. This initiative can be expected to reduce settlement pressures in capital cities, especially Sydney and Melbourne, as well as to enhance the mobility of labour that resource developments will generate. An important aspect of the selection assessment is the recognition of qualifications, and there is a need for the qualifications of migrants and refugees to be recognised and utilised more widely. This is not a question of lowering Australian standards but rather of providing quick, accurate and unbiased assessments of the real level of skill which migrant members of the community already possess. In this regard the States have agreed to co-operate with the Commonwealth in a wide-ranging review to include such specific issues as the lack of special courses to bring people up to Australian standards; and the possible conflict of interests when professional bodies set standards in which the present members have a vested interest.
Five selection categories will now cover the range of applicants for permanent enfry. Family reunion will be replaced by an extended family migration category. General eligibility will be abolished and two new more restrictive categories introduced-the labour shortage and business migration category and the independent migratipn category. The special eligibility category has been modified. The category for refugees and special humanitarian programs remains. These changes go far deeper than changes in terminology. The family migration category will provide a single category for the immigration of family members to Australia. Honourable members will be aware that at the present time a large number of applicants with family connections are assessed under the general eligibility category.
Family migration will attract important concessions. The new policy will impose no age limits for children who are part of a family unit. It will allow all working age parents, irrespective of the

2708 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Australia's Migrant Assessment System

number of children in Australia, to enter without an economic/employment assessment. As settlement safeguards they will require sponsorship, including financial assistance, accommodation and assurance of support. Where they intend entering the work force the requirement of a firm job offer will be a further safeguard. That is a safeguard not only for the settlement prospects of the people concerned but also for the Australian taxpayer, who otherwise would be asked to subsidise their arrival, settlement and stay.
The new policy will also provide important concessions for non-dependent children and brothers and sisters. They will gain bonus selection points if their sponsors undertake to assist with accommodation and financial support or have a job arranged through family members in Australia. In recognition of the importance of family support, the points for sponsorships will be increased compared with the present system. While the precise factors and weightings will be determined after field testing, it is envisaged that brothers and sisters and non-dependent children will be able to gain up to a quarter of the total if the necessary support is forthcoming.
The new policy willalso simplify the present residence requirements for sponsorship and in most cases will reduce them. For spouses of immediate family, that is, spouses, dependent children and so on, there will continue to be no minimum length of residence requirement. For all others the requirement will be two years. At the present time residence requirements range up to five years.
The requirements, in some cases, for sponsors to provide financial support, accommodation and pre-arranged employment are settlement safeguards. Family reunion, when selection criteria are based solely on family relationships rather than labour market considerations, accounts for a large proportion of unskilled and semi-skilled people. Last financial year, for example, over half the workers entering the family reunion category were semi-skilled or unskilled. Prearranged employment will greatly lessen the risk of unemployment and the new settler becoming a charge on public funds. Often these pre-arranged jobs will be in family businesses where the extended family will share the work and the profits. In those cases, the jobs would not ordinarily be available to others persons already in Australia.
Within the family migration category, successful applicants will be expected to attain self reliance quickly with the assured assistance of relatives who have already settled successfully. In some cases, the assurance will be implicit in the

closeness of the relationship to the sponsor. In some cases, the assurance will be guaranteed formally, before a sponsorship proceeds, ina document to be known as Assurance of Support. The Assurance of Support will be a revised form of maintenance guarantee. Many people who made submissions favoured concessions for close relatives on condition that they did not become a cost to the Australian taxpayer. While the concept of maintenance guarantees has been criticised, in practice the Department of Social Security has established that few maintenance guarantees break down. Most sponsors are capable of fulfilling their obligations and are willing to do so. Those who fail to meet their obligations will not be permitted to undertake further sponsorships. Details of the Assurance of Support will be announced later. It is intended, however, that generally the time period of assurances will be less than that now asked for maintenance guarantees.
The new arrangements for family migration express the Government's concern to facilitate the reunion of family members by emphasising the closeness of family ties.. They therefore overtake previous sponsorship arrangements including the Independent Family Nomination SchemeIFN-introduced in June 1980.
The cumulative effect of the concessions I have outlined will ensure that a much greater priority will be given to family reunion. In fact under the new arrangements close relatives will be admitted at the expense of many independent applicants previously admitted under the general eligibility criteria.
Let me give a concrete illustration. Recently I had occasion to consider the case of a Greek family where the husband was a house painter. The brother-in-law here in Australia is a painting contractor and made an offer of employment in his business. However, the applicants in Greece just failed to pass NUMAS even taking into account the concessional points under the Independent Family Nomination Scheme. Under the new arrangements where the support and job offer are more fully recognised I have no doubt that the application would have been one for approval.
I
So that people affected by decisions can understand the basis of them, they will be given access to the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs' instruction manual. This initiative is one aspect of the Department's policy to help people understand the decisions which affect them. By the time the new policy is operative in mid~April that manual will be available along with other literature to assist people to understand their entitlements under the policy~

Australia's Migrant Assessment System

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2709

Immigration plays an essential role in the labour market by providing otherwise unobtainable skills for development projects and in relieving shortages of particular skills. The new selection system carries a strong labour market emphasis along with the concessions to family migration. The new category-labour shortage and business migration-will comprise applicants with occupationsin demand in Australia, employment nominees and business migrants. People admitted under this category will have skills or characteristics of direct benefit to Australia, and here I want to make it clear that the skills and qualities we will be seeking are those which are in short supply in Australia. We will have to ensure that they are accurately and adequately informed about the opportunities which Australia offers.
Through the business migration program, we will be seeking to attract people of flair and proven enterprise who will help us fulfil our potential during the 1980s. We will encourage them to visit first and assess business opportunities and, having made a sensible market assessment, to apply to migrate. We will be looking for people who will take an active role in developing Australia using their expertise and technological know-how to Australia's benefit by introducing a new industry, improving an existing industry, expanding Australia's exports, or promoting employment opportunities within Australia. Through the employment nomination scheme, we will be encouraging employers who can show they have made efforts to recruit locally to look overseas when the skills they need to maintain the momentum of their industry are not available here. I want to emphasise though that we will not be bringing people here only to compete with Australians for scarce jobs. The Government will continue to give top priority to the training and retraining of Australians, especially young Australians.
Within the independent migration category, there will be room for people of proven achievement and distinction in occupations where demand may be limited. There will be room also for considering the claims of people who have lived in Australia previously. It is not intended that this should become another general eligibility category. The Government expects that fewer than 5,000 people are likely to qualify under this category in the first year of operation. Applicants will not receive any of the relevant points when their occupations are in oversupply or minor oversupply. Compared with the general eligibility category they replace, these two new categorieslabour shortage and business and independent migration-are restrictive. However, the selection

criteria set for the categories are sufficiently flexible to leave room for broadening eligibility when the government of the day believes it responsible to do so. For the present, general eligibility has been curtailed so as to maximise scope for family migration and for migrants who will contribute to the economic and social development of Australia in the ways referred to earlier.
The fourth selection category will be for refugees and special humanitarian programs. The Government is still reviewing policies and procedures to be applied and further announcements will be made. For the present there is no change. The final category, special eligibility, will largely cover people who cannot be regarded as part of the planned immigration program. It will continue the present trans-Tasman travel arrangements which exempt New Zealand citizens from immigration controls. It includes the concessions to patrials and will extend the provision to children or grandchildren, irrespective of citizenship, of people born in Australia. The category will provide also for the entry of people who have sufficient assets to support themselves fully during their retirement in Australia and for the entry of people with acknowledged creative or sporting talents.
These new migration categories should simplify the selection task. Broadly the would be applicant overseas has to be able to answer 'Yes' to one of the following two questions: Have I close family ties with an Australian resident who can help me settle? or Have I a skill or a personal quality to offer Australia? Unless the answer to one of those questions is 'Yes' he will find it difficult to be considered seriously. The new arrangements I have outlined will take effect from 19 April next year. While existing arrangements will continue until then, semi-skilled or unskilled applicants without close family in Australia will not be approved. From tomorrow further nominations under existing family migration arrangements will be accepted only for close relatives. The Departmeht of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs will be taking action to make the new system widely known ih Australia and overseas.
I have also been giving thought for some time to ways in which ministerial review of departmental decisions in individual migration and citizenship cases can be further improved. I have taken particularly into account the points made during the course of the NUMAS consultation. I expect to be able to announce some significant developments in this area in the near future. The migrant intake for 1981-82 is likely to be in the order of 115,000 to 120,000 and the pattern of that intake

27\0 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Australia's Migrant Assessment System

has been set already. The effect of the new selection criteria when they come into force will be to eliminate applicants whose occupations are in oversupply but who may have been approved under the former general eligibility category. It stands to reason that under the family migration category, as it will now be called, many applicants will be approved who previously would not have been approved. Likewise, many applicants who would have been approved under the general eligibility category but who have no family in Australia will now not be approved. The Government will be looking at the intake for 1982-83 when considering triennial immigration programs. At this stage, however, it is expected that the intake for 1982-83 is likely to be of the same order as 1981-82. Sponsored family and in-demand skills will be the dominant components. So as to ensure that the program achieves the size and balance agreed by Cabinet, the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs will be improving its system of program management and monitoring controls.
The selection system I have outlined is designed to meet the diverse views of the Australian community while giving due weight to the reasonable expectations of particular groups with special concerns. The system will be monitored and adjusted in practice to ensure that it achieves the results required by changing circumstances. The system itself should serve Australia well through the 1980s and into the 1990s. Whether occupationally-based or family-based, the measure of a successful immigration program is the settlement success of the people selected to make up the program. For all the acknowledged hurdles that new arrivals have to overcome, the successes far outweigh the number of failures. The vibrancy of Australian society today largely reflects the impact of immigration and the cultural contribution of migrants and ethnic communities. Above all else, immigration has changed Australia for the better. Migrants seeking a better life have made Australia a better place in which to live. Australia is now less insular and a more open, receptive and innovative society than it was 30 years ago. We have to keep that record intact under the circumstances of the 1980s and I990s. The days are gone when we thought we should sustain 1950s and 1960s levels of irnmigrationgrowth for the sake of growth. By cutting out assisted passages .earlier this year the Government recognised that we no longer have need for mass migration.
We need to plan for population increase but, in pursuing population objectives, we need to be selective. The migrant Australia needs today must

demonstrate a capacity to reach self-reliance as soon as possible after arrival. That vie~ is strongly supported in the report of the Committee on MIgrant Assessment and is the rationale for many of the recommendations of the Galbally report. In revising the migrant selection system to meet present requirements of the immigration program the Government has taken self-reliance to be the key to settlement success.
Under the new arrangements, successful applicants in the family migration category can be expected to attain self-reliance quickly with the assured support of relatives who have already settled successfully. Others coming within the labour shortage and business migration category can be expected to attain self-reliance quickly by using the skills and personal qualities which ~re in demand and which are of benefit to Austraha. In this way the program is not being underwritten by the Australian taxpayer. I commend these changes and the new migrant selection system to the House. I present the following paper:
Australia's Migrant Assessment System-Ministerial Statement, 29 October 1981.
Motion (by Mr Thomson) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (2.42)-After a year of investigation, we are pleased to have the statement of the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) before the Parliament to be subject to scrutiny as to the changes in criteria that will now operate in the selection of future immigrants to Australia. It seems to me inadequate that Parliament, discussing a matter of such national importance and an issue upon which almost every member of this Parliament becomes personally involved, should discuss the report of a year-long inquiry for one hour. It seems to me that there is no need for the House to get up in such a hurry; that we could at least put aside several hours for many speakers to take part in the debate on this question. I sincerely hope that when the House resumes, as it is going to next Tuesday week, that some time will be put aside because there are certainly many honourable members on my side of the House who want to add their comments to what people will say today. How great immigration has been t~ t?is country has been mentioned so often that It IS almost a cliche. By and large, that is a sentiment expressed by most people in Australia. We give recognition to and acceptance and approval of what has happened to Australia as a result of migration to this country and as a result of this country's haying taken to its shores some 400,000 refugees since World War II. But there does not seem to be any clear concept of where the future lies in regard to

Australia's Migrant Assessment System

29 October 1981 REPRE~:pNTATIVES 2711

national immigration policy. For instance, in the Labor Party committee discussion this morning we raised the question of how many people in Australia really have an understanding of just how many people we should approve to come to this country; how many people we could settle properly and what it would mean in 10, 15 or 20 years' time to be fixing on a total number of migrants, as we are today, of between 115,000 and 120,000. Of course, these responsibilities, these judgments and these decisions are always the responsibility of government. Nonetheless, as I said earlier, each member of parliament is involved in the intricacies and complexities of immigration to an extent that he cannot possibly ignore it. Some of us, of course, are involved in a great deal more than just the day to day problems of the migrant coming to our electorate office.
In relation to the Minister's statement, I first of all point out three points made by the National Conference of the Labor Party in 1979. Under immigration, clause 2 reads:
Labor supports immigration at a level which is consistent with the national interest and Australia's humanitarian obligations.
Clause 3 states:
Family reunion sponsored by Australian residents shall not require maintenance guarantees.
Clause 4 states:
As negotiated with the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, the Australian Government after consultation with the States will select without discrimination on grounds of sex, politics, colour, race, creed or place of origin, and accept for permanent settlement, its fair share of the refugees being cared for by countries of first asylum.
Let me deal very briefly with the refugee question. Unfortunately, there has been no major debate on this question in the Parliament in recent times. We hope that there will be in the not too distant future. We on this side of the House support that policy of accepting our international responsibilities for what is termed 'our fair share of refugees' in accordance with the declaration of the United Nations High Commission .for Refugees. The only thing we say to the Government is that there must be no' sign of any discrimination in terms of the selection of those refugees. Whilst one may agree with the primary responsibility, and in this day and age of Indo-Chinese refugees there are refugees from all types of regimes around the world, Australia cannot be looked upon as discriminating against any of those people.
Mr Donald Cameron-They are nearly all communist regimes that they are running from.
Mr YOUNG-The people from El Salvador are not running from a communist regime. If boofheads like you would go back to their seats

and be quiet for about half an hour we will explain it to them.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-

O~M!

'

Mr YOUNG-On the question of family reunions sponsored by Australian citizens, as I said, and this has been pointed out many times, we do not agree with the requirement of maintenance guarantees in whatever form they,come and how ever they may be described. That is one point of difference we have with the statement which has been made by the Minister today.

I refer now to the evidence given to the Committee of Review on Migrant Assessment. It seems to me that in spite of the year-long investigation of this matter, much of what the investi-
gation has come up with could have been arrived at within this Parliament itself. Had we had the mechanisms by which discussion of parliamentarians could have taken place I think we may have been able to add much to the final answers which are thrown up in this assessment. I do not know how many members of parliament put in submissions to the Committee. I know that certainly one honourable member from this side of the House did. Nevertheless,there is an overriding element in every submission which came before this Committee; that is, that family reunion has to remain as top priority in any migration program which Australia has.

The evidence is overwhelming in this Committee report, as was suggested by many of the speakers at the forums which we attended, that in any review such as this, this sort of conclusion
would be reached. And so it has been and to that extent the recognition in the Minister's statement of the extension of the family unit for purposes of migration to this country has to be welcomed not only on our behalf but also on behalf of the thou" sands of people who make up the ethnic committees and whose views and priorities they believed were being submerged by the former Numerical Multifactor Assessment System. I am thankful that those. parts of NUMAS .which did so much to discriminate against family reunion have now been abolished.

It is surprising, when we talk about the numbers of people who may come to live in Australia and try to reach a figure; just how few
people in this country have any real idea of the
sorts of numbers that may be required. The one feature of this report is the number of people whQ,
on putting in their submissions and being .asked
questions about migration, opted out of reaching any conclusion at all. They said that they did not

2712 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Australia's Migrant Assessment System

know how many migrants we should takeperhaps 100,000 would be good; perhaps 120,000 would be better; perhaps 50,000 would be better.
There is no clear line in Australia apart from what I expressed earlier about the sentiment that migration is good for Australia. There are other matters, of course, which go to reaching that conclusion. I talked about the feeling of the ethnic communities in relation to NUMAS. The question being asked of people who put their submissions in to be assessed is this: 'Is NUMAS working satisfactorily'? I think there is no doubt on the part of all the people who looked at NUMAS and at the way in which Australia was being affected by the operations and the application of NUMAS that the answer would have been: 'No, it is not working satisfactorily. People are being deprived who, underariy other fair system, would have received priority on entry to Australia'. In the report of the Committee of Review on Migrant Assessment the fedings notonly of people from the ethnic communities but also Australian-born people were made pretty clear.
In relation to the waitings, there are arguments, of course, as to how one reaches a conclusion. Some honourable members on our side of the House and, I suspect, some Government members would argue that it is difficult to apply waitings when one is making an assessment about who should or should not come to Australia. There does not seem to be any answer to the waitings of people in trying to assess who best will be able to settle in Australia. It is no longer a case of taking whoever we can. We have long since lost the day when Australia had an immigration program that said: 'Growth for growth's sake. We will take as many as we can from wherever they come, with whatever skills they have or whatever education levels they may have reached'. That is no longer either in the best interests of the person seeking to enter Australia or in the best interests of Australia itself. In a sophisticated society like Australia people without skills, education or the ability to learn English-as has been said in the Minister's report-will face some difficulties in settlement. The overriding feature of their success in the past has been that they have had some family here to assist them. The family has been the vanguard in seeing that these people are properly settled. It does not matter on what side of the House honourable members may be on, people have to face the realities of the difference in Australia in the 1980s as compared with the 1950s and the 1960s.
I wish now to deal with the Minister's statements in relation to skills and about employers having to seek skills in Australia before they are

given approval to bring in people from overseas. This encompasses a debate that takes place not only in relation to immigration but also in relation to the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs. The Opposition has been saying for a number of years now that not enough priority is given by the Government to training programs in Australia. It is impossible to believe, with so many young unemployed people in this country, that something cannot be done to ensure that they are trained in the skills that other people say we are short of. Those people then go out into other parts of the world seeking those skilled' craftsmen to come and work in Australia:
A clash ofevidence is available in Australia and some gigantic contradictions are being made about the real state of skills available in this country. On the one hand, we have the largest union in Australia, the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union, telling us that its surveys of the members on its books and of industries show that in many areas there is a surplus of metal craftsmen. On the other hand, we have the employers in the very same industries conducting surveys and telling us that there is a shortage. If the Government cannot rely upon evidence coming from either of those two sectors it should do its own sophisticated analysis of what is and what is not available in this country and what is preventing young people in this country from training in the skills that we say we are short of. It is bordering on the criminal for us to send our regional officers and immigration officials scouting around the world looking for skilled tradesmen when we have so many young people on the dole queues in Australia. There can be absolutely no excuse for it when we consider that the people on the dole queues come from the generation of besteducated people that we have ever had in Australia's history.
It is not the responsibility of this Department. This Department is told to go out and to look for the sorts of people that the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs assesses that we may require in Australia. But if the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs says that it wants 20,000 tradesmen to come into various industries in AJstralia next year we will not glibly accept that. We think it is an enormously important factor in the make-up of programs in Australia that young people have access to training so that they have the first opportunity to get the jobs that may be available in Australia. Of course, the demand in Austn~lia in the future will be more heavily aligned with skilled and technical people. The swing away from opportunities for unskilled and semi-skilled people in the processing plants of

Australia's Migrant Assessment System

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2713

Australia will become less and less, irrespective of what happens to tariffs, exchange rates and so on. We will need better trained people, more skilled people and more technical, people. We have to start in our educational establishments to see that our young people are trained to take the jobs that may become available in Australia. It is an enormously important point which honourable members on this side of the House would like the Government to take into account.
There is another very important factor to be considered. Despite what we in the political parties may think about immigration in this country-I have said this on many occasions in this House-despite what we agree to or what we say, things can be done only within the confines of the tolerance of the Australian people. We have successfully taken in 55,000 Indo-Chinese refugees in the last five years. We ,have been able to do it only because the Australian people overwhelmingly accepted that that was our responsibility. This has won us a lot of new friends in our region. We have also to keep in mind that there are other groups in Australia which have an enormous influence on the thinking of their members. We have to keep in mind what they say about these sorts of policies. I refer here, of course, to the most recent Australian Council of Trade Unions Congress which, under the heading 'Migration and Population', declared as follows:
Congress believes that consideration must be given-
(Extension oftime granted).
I will be brief because I want other honourable members to take part in the debate. The Aus" tralian Council of Trade Unions is an enormously important pressure group~if honourable members would like to call it that-in the input of ideas in the Australian work force. We have to be cognisant of what it says and what fears it may have in regard to immigration policies. We also have to take into account the advice it may be giving about how well it may be working. After all, no one sees the problems of employment more than the average union official who visits the work place every day of his life. The ACTU at its Congress this year said, under the heading 'Migration and Population':
Congress believes that consideration must be given to the following factors:
1.1 The existing high level of unemployment is eroding the right to work. Priority must be given to the economic objectives of full employment, in work which is both satisfying and productive. . . .
1.2 Congress demands that the ACTU is consulted by employers and government to ensure that workers are not recruited for jobs which are capable of being filled by the existing workforce in conjunction with effective manpower planning.

A question was asked by the largest voice of organised labour in this country about how well our manpower planning fits into our immigration program. The ACTU has stated its recognition and acceptance of the refugee program which I mentioned earlier. For the purposes of the debate I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard the statement of the ACTU Congress.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
Australian Council of Trade Unions Circular No. 399/1981
ACTU CONGRESS 1981
Immigration Policy Decision
Policies relating to population and immigration are of fundamental importance to the development and growth of Australian society.
Congress recognises that the post war migration program has brought about long term changes in the structure of our society.
Over 20 per cent of Australia's existing population was born overseas and over half these people have come from countries with very different languages and cultures
The Australian workforce has one of the highest complements of overseas born workers in the western industrialized world.
Congress believes that the future well being of this country depends on an acceptance of the economic, social and cultural implications of a multi cultural, multi racial Australia where all citizens should have the right to maintain and promote their language and culture.
I. Migration and Population
In addition, the well being of our diverse population must be taken into account by government in developing policies relating to migration.
Congress believes that consideration must be given to the following factors:
1.1 The existing high level of unemployment is eroding the right to work. Priority must be given to the economic objectives of full employment, in work which is both satisfying and productive. Migration is not an effective means of solving general shortages of labour or of reducing unemployment, adding as it does, to both supply and demand. In this context, Congress declares its opposition to any proposal by government or employers to introduce 'guest labour' schemes into Australia.
1.2 Congress demands that the ACTU is consulted by employers and government to ensure that workers are not recruited for jobs which are capable of being filled by the existing workforce in conjunction with effective manpower planning.
1.3 Care must be taken to ensure that immigrant workers are not exploited or systematically channelled into low paid, low skilled and unsatisfying work leading to their identification within the community as second class citizens.
.1.4 In determining the number of migrants who will come to Australia and stay, regard must be had to humanitarian as well as purely economic reasons. For this reason refugees and families of resident Australians warrant special consideration.

2714 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Australia's Migrant Assessment System

1.5 Policies relating to the selection of people for settlement in Australia subject to the above principles should not discriminate between applicants with respect to race, religion, national origin, sex, language or age. Congress condemns the use, by the Australian Government, of selection procedures such as NUMAS which are discriminatory and lead-to rejection of any of these criteria.
1.6 The need for Australia to reject an isolationist view of our presence in Asia.
Congress"reaffirms that settlement in Australia involves a two way process of adaptation for both new comers and the community at large. Both need to appreciate the different values, experiences and cultural realities which exist while at the same time respecting the right of people to preserve and share their cultural identity.
Congress recognizes that the process of adjustment to a new and different environment places particular pressures on immigrants. To alleviate those pressures and to ensure that immigrants are accepted as part of Australian society, Congress calls for increased resources and supports from governments, employers and the trade union movement itself.
Congress believes that it is a Governmental responsibility to provide services for migrants which will facilitate full participation in the Australian community. Congress deplores the Federal Government cutbacks to already grossly inadequate levels of funding and services for migrants in Australia, announced in the Razor Gang Report and the Budget, namely cuts to translation and telephone interpreter services, and to other specialized migrant services. Services provided must cover-
Health Welfare Housing Education
English classes must be available for all migrant adults and children.
Opportunities must be available for migrants to upgrade qualifications.
2. Trade Unions and Migrants
The trade union movement has a responsibility to facilitate communication with migrant workers and to provide them with a clear understanding of their rightsand responsibilities as workers. Action to achieve these rights will require both will and resources. Congress therefore urges affiliated unions, to continue to be more actively involved in co-operation with the ACTU and State Branches to:
2.1 Negotiate with governments and employers to-
ensure the provision of English classes on the job as a right without loss of pay both for recent arrivals and for those who have achieved some proficiency in English.
" give unions and migrant workers access to trained interpreters to fulfil a variety of tasks in developing and maintaining two way communication.
develop and maintain broadly based job induction programs and on going safety programs in languages appropriate to the needs of workers.
provide dear, easily understood symbols and multi lingual signs at the work place for workers convenience, protection and safety.
establish paid study leave for Trade Union education through TUTA and individual union courses.
2.2 Strengthen participation of migrant workers in union affairs by-

establishing effective communication with migrant members to ensure that migrant members have access to the knowledge and information they require to function as responsible members of the union.
encouraging the setting up of appropriate mechanisms: committees of migrant workers at the workplace and in unions, migrant workers centres, specialised staff at the workplace, within unions or at the state and provincial level with the aim of further developing skills and knowledge in union activities, structures and processes and to meet the needs of migrant workers. In particular, Congress recommends to the ACTU Executive that migrant workers centres be established in major cities and major industrial areas to assist migrant workers with their industrial 'problems and that affiliated unions, state branches and provincial councils be requested to co-operate in this process. Any such mechanisms including committees and centres should operate according to the policies of individual unions and peak councils as an integral part of the trade union movement.
, utilizing the Tacilities of TUTA in supporting the program of integration, including the expansion of courses which meet the particular needs of migrant members and of union officials who work with them.
encouraging the appointment and training of migrants as union representatives including delegates.
advertising union activities and union elections in different languages and making provision for interpretersto be present to assist non-English speaking members.
providing multi lingual information in printed or audio visual form which specifies the operation of unions and includes material on issues such as industrial legislation, working conditions, safety regulations, compensation, welfare services and legal assistance.
idel)tifying the particular problems faced by migrant women workers 'and encouraging union action within the guidelines of the Working Womens Charter.
actively encouraging migrant members to join their union and tailoring ongoing campaigns which will achieve this aim.
2.3 To campaign to improve the position of low paid, unskilled and semi skilled workers including the majority of migrants. Therefore existing policies of the ACTU in the following areas should be vigorously pursued.
I. Real access to training and retraining schemes.
2: Strict observance of award provisions.
3. Freedom to organise and be active on-the-job.
4. Involvement of unorganized workers into union membership.
5. Shorter working hours and earlier voluntary retirement with adequate government pensions.
6. Higher wages for lower paid workers.
7. Free medical and hospital care.
2.4 Congress congratulates the ACTU Executive for adopting the proposal of the ACTU Migrant Workers Com'mittee to hold a Migrant Workers' Conference in 1981. Congress notes the enthusiastic response to, and participation in, this historic conference by migrant worker delegates from so many participating unions. Therefore Congress requests the Executive to arrange another Migrant Workers' Conference.
3. Discrimination

Australia's Migrant Assessment System

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2715

ACTU Congress reaffirms its opposition to all forms of racial discrimination and calls for a special effort by all trade unions to combat the activities of neo-Nazi and racist groups among Australian workers.
3.1 That the Racial Discrimination Act 1975 be strengthened by Australia agreeing to Article 4 of the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination which provides that-
States Parties condemn all propaganda and all organisations which are based on ideas or theories of superiority of one race or group of persons of one colour or ethnic origin, or which altempt to justify or promote racial hatred and discrimination in any form, and undertake to adopt immediate and positive measures designed to eradicate all incitement to, or acts of, such discrimination and, to this end, with due regard to the principles embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the rights expressly set forth in Article 5 of this Convention, inter alia:
Shall declare an offence punishable by law all dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred, incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of violence or incitement to such acts against any race or group of persons of another colour or ethnic origin, and also the provision of any assistance to racist activities, including 'the finance thereof;
Shall declare illegal and prohibit organisations, and also' organized and all other propaganda activities, which promote and incite racial discrimination, and shall recognize participation in such organizations or activities as an offence punishable by law;
Shall not permit public authorities or public institutions, national or local, to promote or incite racial discrimination.
4. Ethnic Media
Congress affirms that one of the most important factors in the development and strengthening of national and working class unity and cohesiveness is equal access by all to the services provided by governments.
Congress supports the provision of government broadcasting services (both radio and television) to the non-English speaking population of Australia as an extension of services provided to the rest of the community through the Australian Broadcasting Commission. Such broadcasting should aim to serve the needs of the ethnic communities for information, discussion, education, cultural expression and fulfilment as well as provide a forum for communication and interaction between ethnic communities and the wider Australian community.
Congress affirms the right of members of ethnic communities to participate in both program and policy making processes. Congress therefore deplores the present government's practice in using government funded ethnic media as a propaganda outlet. censoring information and preventing discussion on matters of public interest, particularly with regard to the Trade Union movement.
Mr YOUNG-I thank the House. In conclusion, there are many things in this statement by the Minister which must be taken on trust. One is the field work that must be carried out for the waitings that will be allocated in terms of assessment for a very short experimental period. Obviously we will be monitoring that very closely. Another is the bringing in of skilled labour and the opportunities for employers to do what they can

in Australia before they go overseas. The opportunities and the increased numbers of people coming in to Australia as a result of family reunion are enormously important points which we will also be monitoring. The Minister has not
mentioned the changing rate of numbers as a result of the new immigration scheme. But if under the present NUMAS scheme 20 per cent of our intake is in the family reunion category, of course, in a year's time it would be our view that that should be substantially increased under the new system.
We do not want to see the Department doing any fiddle on the numbers by concentrating on bringing in new skills for the employers of Australia and neglecting the areas from which the real pressure came-the ethnic communities-for the NUMAS review and to enlarge, recognise and appreciate the contribution that the family reunion category has made in Australia. In order to allow other honourable members to speak, I will conclude by saying that it is our view that they will start off 1982 better than 1981 as a result of the changes to NUMAS. It is unfortunate that the Parliament does not have an official watching brief over those changes. But it is something that the Labor Party will continue to pressure the Government about.
Mr INNES (Melbourne) (3.1)-As time is short I will be brief in my comments on the statement presented by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee). I hope that the supplementary notes that will be supplied in the course of implementation of the new migrant selection system will answer some of the questions that must obviously be answered. I commend the Minister for a step in the right direction. Nothing could have been worse than the situation that evolved from the implementation of the Numerical Multifactor Assessment System. That system attracted much criticism. That was no fault of the
Minister's. In my view he has administered his portfolio satisfactorily. But there are obvious questions that we must ask ourselves. What is meant by 'good', 'satisfactory' and 'serious settlement risk' in regard to the criteria that will be used in the settle assessment? I do not have time to refer to the other aspect, but my colleague the honourable member for Burke (Dr Theophanous) will probably handle that.
One matter deserves serious consideration. Using immigration policy to supply the ski1ls necessary for industry in this country is an obnoxious policy as far as I am concerned. It should not be entertained by the Minister. We should look at the track record of the Government in respect of this matter. Blame for the fact that we do

2716 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Australia's Migrant Assessment System

not have sufficient skills available in industry can be clearly laid at the feet of the Government. In 1965 I attended a conference on training for industry and commerce. The present Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) was then in charge of the Department of Immigration. He knew all the problems then. Private industry has failed to come up with the answers for developing sufficient skills. The Minister knows that that is a fact. It would be quite wrong to allow that aspect to encroach on a fair and reasonable immigration policy.
Government departments, particularly
Telecom Australia, should be the areas in which skills are developed in this country. The Government's resources should be used to eliminate youth unemployment and to give opportunities to young people to serve in jobs that are available. The Government should not go overseas looking for skills. The skills criterion should not be eliminated from the new scheme but immigration policy should not be the only means by which the Government seeks skills. The Commonwealth Ordnance Factory at Bendigo, in Victoria, and Telecom should be used for the purposes of developing the s,kills needed.
I refer quickly to an answer given to the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) by the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) listing by trade and State the number of apprentices employed by Australia Post. As at June 1975 a total of 3,038 apprenticeships were available. In 1979, the last figure that is available, 1,686 apprenticeships were available. So the evidence is clear. We are not using the resources of this country to fulfil our obligations to the young people and give them the chance to develop the skills being sought. I do not have time to pursue these matters. In deference to my colleague the honourable member for Burke, I will leave my remarks at that and hope that the Minister, in his supporting documents, will supply answers to queries raised.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (3.5r-1 am not so much making a speech as asking the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) for clarification of a point. At the end of the debate the Minister can comment upon it. I have found that the greatest amount of time consumed in work in my office is on matters involving his Department. My view is that most honourable members have had this experience and that, in effect, individual members' offices are branch offices of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. That is the way it seems to work. I wonder whether the Minister could have his statement paraphrased and printed in other languages

to assist honourable members in handling all their inquiries. This statement announces vast changes and I think that we will have thousands more inquiries.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (3.6)-1 thank the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) and the shadow Minister for allowing me to make some remarks on this important issue. We welcome the Government's attempt to rethink the principles of the immigration policy. We welcome also the Government's recognition of the importance of family reunion as the most effective and humane method of immigration. We welcome also the Government's expressed intention to tighten the requirements for skilled migrants so that those coming to Australia under this category will indeed be fulfilling a need. But expressed intentions are not enough. They may be useful as a propaganda exercise to allay fears in many of Australia's migrant communities; but they will be useless unless they are backed by concrete guidelines which really do achieve the goals enunciated by the Minister. It is here that I believe the Minister's statement suffers from major weaknesses.
I shall argue that the new guidelines put forward by the Minister do not, in themselves, guarantee an increase in family reunion, nor do they really amount to a major relaxation of the criteria for the admission of close relatives. Admittedly, on first reading of the proposals it would appear that the Government's intention is to abolish the Numerical Multifactor Assessment System. We have been critical of NUMAS. It is unjust and biased against migrants and particularly those from non-English speaking countries. This is evident from the fact that the proportion of migrants entering under the general eligibility category is almost equal to the number entering under the family reunion category. Many of those who entered under general eligibility were said to be skilled but, in' fact, other criteria were usedfor instance, responsiveness, presentation, initiative, competence in English, literacy and adaptability. Many of those criteria are vague and have a distinct bias. Yet most of these factors have not been shown to be effective in ensuring successful settlement and integration into the community.
At the same time, under NUMAS, inany humane considerations were thrown aside with respect to family reunion. Currently, this category is responsible for only 20 per cent of total settler arrivals. It is clear that this is far too small to accommodate many worthy cases. There are a large number of immigrant families whose brothers and sisters and parents have not been able to join

Australia's Migrant Assessment System

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2717

them. This situation has created considerable distress and hardship, as many members of parliament will testify.
We thus welcome the intention to abolish NUMAS. But has NUMAS in fact been abolished or has it simply been recycled under new names and new categories? Under the new proposals the general eligibility category is to disappear and be replaced by two new categories-labour shortage and business migration, and special eligibility. In the former category we are to have skilled migrants with occupations in demand in Australia and persons nominated to engage in business enterprises. The skilled migrants are to continued to be limited only to people who are nominated by employers under the Employment Nomination Scheme. Thus the criteria for determining which jobs are in short supply in Australia will remain substantially the same. This, in my view, is totally unsatisfactory because it means that the present circumstances under which people are brought into Australia under the skilled category will probably continue. However, this does not take into account the many weaknesses of that category that have been pointed to by others.
The impression that the present level of skilled workers will continue is borne out by the fact that the Minister has not specified any limit to the total number which will be entering every year under this category. There is a limit of 5,000 applicable to those under special eligibility but no limit whatsoever on those under the skilled category. Given that the total number of migrants who are to enter is to be kept at roughly the same level-
that is, approximately 100,000-it follows that the number eligible under family reunion is not likely to improve very much at all. If this is the case, the Minister will have deceived the people in claiming that there is to be a more humane scheme. I challenge the Minister to state what proportion will be admitted under the family reunion category and what proportion will be admitted under the skilled category.
In assessing this question, we should keep in
mind one important fact which was referred to by the Minister earlier this year, namely, that 60 per cent of all of those who came into Australia under the general eligibility category had close relatives in Australia. When determining whether the level of family reunion wilL increase in real terms, we must ensure that this figure of 60 per cent which applies to those who came in under general eligibility is taken into account. It might be said that surely the criteria have been relaxed to admit, for example, adult brothers and sister. But let us look at the criteria which will be used for this group which comes under sub-category C. Under those

criteria we see that requirements will be economic-employment assessment and settlement assessment. What this means is that the Government will be relaxing the criteria at one level but insisting on tough conditions at another. To include economic-employment assessment is simply to introduce, in my view, NUMAS criteria by the back door, as it were. I cannot see why the Minister should not simply allow brothers and sisters who have guaranteed employment, of whatever kind, to come here without forcing them to undergo scrutiny-by way of an employmenteconomic assessment, which is the intention. Finally, I refer to this comment of the Minister:
In considering what changes needed to be made the Government did not see its task as one of reconciling minority views but rather of serving the totality of the national interest.
It seems to me that the national interest requires reference to the views of the so-called minority groups. The two factors are not necessarily separated. I ask: If the Minister knew before consulting ethnic groups what the national interest was, why did he go through the exercise of that consultation? Was it simply a token exercise? It is remarks such as this which give rise to fears that the number of people coming in at present for family reunion reasons will, not in reality, be increased very much. We warn that if this is the real intention of the Government we shall fight its policy. It is our view that family reunion must be increased in real terms and other categories reduced. If this does not happen the human suffering created by the trauma of separation will continue. If the Government is serious about the principles which it espouses, it must clarify the criteria and make sure that the system is administered to achieve this goal.
Debate (on motion by Mr Kent) adjourned.
COMMITTEE OF PRIVILEGES
Report
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden)-I present the report from the Committee of Privileges in connection with an advertisement published in the Melbourne Herald on Friday, 16 October 1981, together with the minutes of proceedings of the Committee.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-by leave-The report which I have presented relates to an advertisement published on the front page of the Melbourne Herald of Friday, 16 October 1981, under the heading 'P.M. votes Sigma No.1'. The advertisement went on to say: 'So join the P.M. and drive Sigma-it's a real vote catcher'. In the House the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser)

2718 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981 Committee on Environment and Conservation

said that the whole thrust of the advertisement seemed to refer to him as Prime Minister. The Speaker, in allowing precedence to a motion to refer the advertisement to the Committee of Privileges, said:
To any person reading the advertisement, the first impression would be that the reference was to the Prime Minister and that he endorsed that particular make of motor car.
He went on to say:
Unless the Privileges Committee considers the matter, then by leaving a vacuum it will encourage people to use members of this House, unwittingly and unknowingly to the member of the House, to endorse a product. That is a matter which I wish the Privileges Committee to examine and report to the House on.
The Committee has found that this type of advertising could constitute a contempt. It expressed concern at advertising of this type which purp,orts to show members of the House supporting a particular product. However, the Committee did not believe that this particular reference should be further inquired into by the Committee of Privileges. In its report the Committee invites attention to its earlier report on an article published in the Sydney Daily Mirror of 2 September 1981, which was presented to the House on 27 October 1981, wherein it strongly recommended that a joint select committee should be established to inquire into all aspects of parliamentary privilege. It is the Committee's view that this type of advertising should be considered in the broader context of the proposed joint select committee inquiry and has recommended accordingly.
Since the Committee completed its inquiry yesterday it has come to notice that the sponsor of the original advertisement has published an apology in the Melbourne Herald in which it makes it clear that the Prime Minister did not authorise the advertisement and is not associated with the organisation concerned or with the promotion of the Sigma motor car. The announcement went on to regret any embarrassment which the advertisement may have caused the Prime Minister.
Debate (on motion by Mr Macphee) adjourned.
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION
Report
Mr HODGES (Petrie)-On behalf of the Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation, I present the report of the Committee on sand mining on Moreton Island, incorporating a dissenting report, together with extracts from the minutes of proceedings.
Ordered that the report be printed.

Mr HODGES-by leave-The report that has just been tabled is the twentieth report of the Committee since its establishment in 1973. During the past year the Committee has received many representations concerning sand mining on Moreton Island and requesting that the Committee conduct a public inquiry. We have decided to report without conducting an inquiry not only because of our commitments to other inquiries but also because we believe that legislative mechanisms exist which would allow an inquiry to be undertaken by the Commonwealth Government. The Committee notes in its report that the Commonwealth Government is directly involved with Moreton Island because before minerals mined on the island can be exported from Australia approval must be given by the Commonwealth Government. Two pieces of Commonwealth legislation apply; namely, the Australian Heritage Commission Act and the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act. The Committee believes that before the Commonwealth approves the export of minerals a public inquiry should be conducted under the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act and we have recommended accordingly.
I emphasise that whilst members hold personal views on sand mining on the island, as a Committee no decision opposing or supporting sand mining has been made. I point out to the House that the report that has just been tabled is not a unanimous report of the Committee. Two of the Liberal Party members on the Committeenamely, the honourable member for Forrest (Mr Drummond) and the honourable member for Wilmot (Mr Burr)-have a dissenting report. I make my own personal position clear in relation to this issue. It is often claimed that chairmen of committees, because they do not have a deliberate vote and often are not expected to cast a casting vote, do not make their position clear. I state here and now that my position in relation to sand mining on Moreton Island is one that I have made known now over many months, that is, I believe that sand mining should be avoided on this island if at all possible.
When one takes a stance against a particular mini.ng development it is often claimed that one is anti~mining. I refute that entirely. Indeed, I believe that I am a pro-mining person and, indeed a pro-sand mining person. I shall make just one or two comments in relation to the proposals to mine sand on Moreton Island. I have no doubt in my mind that revegetation and rehabilitation can be undertaken by sand mining companies to an acceptable degree. Over many years now a degree of expertise has been built up by sand miners. I

Committee on Environment and Conservation 29 Octoberi98l REPRESENTATIVES 279

suggest that possibly sand mining rehabilitation in this country is as good as it is anywhere else in the world. I am reasonably confident that if mining were to be carried out on the island the rehabilitation that would take place would ensure that the island does not blow into the sea. I believe that there are some areas in this country that ought to be kept in their natural state. There are some things that we want to keep. I believe that Moreton Island is one of them.
I would not have made the decision that was made to prevent further sand mining on Fraser island for the simple reason that mining had been going on on Fraser Island for many years. Only a very small proportion of that island was to be mined; namely, about one per cent. In contrast, 6.4 per cent of Moreton Island is planned to be mined. In south-eastern Queensland there are in excess of one million people. Moreton Island is some 30 to 40 kilometres from the centre of that population; namely, the city of Brisbane. Over the last 20 years I have been a regular visitor to this island and have noticed the increasing people pressures that are placed on the island. At present there are two barges operating regularly to the island, scores of four-wheel drive vehicles visit the Island and there are management problems on the island. It is my belief that the Queensland Government has recognised this in recent years and has appointed some honorary rangers. Indeed, I understand that it is in the process of appointing full time paid rangers. It is my view that the increasing recreational use would not be compatible with sand mining in the area. It must be remembered that the 6.4 per cent of land to be mined represents something like 50 per cent of the east coast of the island that is to be disrupted.
I wish to say one or two things about Cook report. The. Cook report, the recommendations of which the Queensland Government has adopted, was presented to the Queensland Government in March 1977. The report at this time is four and a half years old. I am not in any way bringing into question the integrity of Mr Neville Cook, the Valuer-General, Sir David Muir, Mr Krimmer,
from the Co-ordinator-General's Department in Queensland or, indeed, the two previous commissioners who retired, one of whom, Sir Sydney Schubert, I have known personally for many years. I believe that in the last four years since that report was presented a deal of new information has been made available, including scientific data on the dunes that are proposed to be mined which were considered to be degraded dunes. In actual fact it has been proved that they are in the state that they have been in for many -years. There are archaeological finds in the area

that werl not known when the Cook inquiry \'IS
conducf4.
Decis~ns, of course, ultimately rest v.!h govern~ents. Decisions of people appointed tonquirie&iof course, get back to their o,:"n persoal opiniols. I have no doubt that the mformaon that hli; been collected, both for the Heath reprt, whichpreceded the Cook inquiry, and indee<for the Ook inquiry, is extremely valuable to a of thosepersons who have had to make decisics. I am s1ggesting to this House that one could ~d a doze1 sets of three commissioners who woul4ive the ~me result as the Cook report or a simiI! reporI. I could find a dozen sets of three ommis;ioners who, indeed, would give a unanlous de~lsion the other way; that is, not to mine t the isItnd. Governments tend to follow recomendlltions of inquiries when it suits them. Thetend also to reject recommendations of inquiriePv'hen it suits them. I think I have made my positi( very dlear on this issue. I sincerely hope tit the Government follows the recommenda:tiorPf the Committee and that when a permit is soug: from .this Government a public inquiry will! instituted under the provisions of the Envinment 'Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act. commend the report to the House.
Dr JENKINS (Scullin)-by leaveUnder constraints of time. I briefly enter the .Ibate to support the recommendations of theouse of Representatives Standing Committee or:nvironment and Conservation. The matte9f sand mining on Moreton Island has prov~d widespread opposition from a very broad s,ctrum of the public, government and politica)arties in Queensland. The Committee has not psed judgment on this matter; its inquiry IS not of sufficient depth to do so. It has, Wever, expresse<i the opinion that there is suftent information to warrant an inquiry und(Commonwealth legislation. Federal involvernt rests in the requirement for export permitsarticularly. Queensland legislation is, regrettablnotoriously deficient in the area of environment otection.
Much is made by the protagonisti' the scheme of the small area of the island invold. However, the area covers the principal ea'coast beach areas, and mining would involve .ds, et cetera in the scheme. I remind the House1at this island is listed on the Register of the ]tionaI Estate. Much is made of rehabilitation1at can occur after sand mining. This is a misn~er as rehabilitation does not occur. What occuis revegetation and stabilisation of the area withvastly different ecosystem. I believe Moreton Is)d deserves better than this. The Heath and c~reports are no

no REPRESENTATIVES 29 _ctober 1981 Committee on Environment and Conservation

1(1ger recent. Since the latter report sciutific evidnce has shown that areas in the northeast, said t( be degraded dunes, are natunlly and gOlogically stable and are, in fact, d a very mture geological nature. Since that rep1rt there hae been a number of finds of si/!1ificant arqaeological importance. It is urgent hat the enironmental legislation passed by this House sh(lld be used for an inquiry to assess tIe new evience, to allow proper public particitation. Othwise, what is the use of having Fedeial envirqmental legislation when maverick&ate leatrs can circumvent it at every turn?
l\- WEST (Cunningham)-by leave-l join the mourable member for Scullin (Dr Jenkins) in wcoming this initiative by the House of I\epresef;ltives Standing Committee on Environmen\nd Conservation to urge this GovermIient and t: Minister for Home Affairs and EnvironmentMr Wilson) to instigate a public inquiry undethe Environment Protection (Impact of Prop<tls) Act into sand mining on Moreton IslanQefore export licences are issued. This, as the t\l honourable members who preceded me have !d, is an extremely important issue to the people,f Brisbane and south east Queensland. The Ok report recommended that only 6.4 per cent ohe island be mined. This does not sound like a "y great area. However, it is over 50 per cent ofe most environmentally sensitive portion of the and-in the north east corner on the ocean si and in close proximity to the beautiful blue la~n area which I visited recently. Only two conanies are involved in this proposed project-ssociated Minerals Consolidated Ltd and Minds Deposits Ltd. Fewer than 200 permanent )s are involved and the anticipated export eaings are less than $13m a year. They are both itry considerations when we think of the very ltg period for which a very significant portion oflis beautiful island will be removed from publhse for passive and active recreation.
It is implant to note also that there are very great divisis on this matter within the sand mining in<stry itself. Although the two companies t,1 I have just mentioned obviously are keen to ine, another investment company, Mining Hou\ of Australia, which owns 20 per cent of Mbhyores, the main proponent company witlegard to Fraser Island and which has some sanleases on Moreton Island, has recently gone plic and advised its colleagues in the sand minirindustry to forget all about sand mining on MOJ.on Island and to get on with the job of mining md in other areas of Australia where damage 11 not occur to the environment.

I make the point that there are significant divisions on this matter in the industry itself.
Moreton Island is part of the National Estate. Just recently it was included in the Australian Heritage List under the Australian Heritage Commission Act. I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard section 30 of that Act.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
30..( I) Each Minister shall give all such directions and do all such things as, consistently with any relevant laws, can be given or done by him for ensuring the Department administered by him or any authority of Australia in respect of which he has ministerial responsibilities does not take any action that adversly affects, as part of the national estate, a place that is in the Register unless he is satisfied that there is no feasible and prudent alternative to the taking of that action and that all measures that can reasonably be taken to minimise the adverse effect will be taken and shall not himself take any such action unless he is so satisfied.
(2) Without prejudice to the application of sub-section (I) in relation to action to be taken by an authority of Australia, an authority of Australia shall not take any action that adversely affects, as part of the national estate, a place that is in the Register unless the authority is satisfied that there is no feasible and prudent alternative, consistent with any relevant laws, to the taking of that action and that all measures that can reasonably be taken to minimise the adverse effect will be taken.
(3) Before a Minister, a Department or an authority of Australia takes any action that might affect to a significant extent, as part of the national estate, a place that is in the Register, the Minister, Department or authority, as the case may be, shall inform the Commission of the proposed action and give the Commission a reasonable opportunity to consider it.
(4) For the purposes of this section, the making of a decision or recommendation (including a recommendation in relation to direct financial assistance granted, or proposed to be granted to a State) the approval of a program, the issue of a licence or the granting of a permission shall be deemed to be the taking of action and, in the case of a recommendation, if the adoption of the recommendation would adversely affect a place, the making of the recommendation shall be deemed to affect the place adversely.
Mr WEST-I thank the House. The intention of section 30 is such that no Minister of this Government should take any action that is within his power to prevent that which might result in damage to any area that has been included in the National Estate. The National Estate involves Moreton Island. Section 30 gives, the Minister the authQrity and the reason for carrying out the recommendation of the House of Representatives Standing Committee.
Mr DRUMMOND (Forrest)-by leave-My colleague the honourable member for Wilmot (Mr Burr) and I have prepared a dissenting report to the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation. I will be brief. Two major reports have been prepared in relation' to sand mining on Moreton Island. Firstly, A. A.

Committee on Environment and Conservation 29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2721

Heath and Partners prepared the Moreton !slanc! Environmental Impact Study and Strategic Plan. That company reported in 1976. They are planning consultants and environmental scientists who are well known throughout Australia. The project director was Mr J. E. Coaldrake, a plant ecologist and an expert in rehabilitation following not only sand mining but also bauxite and coal mining. He has been a director of a number of interdisciplinary studies in mining, watershed management, urban and regional planning and the planning of Jabiru village at Kakadu. The Heath report provides 400 pages of analyses, maps and technical papers. Twenty-eight specialists from many disciplines contributed to the study. As I said, Heath and Partners have been involved in environmental studies for a long time.
It is interesting to note that the principals or the team leaders of that study were asked by the Cook committee to put forward their personal views after they had completed the study. Five of them recommended that strategy B be adopted. Two strategies came up for consideration-strategy A, that there be no mining, and strategy B, that there be very limited mining in comparison with what was originally anticipated for the island. Some . years ago something like 60 per cent of the island was under consideration for mining. Now we are talking about 6.4 per cent. Only one principal, Mr Snelling, who is a land use planner, at that time said that he would prefer strategy A, that there be no mining, because he was not sure that the mining could be contained to 6.4 per cent of the island. At the end of his report he stated:
Should the findings of the inquiry ensure against a creeping expansion of mining from the area designated in the strategy I would feel less hesitant about strategy B.
After that report came the Cook report. Two well known gentlemen, Mr Cook, the Queensland Valuer-General, and Mr Schubert, the Deputy Co-ordinator-General, conducted this inquiry. They sat for some 43 days. They heard 74 witnesses and took 2,686 pages of evidence. They conducted inspections of North Stradbroke Island, Fraser Island and other areas in Queensland and four areas in New South Wales.
What is the point of having another inquiry? The honourable member for Wilmot and I make the point in our dissenting report that the new scientific evidence as to dunes and archaeological sites could quite easily be investigated, and should be investigated, by the State government concerned or, if necessary, by the Federal Government. There is no need for another full blown inquiry. For the sake of brevity I just ask: To what extent should the Commonwealth Government be interfering in the rights of the States to decide

what their responsibilities should be in the way of mining? What will be the next thing into which this Federal Parliament will be delving? Much was made of the local opposition to mining on Moreton Island. Really and truly, I do not know of one industry proposed for any area which has not had opposition. Two were proposed quite recently in my electorate. A resin factory was proposed for the Port of Bunbury. Local opinion said that it should not proceed. An aluminium smelter has been proposed for very close to Bunbury. I venture to say that 80 per cent or even more of the local residents do not want that development to take place. It seems to me that development is something that we all strive for as long as it does not take place in our immediate area.
It may be well for the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) to make little of the amount of money and the number of jobs that are involved but surely that is all part of the general prosperity of the country. He lightly dismissed the 200 jobs and the $1 3m-odd per year and is against that development taking place. I see no reason why mining should not take place on Moreton Island hand in hand with the tourist and other leisure activities that people will enjoy on that island .
Mr HOWE (Batman)-by leave-I wish to refer very briefly to the substance of the proposal which is not a proposal that sand mining on Moreton Island be opposed but simply a proposal that, in the event of there being a move to export sand from Moreton Island, the Federal Government use its export powers to order an inquiry under the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act. I think the argument for that was simply that the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation did not believe that it could go round the country conducting inquiries on environmental issues, no matter how important those issues might be, when it is the Government's responsibility to honour its own legislation. Since 1975 not a single public inquiry has been initiated by the Government under the relevant legislation. Of course, over that period a number of situations have involved not only serious environmental issues but also very often areas of national significance. The majority of the members of the Committee believe that Moreton Island represents a situation in which the Federal Government ought to use its powers to ensure that all the issues are examined, all the evidence is sifted and the widest possible opportunity is provided for public comment.
No matter what we may think about the environment of Moreton Island, the Committee is

2722 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Air-crash and Air-search Procedures

not making a judgment about that. It is simply saying that where legislation offers an opportunity for the Federal Government to examine these matters that opportunity ought to be taken and such an inquiry ought to be put in place. It is regrettable that in a number of Budgets the Government has made no provision whatever for such an inquiry to take place, and that it has initiated no inquiries under the legislation. With respect to South West Tasmania the Committee made a judgment 18 months ago that such an inquiry ought to be carried out and now in relation to Moreton Island the Committee has made a similar judgment. It is to be hoped that the Government will heed the Committee's recommendation and that at the appropriate time, if necessary, this inquiry will be carried out.
AIR-CRASH AND AIR-SEARCH PROCEDURES
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)-Mr Speaker has received letters from the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) and the honourable member for Calare (Mr MacKenzie) proposing that definite matters of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion today. As required by Standing Order 107, Mr Speaker has selected the matter which in his, opinion is the most urgent and important, that is, that proposed by the honourable member for Shortland, namely:
The recent failures of the Ministry of Transport adequately to perform its public responsibilities particularly in relation to current air-crash and air-search procedures.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (3.44)-The matter I have brought before the Parliament today for discussion, namely, The recent failures of the Ministry of Transport adequately to perform its public responsibilities particularly in relation to current air-crash and air-search procedures', is a grave issue of growing concern to both the Australian public and to the constituent sectors of the transport industry. During the six years of Fraser government and under the stewardship of two National Country Party Ministers, we have seen the once enthusiastic and highly regarded Department of Transport degenerate into an unreliable, inefficient, decrepit and demoralised organisation. Regrettably for Australians it is led by an embattled National Country Party Minister who is quite

incapable of grasping the complexities and important responsibilities of his portfolio.
Within the Department of Transport there are some officers l~ft who are candid, competent and dedicated to their duties. However, their efforts are constantly negated by the serious lack of skilled and experienced personnel, particularly in the aviation divisions. This unsatisfactory and serious situation has been brought about by the niggardly and ill-conceived policies of the Fraser Government, by constant and unpredictable changes in government policies, by a lack of effective leadership from their Minister. It has been fostered by brawling within Government ranks and the incompetence of National Country Party Ministers. The incompetence and inability of the Department of Transport to carry out its publiC responsibilities were best described by a member of the Government parties, the honourable member for Mackellar (Mr Carlton), a Liberal Party member, when referring to the scandalous treatment accorded the Holcroft Independent Committee of Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares by this National Country Party Minister and his Department. He said, as reported at page 1532 of Hansardof9April,1981:
. . . but what cannot be disputed is the incapacity of the Department of Transport to respond to a series of questions that were pertinent, in a top management sense, to the resolution of the actual policy issues involved, and not just to a limited defence of an existing policy position. The distinction is quite critical, and I hope the real lesson to be learned from the last few weeks, that of managerial deficiency, not back bench revolt, will, in fact, be learned by the Government and its Public Service.
He had earlier defined top management as the combination of the Minister and the Department head. Unfortunately his advice was not heeded by the Ministry of Transport.
Let me itemise the shabby record of bungling, mismanagement and policy reversals that have occurred within the Ministry of Transport in recent months, behind some of which has lurked the heavy hand of Prime Ministerial interference: The collapse of Government's international civil aviation policy, and its belated actions to regularise international air fares contributing to the massive losses by Qantas Airways Ltd; the exposure of the inad~quacies of its in-house domestic aviation policy review and the subsequent adoption of Labor's policy of an independent and public inquiry into domestic air fares and the establishment of an Independent Air Fares Committee to determine domestic air fares; the abrupt and premature termination of the Holcroft inquiry into domestic air fares and the scandalous treatment accorded its members by National Country Party Ministers; the confusion in domestic aviation policy caused

Air-crash and Air-search Procedures

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2723

by public squabbling within Government ranks over the terms of the new two-airline agreement; the failure of the Minister to protect the peoples airline, Trans Australia Airlines, from the vendetta being waged against it by government idealogues; the bleeding of TAA by the Government, the uncertainty created as to the airline's future by foolish government decisions and the failure of the Minister to provide TAA management with flexibility and a definite course of action; the damage done to TAA by the Minister's procrastination over the superannuation scheme imposed on it by government and his dithering over TAA's capital needs; the disastrous loss of irreplaceable key skilled, technical and experienced Department of Transport personnel arising from the Minister's iIl-considered-MelbourneCanberra transfer program which should be stopped until a full evaluation has been made of its progress and appropriateness; the degradation of services provided by the Ministry of Transport to the various sectors of the transport industry, particularly aviation safety services; the massive disruption to air services caused by the unnecessary radar technicians dispute when the Minister, despite several months of soothing words, did nothing to remedy the legitimate claims of the radar technicians-that problem remains still unsolved; and the abject failure of the Ministry of Transport to ensure sufficient air traffic controllers are available to keep airports open during normal operational hours causing the daily premature closure of Brisbane Airport, which has led to the dislocation of airline service schedules, and unnecessary costs for the airlines as well as considerable embarrassment to Qantas Airways Ltd in Japan.
Having forced Ansett and TAA to charge unjustified higher air fares to Canberra, the Minister then bleated about the reduction in services following the heavy fall in traffic caused by his own actions. Related to the chaos he created in Canberra air services is the shabby and prejudicial treatment accorded East-West Airlines Ltd by the Minister in its vain attempt to provide the people of Canberra with cheaper and more frequent air services. I mention also the Minister's continuing failure to approve cheaper TAA air fares from Canberra.
Deep concern has been created among thousands of amateur and professional small vessel operators by the Minister's blind adherence to his Government's policy of demanning lighthouses around Australia's coastline, despite the absence of any public examination of the appropriateness of that policy. There should be a public investigation of this program of converting manned

lighthouses to unmanned automatic operation similar to the successful inquiry conducted into the same subject in New Zealand recently. Disruption and unemployment have been created in public road authorities by the Government's legislative preference for the use of private contractors as a blatant political pay-off to the Australian Federation of Construction Contractors for past services rendered.
The Minister has failed to provide leadership or play any effective role in reducing delays associated with the shipment of Australia's bulk exports. A cloud has been thrown over the future role of Qantas and the provision of international airline services by the Minister's statement several months ago that a review of international civil aviation policy is to be conducted, at some time, by someone, with yet unknown terms of reference. The fact is that the Minister has had the draft terms of reference for a month now. The inquiry should be public and it should embrace all international and domestic air services. Meanwhile, Qantas's services and profitability are being damaged by Government meddling, muddling, and delays in making decisions. We have had the fiasco of the lengthy and expensive general aviation study conducted by the Ministry of Transport, which the Minister was forced to throw out following widespread protest by the industry at its inaccuracies and inappropriateness. Earlier this week the Joint Committee of Public Accounts, in its one hundred and eighty-ninth report on the purchase of the Walter airport fire tenders, exposed the maladministration of the Ministry of Transport and the questionable personal and professional integrity of some of its officers who were associated with the purchase of the tenders. The report is a damning indictment of the Ministry and the manner in which it misled Parliament, and I quote from its conclusions. Referring to the Department of Transport, it states:
It did not fully inform the Committee on matters relating to the Walter contracts . .
Conclusion 18 states:
. . . The Committee believes that the evidence it heard and extracted from written submissions and correspondence brought into question the personal and professional integrity of some Departmental officers involved in the drawing up of specifications and the selection of the successful tenderer . . .
I move now to the Minister's performance in relation to the tragic Advance Airlines crash at Mascot on 21 February last year in which 13 people lost their lives. The report on the crash by the Air Safety Investigation Branch of the Department of Transport stated explicitly on page 44 of the report:

2724 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Air-crash and Air-search Procedures

Officers of the Department of Transport were aware of the unapproved practices in respect of standard passenger weights and reduced power take-olfs but action had not been taken to regularise the company's operations.
Similar explicit statements appeared on pages 9, 35 and 41 of the report. Yet despite the gravity of the report's conclusions, the Minister embarked on a cover-up of his Department's involvement. In rejecting my call for a royal commission into the circumstances of the crash he said on 23 September, 1981 :
On receipt of the Air Safety Investigation Branch report, I have considered the need for appointment of a Board.
He meant a board of inquiry. The Minister continued:
I have concluded that such action is not warranted in the circumstances of this accident.
Then, in an amazing overnight about-face, some 14 hours later, he told us from coward's castle, in answer to a Dorothy Dix question:
I feel that there is a public interest matter that should be resolved by a Board ofInquiry.
It was a reversal that the Opposition welcomed. While a board of inquiry is similar in many respects to a royal commission, its terms of reference should be broadened to cover the Department's activities in air safety matters and in the aviation industry generally. One further aspect of this report that is rather puzzling to me is that although the Minister made available for public release the transcript of the conversation between the Mascot control tower and the Advance Airlines aircraft involved in the crash in the minutes prior to that tragic crash, he has refused to make available the transcript of the conversation that occurred between the Ansett Boeing 727 aircraft, which was in the immediate vicinity at the same time and which landed moments before the tragic crash occurred. I hope that he will in his response give some explanation as to why he has released one transcript and not the other. This is a matter of great public importance to the people who are concerned with that tragedy.
The final matter in this Ministry's abysmal record is its conduct of the light aircraft search in south-east Australia. The aircraft with four persons on board disappeared at about 5 p.m. last Thursday, 22 October 1981, during a flight from Canberra to Moorabbin in Victoria. It was fitted with a crash-activated emergency location beacon known as a survival beacon. Each of the Department's fleet of 16 Fokker F28s, Merlin, Aero Commander and Bonanza aircraft is specially fitted with search meters designed to locate the source of signals which could have been transmitted from the missing aircraft's survival beacon. Yet only one aircraft, an Aero Commander, was

utilised in the search. Yesterday when I asked the Minister a question on this matter, he said that he had no knowledge of the beacons. It was obvious to all present that he did not really understand what an emergency location beacon was.
In a further written answer provided to me late last evening, he said that the F28 and Merlin aircraft were considered less suitable for visual search in the area under examination than the helicopters and Cessna aircraft hired for that purpose. The Minister failed to give reasons why the F28s or Merlin aircraft were not utilised to search for the source of a survival signal should one have been transmitted from the missing aircraft, or why the Bonanza aircraft were also not utilised in the search. He should provide a full and factual explanation of why only one of the Department's fleet of aircraft, equipped with search meters, was utilised in the search for the missing Piper Lance aircraft VH-CGL, particularly during the first 24 hours following the disappearance of the aircraft.
The effective performance by the Ministry of Transport of its public duties is critical to the safety, efficiency and public accessibility of Australia's transport services. There is now available abundant evidence to show that the Ministry of Transport has failed to perform adequately its public responsibilities. Responsibility for those failures rests with the Minister for Transport and his Government. From across the full spectrum of the transport industry there is deep concern at the inadequacies of this Minister and his Department. There is deep concern at the clear deterioration in the supervision of air safety standards by this Minister and his Department. In the eyes of the industry, neither the Minister nor his Department can be relied upon to carry out their public duties responsibly and sensibly. Let me quote from one of the many letters I have received. This one is from Mr Peter Patroni, Vice-President of the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association of Australia, calling for an investigation of the Department's activities. He wrote:
In the light of the chaos being ,created by Transport Australia, their lack of forward planning, the closure of airports and general inconvenience and delays to all aircraft, I am sure you will agree, that it is time we had an independent inquirr into Transport Australia (Air Transport Group).
I conclude by saying that two things must happen if the Ministry of Transport is to be restored to its former stanoards of efficiency, reliability and enthusiasm. A thorough investigation must be initiated with the utmost urgency into the operations of the Ministry of Transport and a comprehensive overhaul of the Department conducted. Secondly, the embattled National Country Party Minister for Transport, who is at the table, must resign.

Air-crash and Air-search Procedures

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2725

Only in this way will the previous enthusiasm and efficiency of the Ministry of Transport be raised to the desired levels. Only in this way will public confidence in the Department be re-established, and only in this way will the quality of its performance be raised to the levels necessary to provide standards essential for the safe and efficient operation of Australia's transport services.
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (3.59)-The honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) never fails to use every opportunity, including accidents, to damn the Department of Transport, the Minister and the Government. This is not a new tactic. Indeed, it is a well-worn one. The honourable member used it consistently against my predecessor, now the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon). If one reads Hansard since the honourable member became the shadow Minister for Transport and is prepared to be utterly bored, one will readily see the truth of my observation. Today the honourable member has sought to damn and vilify the Ministry of Transport, as he calls it, for its so-called failure to perform its public responsibilities in relation to the current air crash and air search procedures. He catalogued a whole list of things that he had put together from dozens and dozens of Press releases he has issued from time to time. His rantings and ravings, his vilifications, I think, are designed to scare and panic people and to turn them against the Department of Transport, which has an unequalled record in air safety administration around the world. There is not the slightest doubt that he seeks to blame the Department of Transport for the difficulty it has had in locating the missing aircraft which tragically disappeared. Let me make it clear that responsible criticism is always welcomed and encouraged. The Government recognises that Australia's good air safety record is probably due in no small measure to the fact that Ministers, governments and the Department keep themselves open to positive suggestions for improvement. The constant stream of destructive criticism and invective coming from the honourable member for Shortland does him no justice. It is negative, politically motivated criticism in a most sensitive area of public confidence.
Information has been provided by my Department outlining in detail the search for the missing private aircraft which has been carried out by the Department over the past seven days. A Piper Lance aircraft, VH-CGL, departed Canberra for Melbourne at 3. \0 p.m. on Thursday, 22 October. The four occupants of the aircraft were part of a German flying club group tour which had planned to travel from Sydney to Cairns via Canberra, Adelaide, Alice Springs and Mount Isa before

departing for Papua New Guinea. The missing aircraft made a routine position report over Eildon at 4.43 p.m. and was due at Moorabbin at 5.l1 p.m. No further reports were received. The pilot's flight plan indicated that search and rescue action should commence at 7 p.m. if the aircraft was unreported. A weak signal, thought to be coming from an emergency location beacon, was heard at 6.45 p.m. by a light aircraft close to Moorabbin but the signal faded out. The Melbourne rescue co-ordination centre of my Department immediately initiated search and rescue action. The search mission co-ordinator notified all emergency bodies, called extra staff on duty and commenced search planning. Other aircraft operating between Eildon Weir and Melbourne were asked to listen fora signal. An Ansett Airlines of Australia Electra spent 30 minutes in the search area listening for a signal but heard nothing. This aircraft noted the position of fires in the area so that they could be checked the following day by aircraft and ground parties.
Further investigation on the following day revealed that the signal which was thought to be from an emergency location beacon was, in fact, interference radiated from power lines in the area. The Victorian Police established a search command post at Eildon and investigated the source of fires in the area, reports from the public of hearing and sighting aircraft and trails and tracks in the most probable search area. Up to 10 fixed wing aircraft and 10 helicopters have carried out intensive contour and pattern searches of 6,600 square nautical miles. I emphasise that not one aircraft was involved but 10 fixed wing aircraft and \0 helicopters. The search area extends from Benalla, Maffra, Yarram, Wonthaggi and back to Benalla and encompasses mountainous terrain which is heavily timbered. The search has been continuing during daylight hours for seven days. Approximately 380 search hours had been flown to this morning. I am told that by the end of the day we can expect that 425 hours of aerial search will have been undertaken. The weather in the search area has been generally good. Because of the nature of the terrain and the intensity of the search patterns, helicopters and light high wing aircraft have been used extensively.
An Aero Commander operated by my Department has been made available and has been used as required by the search mission co-ordinator. It is a high wing, medium speed aircraft. High performance low wing aircraft such as the F28 and Merlin are less suitable for this type of search. The Aero Commander is fitted with a search meter and has flown 15t hours on this search. A Royal Australian Air Force FIll aircraft carried out

2726 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Air-crash and Air-search Procedures

high resolution photographic flights of the search area. Preliminary results have revealed possible aircraft wreckage near Mount Terrible, 26 kilometres south-east of Eildon township. This is being investigated now by the Victorian police helicopter and ground parties. The search mission co-ordinator has the responsibility for determining the number and types of aircraft he considers most suitable for the task. Because of the very difficult terrain, high speed aircraft are unsuitable for low level searching. The search mission coordinator also made maximum use of pilots having detailed local knowledge of the terrain. I refute the claim of the honourable member for Shortland that I said that I had no knowledge of the beacons. I said that I did not have the full details immediately available or at my fingertips when he asked the question yesterday.
Mr Morris-You said you had no knowledge of the beacons.
Mr HUNT-I did not at any stage say that I had no knowledge of the beacons.
Mr Morris-That is what you said. You said it when you were walking over there.
Mr HUNTI will repeat what I said so there is no doubt:
I do not have at my fingertips the details with respect to the beacons to which the honourable member referred.
Sufficient suitable aircraft were utilised in the search to ensure that an emergency beacon signal would have been detected. The honourable member for Shortland should understand that it is essential to limit the number of aircraft engaged at anyone time in a search of this nature to ensure that there is no danger of collision between searching aircraft. The search is being continued because expert aviation and medical opinion considers that the possibility of survival still exists.
I point out that the procedures for searches by my Department are set out in detail in the airways operations instructions and are taught in search and rescue schools. These procedures are derived from annex 12 to the convention of the International Civil Aviation Organisation to which Australia is a signatory. I have the document here. Search and rescue procedures are also promulgated in national search and rescue manuals which have been endorsed by Australian search and rescue authorities. I also have those documents. I have been assured that the procedures have been carried out to the letter. Let me give an assurance that maintenance of air safety standards is one of the Government's top priorities. It is prepared to take whatever steps are necessary to keep our airways safe. It is an ongoing responsibility that has to keep pace with developments in

the industry. One such development where government action is necessary and already in train, is in the sphere of general aviation, that is the non-airline sector.
Unfortunately, there have been trends in some areas of general aviation which are of concern to me and my Department. I mention private and business flying in particular. There has been an across-the-board improvement in safety statistics in general aviation in recent years in spite of what the honourable member for Shortland might say. However, in the five-year period from 1976 to 1980 there were 1,209 accidents involving general aviation aircraft of which 619 or 52 per cent occurred in private and business flying. Yet this sector flew only 33 per cent of the total general aviation hours.
To highlight even further our concern about this form of flying I will cite some figures. Accident rates for 1979 were for the whole general aviation industry 14.3 accidents per 100,000 hours flown. Charter flying experienced 7.01 accidents per 100,000 hours, flying training 9.26 accidents per 100,000 hours and business and private flying 19.01 accidents per 100,000 hours flown. In 1980 the total general aviation accident rate was 13.63 accidents per 100,000 hours flown, charter flying 7.53 accidents per 100,000 hours flown, flying training 8.39 accidents per 100,000 hours and private and business flying 20.42 accidents per 100,000 hours.
Provisional statistics for the current year to 30 September-these are the latest statisticsindicate that for the whole of the general aviation industry there were 177 accidents of which 89 occurred in private and business flying. Of the total of 35 general aviation fatalities, 27 deaths were in the private and business flying category. Unfortunately, the level of safety in private and business flying is markedly worse than that of other sectors in the industry. Therefore, I do concede that there is a need to take some additional measures to improve the safety level and the safety performance in the private and business operational area.
The Department of Transport has introduced a biennial review for pilots nototherwise subject to proficiency checks. The requirement is part of a package of revised licensing standards which my Department has introduced after discussion with the general ~viation industry. The measure has not been without criticism. It has attracted considerable criticism indeed from some people in the industry. However, I would like to draw the attention of honourable members to the fact that a similar pilot licence review system has been operating in the United States of America since

Air-crash and Air-search Procedures

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2727

1974. I will quote from the August 1979 Interworld. He should put his case to people who know

national Civil Aviation Organisation Bulletin what they are talking about.

wherein a senior executive of the Cessna Aircraft Co., when referring to general aviation aircraft fleet in the United States, said:
Fatality rates were increasing with the growth of the fleet until they were dramatically reduced by the institution of the

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-Order! The Minister's time has expired.
Mr Hunt-I think I have said enough, Mr Deputy Speaker, to prove my point.

biennial flight review in 1974. It is also promising that with almost twice the number of aeroplanes in the field today, the
fatalities per year are less than they were eight years ago,

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The discussion is concluded.

which is a tribute to the success of the biennial flight review . . .

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

The review will be carried out by approved flight instructors associated with flying schools. It will provide the pilots who are not subject to other

Mr MACPHEE CBalaclava-Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.

forms of regular tests and checks with a periodic Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the Minister

assessment of their aeronautical knowledge and claim to have been misrepresented?

proficiency and should be regarded as an educational measure and not an examination.

Mr MACPHEE-Yes, Mr Deputy Speaker, I do. My attention has just been drawn to the tran-

It is appropriate at this stage to repeat that the script of the Channel 7 Sydney news of last night

Government will take whatever steps may be wherein Mr Ken Begg, a reporter from Canberra

necessary to ensure that air safety standards in for that channel, is reported as saying:

Australia are not jeopardised. An indication of The decision to refuse Viscreanu refugee status was unani-

the Government's commitment to the maintenance of high safety standards in this country can be seen in the amount of money allocated for the maintenance and improvement of navigational

mous. The committee charged with considering his application to stay ruled that he would not be persecuted if he was
required to go home. Viscreanu probably jeopardised his bid
to stay in Australia when he failed to turn up for an interview with immigration officials in Melbourne last week. At that

aids and other technical equipment. More than time Mr Macphee criticised media interests who, he said,

$17m has been provided this financial year as the first part of a $50.3m re-equipment program over

didn't have Viscreanu's personal interest at heart. And he returned to that attack again today.

the next four years. This program includes the I just wish to assure the House and all persons in

upgrading of radar installations at major airports Australia interested in the operations of the Com-

which should significantly improve air traffic conmittee for the Determination of Refugee Status,

trol capabilities.

that that Committee, made up of independent

In conclusion, I would like to quote briefly from the key-note address given to the national seminar on the transport of dangerous goods in Canberra last year by James B. King, Chairman of the United States National Transportation Safety Board. He said:

senior public servants and representatives of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, would never be influenced by media comment or by the failure of an individual to turn up for an interview. Moreover, I would never be influenced either by media pressure or by other public comments. I would be influenced by the facts as they

By the time my hop to Australia ends, I hope to have been came out in the interview and in the report of the

at least partially as helpful to you as you have been to me. In the past few days, I've spent some valuable time picking the

Committee.

brains of air safety officials trying to learn what makes

Furthermore, the same journalist, Mr Begg, ac-

. Australia the world's leader in aviation safety.

tually asked me that question in an interview last

Yet here we have the honourable member for week. It was in that interview that I was critical of

Shortland (Mr Morris) coming into this House another section of the media. He asked me

week after week trying to panic the people of whether Mr Viscreanu's failure to turn up for the

Australia about declining safety standards. He interview and the media publicity would preju-

does his best to denigrate the senior officers of my dice me against Mr Viscreanu. I assured him that

Department who have a very heavy responsithey would not and that I would not bow to that

bility. In the years I have known him he has tried. pressure. I reminded him in that interview of a

constantly to create an atmosphere of panic similar situation with a Russian seaman who

amongst the people of Australia about aviation. deserted. Another section of the media on that

That has been his contribution to transport policy occasion tried to bring some pressure to bear..

in this Parliament. He has been nit-picking about Again, I similarly said that I was not pressured

a whole range of issues. The truth of the matter is into making the decision that the media interests

that we have the highest standards of safety in the seemed to want made.

2728 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Delegation to Pakistan and India

So I am disappointed that Mr Begg should have suggested that Mr Viscreanu was in any way jeopardised in his bid because of his failure to turn up for an interview. I want to assure the House that that certainly is not so and would not be so. It is a shame that media interests seem to think it is important to get an 'exclusive~ on people such as Mr Viscreanu and give them publicity. It seems that other media interests then, almost by way of pay-back to their media counterparts, get into the act and make statements which worsen the complexities of dealing with what are always difficult, sensitive cases. The damage that is done is not in prejudicing the way in which we deal with cases but sometimes prejudicing the individual's own clarity when it comes to assessing his or her own situation.
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO PAKISTAN AND
INDIA
Report
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas)-by leave-I present the official report of the Australian parliamentary delegation to Pakistan and India. I was honoured recently to have been invited to lead the Australian parliamentary delegation which visited Pakistan and India during the period 19 July to 3 August this year. The delegation was most fortunate that a very full program provided adequate opportunities to meet and have wide ranging discussions not only with parliamentary and government officials but also with representatives of industry, commerce and the professions in each of those countries. It was noteworthy that in both the countries visited we were made very much aware that Australia's increasing interest in the Asian region was most welcome.
During our time in Pakistan we were received by the President, General Mohammad Zia-ulHaq, the Governors of the Sind and Punjab provinces of Pakistan and a number of Ministers, government officials and leading representatives from commerce and industry. The visit included the Sjnd, Punjab and the north-west frontier provinces.
We appreciate that Pakistan is facing many difficulties both externally and domestically. We found that active measures are being taken to overcome them. On the domestic scene much is being done to reduce the rate of population growth, to raise the level of agricultural productivity and to develop natural resources such as minerals, natural gas and oils. Steps are also being taken to improve the balance of payments situation.

We, as a delegation, were most impressed with what we learnt of the manner in which the Pakistan Government is handling the very difficult Afghan refugee problem. The Government and all concerned deserve the highest praise for their efforts and as much assistance with their difficult task as is reasonably possible. I certainly commend that to the House.
Internationally, Pakistan faces a number of difficulties, not the least of these is the continuing strained relationship with India its neighbour. We believe that while some progress has been made in this regard a lot still needs to be done. We trust that a normalisation of relationships can be achieved given time, patience and a better mutual understanding.
The strained r.elations between Pakistan and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, which have existed for a considerable time, have been exacerbated by the invasion of Afghanistan and the spread of Russian influence in the area. We believe that this situation will not change in the short term, and indeed cannot do so until the Russians withdraw and until a situation exists which will permit the return of the refugee population to its homeland in Afghanistan.
The program in India was a heavy one which involved a considerable amount of internal air travel for members of the delegation. Nevertheless, the delegation felt that despite the vastness of the country and the diversity of its people, customs and religions we were able to gain some appreciation of India's current problems and achievements, past and present. The delegation was honoured to be received by the Prime Minister, Mrs Indira Gandhi, Presiding Officers of the Union Parliament and Ministers, Government officials and a number of representatives of commerce and industry. We were impressed by the frankness and friendliness of our discussions with Ministers and their senior officials, and were particularly grateful for the opportunity of meeting the Prime Minister. Careful reading of our report on our discussions both with President Zia and Mrs Gandhi I think will assist honourable members individually in understanding the complexity of issues within and between India and Pakistan. I commend those paragraphs of the report to honourable members.
During our visit we were able to gain some appreciation of India's Cl.lfrent problems of unemployment, population growth and the movement of population into urban areas. Nevertheless, it was obvious that much had to be done and was being done in an endeavour to overcome these

Delegation to Pakistan and India

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2729

and other problems: My overwhelming impression was the great strength of India's manufacturing industries and its scientific advantages in some particular areas, not an impression of those enormous problems about which we hear so much. The contrast that is to be seen in India is something that ought to be noted by all honourable members in order that they have a better appreciation of the greatness of that country.
The increase in food production as a result of agricultural research problems, the adoption of better farm management techniques and the development of better strains of food crops and livestock is just but one example. The delegation considered that opportunities existed for Australia to expand its rural development aid projects and that consideration should be given to increasing parliamentary, scientific, technological, trade and cultural exchanges between the two countries.
We had the opportunity of visiting a number of Australian aid projects which appear to be fully meeting the needs for which they were established. I pay tribute in particular to the hard work and dedication of many Australian personnel who work on many of these projects. I know that the work was greatly appreciated by those government officials whom we had an opportunity to meet. I mention that factor to the House in particular. These projects are very necessary. This delegation would strongly defend aid programs of this type and has recommended that Australia should appreciably increase its level of aid to the development of Third World countries such as India and Pakistan. In summary, we believe that our visit to these countries was an extremely worthwhile exercise and we hope that the recommendations listed in this report-to which my colleagues will speak further-are given adequate consideration by all those concerned.
I take this opportunity to place on record our appreciation and gratitude for the assistance and guidance we received from the Australian Ambassador to Pakistan, the Australian High Commissioner to India and the Australian Consul General in Bombay, together with their staffs. The delegation benefited greatly from their experience, background and advice. I have in mind a number of individuals when I say that because their efforts to our delegation were very generous. I thank my colleagues, the honourable member for Chifley (Mr Armitage) and the honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent) from this House and Senator Neville Bonner, Senator Michael Tate and Senator Brian Harradine from the Senate. They had to keep to a very arduous program. Notwithstanding that, there was a great deal of goodwill and comradeship between us all.

I think the delegation was a great one to go away with. I very much appreciate the co-operation and assistance of those members.
Finally, I mention Alistair McDonald, the Parliamentary Officer who accompanied us. Honourable members may know him well but I think the opportunity of going away with a gentleman as dedicated and as competent as he is ought to be noted. I record the very high regard I have for him as a parliamentary officer and the assistance that he was able to give our delegation. I commend this report to all honourable members.
Mr ARMITAGE (Chifley)-by leave-I support the remarks made by the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) and refer in particular to the magnificent work done by Alistair McDonald, the Secretary to the delegation. His experience, his knowledge of the countries we visited-having been there during his service-his very great maturity and complete dedication and the notes that he took throughout the visit made this very comprehensive report possible. We visited Pakistan and India during a period of extreme heat. It was the middle of the monsoon period. Naturally conditions were very trying to say the least. Yet, as the honourable member for Dundas has mentioned, we maintained considerable comradeship. Alistair McDonald was almost a father confessor to us all.
I wish to refer to one or two major points in connection with future visits of delegations. I make the point that we need to be provided with a day of rest. We started early in the morning and finished late at night, at times during periods of extreme heat. Quite honestly, I believe that the itinerary was altogether far too exacting. Not one member of the delegation did not gtt either a fever or stomach trouble-the renowned 'Bombay belly'. I got it even when I returned home. Not One member of the delegation escaped either one or both of those sicknesses. The reason for that was that we simply had an extremely arduous itinerary. This question needs to be looked at. Often members need time to reflect and to make up their minds as to what they wish to pursue the next day.
I wish now to refer in particular to the general recommendation contained in the report which states:
The Delegation had the opportunity of visiting a number of Australian aid projects which appeared to be fully meeting the needs for which they were established. There has been some questioning of the necessity of this type of aid in the past but this Delegation recommends that Australia should appreciably increase its level of aid to the development of third world countries such as India and Pakistan.

2730 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Delegation to Pakistan and India

I strongly support that proposal. Far too often I feel that it can be said that people take an ignorant approach to this question of aid to underdeveloped countries. It is to Australia's very great advantage to see our neighbouring countries improve their lot. Looking at the question of self interest alone, if there would be a one per cent increase in the standard of living in Indonesia the trade which would flow to Australia as a result would well and truly compensate for any aid that we gave that country. Added to that, from a pure humanitarian point of view we must always realise that the people throughout these countries are human beings just as we are. I have a very personal and strong commitment to this aspect of policy. For that reason I strongly commend that recommendation in addition to all the other recommendations contained in the report. We went over this report the other night and were all absolutely unanimous on the recommendations contained in it.
I was very pleased to meet the leaders of the various countries concerned, the Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan. I was most surprised when I met the Prime Minister of India as she is not the iron lady I had expected. To the contrary, she was a most vivacious woman and obviously labouring under a huge load. I was very impressed with her., I feel that the problems of India are so massive that it will be a long while before they will be solved. India is a country of extremes. It has extreme wealth and extreme poverty. It has extremes of very high technologies in some areas and of no technology in other areas. I think it will be a long while before her very great problems, including the problems of population control and so on, are worked out.
By the same token, I think the economic position of Pakistan is a little better than that of India. I do not think there is any doubt about that. But I think it will be a long while, once again, before democracy, in the true sense, returns to that country. I thank the Australian Embassy in Pakistan, the Australian High Commission in India and the Australian Consul-General in Bombay for the great assistance they gave us. Without their assistance we could not have been as effective a delegation as we were. I commend the report.
Mr KENT (Hotham)-by leave-I join my colleagues in expressing my appreciation to both the Pakistan Government and the Indian Government for the friendly hospitality extended to our delegation. At the outset, I also congratulate the secretary of the delegation, Mr Alistair McDonald, who worked tirelessly to make our tour a success. As we started our tour in Pakistan, I would like to say firstly a few words about my

impressions of that country. The regime in Pakistan, which is a military dictatorship governing through martial law, is not a type of rule that we would prefer. Therefore, I welcome the news that General Zia-ul-Haq said in an interview in Islamabad recently that he will usher in civilian rule in the next few years. I hope that the intentions of the President as he expressed them to our' delegation also during our visit are honest and sincere.
There is a lot to be done in his country to alleviate poverty, to reduce the enormous gap between rich and poor, to reduce the rate of population growth and to resolve tribal differences. All of this cannot be achieved without the people's involvement and constant struggle against established vested interests. Military regimes usually maintain the status quo and are there to protect the elite-the same' elite from which the officers come. Let me quote President Zia as reported in the Melbourne Age of 28 October 1981. The report stated:
President Zia admitted that he was dispensible. 'I am also fully aware that there is no one indispensible and political personalities like the one which I am now, cannot be acceptable in countries like Pakistan . . . I have no doubt in thisthat people want a change and therefore one should do one's bit and then leave it for others to decide.'
The second matter I wanted to comment on is the problem caused by refugees from Afghanistan. The exact number of refugees is not known. Whilst it is believed that the Pakistani authorities put the figure much higher than the real numbers, it is nevertheless sure that there are a great number of refugees in Pakistan and if their numbers increase sharply they will create an intolerable burden. The United Nations and other international agencies are working in the field to minimise the impact. Australia has so far been involved in providing humanitarian aid. I hope that it will continue to do so and that our aid will remain humanitarian only. Any other assistance to the refugees or the rebel forces would only exacerbate the situation and turn the temporary plight of Afghan refugees into a permanent one. I draw the attention of honourable members to page 7 of our report. It states:
Nevertheless, the Delegation was convinced that Pakistan wished to avoid confrontation with the Soviet Union and in this regard wished to avoid any dire,ct or indirect involvement in Afghanistan. Pakistan therefore had no involvement in the supply of arms or equipment to dissidents in Afghanistan or to Afghan refugees in Pakistan.
I agree with this statement, but I hasten to add that, whilst the Pakistanis categorically denied ' giving arms to the rebels or the refugees, they stated during our briefing that they welcomed others so to do. While we are strongly opposed to

Delegation to Pakistan and India

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2731

the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, I consider such attitudes by Pakistan to this conflict wrong. It will serve only to prolong the military operations, create more refugees, and turn them into long term, if not permanent, refugees. We were received by President Zia, as my colleague, the honourable member for Chifley (Mr Armitage) said. During the discussions with him he produced a map with red arrows on it trying to explain to us the Soviet intentions in Afghanistan. His opinion, as he voiced it to us, was that the Soviet Union entered Afghanistan to make a two-pronged attack, one red arrow going down towards India and Pakistan and another one going towards Iran, forgetting, of course, that the Soviet Union intervened in Afghanistan to maintain, by force, a regime which was already pro-Soviet. So I cannot accept his explanation. I think we should support Mrs Gandhi's opinion that there should be a negotiated political settlement of the problem. This is the only way of bringing peace to the area.
That brings me to the second part of the tour, India. Undoubtedly the highlight of our tour was our meeting with India's Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi. Mrs Gandhi is certainly a great leader of a nation which will be the largest nation in the world by the turn of the century. She is also a prominent world figure fighting for peace and seeking peaceful resolution of existing conflicts. Mrs Gandhi's proposals for peace and a nuclear free zone in the Pacific is especially commendable as it concerns our immediate region. Our relations with India are reasonably good and friendly, but I think they lack real cordiality. I suspect that the reason for this is the incompatibility of the sabrerattling foreign policy of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) with the quest for peace by Mrs Indira Gandhi. I hope that when we become the government we will further extend our friendly relations with India, which is one of the few. democracies in Asia deserving our full support and co-operation.
There are a couple more aspects of our visit that I will briefly touch on. As the report states, we visited some of India's industrial undertakings. It is important to mention that India's manufacturing industry, which was built in the last 30 years and which is among the 12 largest in the world, has complete protection from imports and competition from abroad. It is protected also from the grab of multinational capital. I mention this because it shows us the way to protect our own manufacturing industry and, with it, the living standards of Australian workers.
Finally, one more thing that I learned during our visit is that there is an appalling understaffing of our post in New Delhi with immigration staff.

In all of India there is only one Australian immigration officer, who is in Delhi processing applications, and the Consul-General in Bombay, who has many other duties as well. It is true that India's population is not very mobile and not desirous of migrating. Notwithstanding this, there are a number among the population of 700 million who would desire to come and settle in Australia. There are 8,000 to 9,000 applications received yearly and our annual intake quota is approximately 500. This situation is completely unsatisfactory. About 40,000 people of Indian origin have settled in Australia. They have settled here and have integrated well. They are very valuable members of our community. Many are well respected professionals. In a word, they are 'excellent' settlers. They speak good English and play good cricket. Yet when they wish to bring some of their remaining family members to Australia we find that less than 500 out of 9,000 qualify under our immigration scheme. I hope that in future our Government will give more humane consideration to this problem as a token of historical friendship between our two nations.
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO CHINA AND JAPAN
Mr MORRISON (St George)-by leave-I present the official report of the Australian Parliamentary Delegation to China and Japan. As we are all aware, most members of the Parliament are widely read and are awar~ of China's problems and attitudes. But I believe it is only through the direct face to face contact that parliamentary delegations provide that we have an opportunity of witnessing at first hand the intensity and emotionalism behind those policies and attitudes. The report refers to lengthy discussions which we had with Chinese leaders. In this intervention I wish only to direct my remarks to. some areas of immediate foreign policy of interest to China that we as a delegation detected. I think it is important-I believe all members of the delegation realise this-that we must go behind the present and immediate past and place in historical context the issues that China now faces, because history and tradition rate very highly in China.
One issue that preoccupies China is, of course, its relations with the Soviet Union. This is getting back to this notion of tradition and history. This predates the Communist regimes in both the Soviet Union and China. It relates to what the Chinese regard, and I think quite rightly regard, as the unequal treaties that in the last century China was forced to sign with a number of countties, including Czarist Russia. One of the issues that comes through in discussions with the Chinese

2732 REPRESENTATIVES 29'October 1981

Delegation to China and Japan

leadership is the emphasis that is placed on the integrity, indeed the sanctity, of the Chinese fatherland. This comes out not only in the relations with the Soviet Union but also in the context of its claims to Taiwan and its attitude to Vietnam as it is now, which I will take up a iittle later.
The differences between the Soviet Union and China are real. As I said, they preoccupy the Chinese Government. The Soviet Union is seen as the traditional enemy. The Soviet Union is regarded by the Chinese as having world-wide ambitions. They have a favourite word 'hegemony' which is used for any adventurist activities of the Soviet Union. Therefore, I say to those who may have been surprised by the recent close collaboration between China and the United States that it should come as no surprise because that alliance is based on a joint endeavour to confront the Soviet Union. As far as the United States is concerned, that collaboration is not that remarkable, even given the rhetoric and the views that were expressed by the United States over several administrations about Communist China, and particularly the events which we can all recall of Korea and Vietnam, because it is predicated on this joint hostility and joint opposition towards the Soviet Union.
A couple of things surprised us regarding the intensity of the opposition to the Soviet Union and the growing co-operation between the United Stated and China. One of the points that was reported before we went into China was the establishment by the United States of an intelligence gathering station in China to monitor Soviet missile tests and intercept Soviet communications. This set-up was transferred from Iran after the fall of the Shah. It was placed in China by the United States, but it is fully manned by the Chinese. I think that this provides an interesting precedent for any future negotiations we may have with the United States on facilities in Australia. Because the Chinese are operating and manning the station they receive the full product of that station.
The other matter which came up quite frequently in discussions with the Chinese leadership was the question of Vietnam and the associated question of Kampuchea. As in its attitude towards the Soviet Union, China has reserved a particularly powerful venom for another recent ally, Vietnam. Again, one must look at history and the age-old conflict between China and Vietnam to comprehend the current situtation. The alliance between Vietnam and the Soviet Union adds point to the efforts of both China and the United States to bleed-I think I can use no other word for it-Vietnam into submission. I notice that the

Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) is present in the chamber. Just before we arrived, the United States Secretary of State, General Haig, had visited Beijing. One of his assistant secretaries, John Holdridge, had made an observation in Beijing on 16 June which stated:
Uyou give what they--
That is, the Vietnamese-
want, this does not make them change their policy in any way. So we will seek, if we can, to find ways to increase the political, economic and, yes, military pressures on Vietnam, working with others in ways which will bring about, we hope, some change in Hanoi's attitude towards the situation.
That refers to the situation which exists in Kampuchea. I want to underline the phrase 'economic and, yes, military pressures'. Both the United States and China have supported the Pol Pot forces, the Khmer Rouge'forces, both diplomatically and, as Mr Holdridge's statement from which I have just quoted implies, militarily. The Chinese take a view on the Pol Pot regime that it is not all that bad. They have repeatedly discounted in the discussions with us the genocidal character of the Pol Pot regime. When they were pressed they said: 'Some things may have happened but Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge regime have learnt their lesson and when they are back in power they will act far more moderately'. As the report indicates, the delegation did not find this argument at all persuasive.
Now that the Minister for Foreign Affairs is in the chamber I wish to go on record as complimenting the Australian Government on the vote that it has taken in the United Nations. It abstained from voting on the credentials of the regime of Democratic Kampuchea. I can understand the enormous pressures under which the Minister was placed. The Chinese put pressure on our delegation-my colleagues who will be following me in this debate will endorse that-but throughout the whole discussions we took a very bipartisan attitude towards it. I can understand the pressures that the Minister for Foreign Affairs was subjected to from China-we ourselves were subjected to it-and undoubtedly the United States. As one who has raised this matter in the House a number of times by way of questions and statements I want to place on record my congratulations to the Australian Government for maintaining its position despite a great deal of pressure from close friends and allies to take another view. That view has now been reported in the United Nations by the Australian delegation abstaining on the issue of the credentials of the Pol Pot-Khmer Rouge-Democratic Kampuchean delegation to the United Nations.

Delegation to China and Japan

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2733

There is one area of disagreement between the United States and China and that concerns Taiwan. Again, this attitude is premised on history and tradition. The Chinese-in fact, both Chinese groups; the group in Taiwan as well as the group in mainland China-regard Taiwan as a province of China. It is this sanctity of the Chinese fatherland that enforms very much the policies of the present Chinese leadership and, of course, the leadership of China not only through the decades but through the centuries. They are highly suspicious of the United States legislation-the Taiwan Relations Act. They have, I think-this can be supported by my colleagues-a rather relaxed attitude about China's relations with Taiwan. Its proposals to us, accustomed to a more confrontationist-type diplomacy, are very flexible.
China is a country that looks at events in centuries rather than in decades. A decade here or there is of not great consequence to the Chinese. They believe that a resolution of the problem of Taiwan will take place-there is no. great rush about it-because there will be a consideration by the Chinese people themselves; between the Chinese on Taiwan and the Chinese on the mainland. They view it very much as a Chinese problem. They view it very much as a problem that only the Chinese can resolve. They do not want any other countries buying into the argument. They have warned the United States repeatedly about the implementation of the Taiwan Relations Act. In fact, they have warned the United States Government to tread very warily on this whole problem.
I particularly endorse the views in the official report about the reception and the very generous hospitality that we received from the Chinese Government and from the Chinese people. We believe that the recommendations-I draw this to the attention of the House-should be implemented. One of the recommendations states:
The Delegation recommends that in future Australian Delegations should be sent to China on a regular basis, say every three years and that future Delegations visit China only rather than two or three countries.
China is a massive country. It is a fascinating country. I believe that a delegation could very fruitfully occupy two or three weeks in China itself. I will not refer to our visit to Japan. There were some difficulties associated with that which I think are reflected in the report.
Again I thank my colleagues, particularly Senator Hamer who led the delegation and who will be reporting in another place on the visit. I refer to the assistance we received from the Australian missions abroad. They are suffering

difficulties with staff but we received excellent attention from them and a great deal of background information from people on the spot who could provide the background and the information that was very much needed by the visiting politicians. I commend the report to the House.
Mr ADERMANN (Fisher)-by leaveWhatever the cynicism we hear outside, what brings people to this House-men and women on both sides-is certainly not the money, the superannuation or the soft life. What brings us all here is a desire to serve our country and to mould the future of our country. Where we differ sometimes perhaps is in our philosophies. Nevertheless, I believe that is the honest intention of everyone of us. We are often called on to make objective judgments about the future of this country that involve other countries about us. We often have to make those judgments without a knowledge of those countries. It is sometimes fortuitous that we make the right judgments. It is important to make the right judgments, particularly when we have countries such as China near us. There are one billion people in China. One in every four babies in the world is of Chinese stock. It is important that we understand a nation such as that because its part in the future of the world certainly is important. Therefore, I found that this visit helped me tremendously.
I had not been to China before. The visit certainly helped me to comprehend the massive problems of China, why and how China is turning her endeavours to the resolution of those problems. As my colleague the honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison) just said, we detected very deep concern in China about the influence of what the Chinese call the hegemonistic designs in South East Asia of Soviet Russia and of Vietnam. Much of what they told us-not all, certainly, but very much of it-mirrored the concerns of this nation and what we have heard expressed in this House from both sides of the chamber.
The future of China depends very much on its achieving two goals that are highlighted in this report. Those goals are success in family planning and success in its agricultural production endeavours. In the latter area at least we could certainly extend not inconsiderable help to China in the future. Indeed, the co-operation, the friendliness and the hospitality that were extended to this delegation were quite magnificent. It showed that here was a nation looking for friends, help and understanding and ready to welcome a delegation . from Australia. The last one I think went there eight years ago.

2734 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Delegation to China and Japan

I believe that the recommendations of this report-I speak only of China-are very important. The recommendations include one that in future Australian delegations sent to China on a regular basis should visit only China and not go to many countries in the world, look cursorily at the countries, resolve nothing and understand nobody. Those delegations should be sent on a regular basis, say, every three years. We ought to institute in the future a regular exchange of delegations between this Parliament and the National Peoples Congress of China. I think that is important. I think members in this House would find it, as I found it, most valuable and most rewarding. It would help them tremendously. It would also help China, which is not well understood and which is desperately looking for help and understanding. I believe in the interests of peace and the future of the world we can make some real contribution there. Surely that is an effective way of halting the Russo-Vietnamese forays so near to Australia, thereby making a contribution to peace and stability in an area that is very close to us and very important to us.
Our relationship with China can be very important in the role that China takes in her future course and the way in which she resolves her problems. We are two nations certainly of very different political ideologies. Despite all that, despite perhaps disagreements in some areas, we have so very much in common. We have very similar concerns about the course of events in South East Asia. Surely we can only benefit from understanding each other and building on a friendship and trust which is there already, which members of the delegation experienced personally in very great measure on our recent and very memorable trip.
I commend this report to honourable members. I hope that they will read it. Although it is short and therefore it can be only an imperfect resume, I think it is a very valuable condensation of the matters that we investigated in China, what we found out about China and the basis that we have for understanding and co-operation in the future. I thank my colleague the honourable member for St George for his valuable part in the delegation. He was the deputy leader. I thank the other members of the delegation because it was a happy delegation. I believe also that it was a most fruitful exercise. I suppose that I will not have the opportunity to visit that area on behalf of this Parliament again. I would like other honourable members to have that opportunity. But, most certainly, I hope that in the future I will have the chance in some capacity again to visit a nation

where. I found great friendliness, great enjoyment and great comradeship.
Mr CHAPMAN (Kingston)-by leave-I was also privileged to be a member of the parliamenc tary delegation to China and Japan between 30 June and 18 July 1981. I welcome the opportunity to speak on the tabling of the report of that delegation today. As has been mentioned, this delegation was only the second official parliamentary delegation from Australia to China, the other one having been in 1973. We found through the visit a vast difference between China and Japan, despite their geographic proximity and the large similarities in their histories, at least before the mid-19th century. Of course, we also found significant differences, as well as some similarities, between those two countries and Australia. These are highlighted in the body of the report.
The program of activities, the discussions, the information gathered and the conclusions reached are dealt with at length in the report. They have also been referred to at some length by the deputy leader of the delegation, the honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison), in his presentation of the report. I do. not believe that I need to go into any further detail about them. I shall refer to just a couple of aspects. I believe that one notable aspect about China is the increased openness to foreign-visitors since the end of the cultural revolution and, more particularly, the interest in foreigners shown by the average man in the street in China. On a couple of occasions when we had the opportunity to wander down the city streets unaccompanied by officials, a tremendous interest was shown in us as foreigners by local Chinese residents. I think the other notable factor about China is the slowly growing recognition of the need for incentive and individual reward for effort in its economic system. I hope that that development continues.
A most notable point about Japan is the economic growth and the technological development that has been achieved in a relatively short time span. The hospitality of the Chinese Government has already been referred to by the honourable member for St George and by the honourable member for Fisher (Mr Adermann). I wish also especially to refer to the hospitality of those Chinese officials who accompanied the delegation throughout its visit. They were extremely generous, they were good company and they made an important contribution to the success of the visit. The support provided by the Australian embassies in Beijing and Tokyo also contributed to what the delegation was able to derive from the trip. I especially commend the work of Richard Johnson of the Beijing embassy and Ken Ward of

Delegation to China and Japan

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2735

the.Tokyo embassy for the hard work they put in to ensure that the delegation's visit went smoothly. I thank them for that. I also commend Charlie Edwards from the Senate staff who acted as secretary to the delegation and who was always on hand to ensure that arrangements went smoothly for us.
I believe that the delegation obtained a good overview of social, economic and political conditions in China and Japan. I believe that delegations to these countries should occur on a more frequent basis in the future, as is recommended in the report. However, I also support the contention in the report that these visits were too short to obtain detailed information and insight into specifics. A longer visit to each country would have given us greater insight and would have exporentially increased the value of the trip. In conclusion, I support the recommendations in the report, which have already been referred to. I also thank the other members of the delegation, both from this place and from another place, for their company on the visit. They were good company. The delegation went smoothly, and I believe that it was a tremendous success.
Mr INNES (Melbourne)-by leave-As a member of a delegation I join my colleagues who formed the delegation, in particular the deputy leader, in the .comments made in respect of the visit. I believe that our visit to China was well organised. The people that we met and the folk who organised the various sectors of the visit, under some hardship, deserve our commendation. It was fortunate that I had been in China on a couple of other occasions, for two months in 1963 and for a week or so at some later time. I could see that some incredible changes had taken place. It seems to me that, despite all the setbacks that the Chinese people have had since 1963 and the acknowledged mistakes that they made in that period, they have done an incredible job. One cannot imagine in the abstract the problems that the Chinese people and their leadership confront. These 1,000 million people have been endeavouring, from the time that they got rid of the people who oppressed them, to recover and to pull themselves up by their bootstraps. Semi-feudal organisations were exploited by a number of Western peoples. The Chinese have suffered the humiliation of having their own people degraded and denigrated. They have had to put up with such insults as appeared on a poster that has been preserved on the bund in Shanghai. It stated: 'Chinese and dogs not permitted in this area'.
Mr Adermann-'Dogs and Chinese'.

Mr INNES-Yes, 'Dogs and Chinese'. The dogs even took precedence over the Chinese on the hoarding. It is necessary for me to point out-I think my colleagues would acknowledge this-that despite their problems the Chinese people are not endeavouring to refer to the past. They want to look forward to the future. The fact is that the cultural revolution devastated the country. The individuals who created that situation put China back by years and years. We saw evidence of the struggle of the Chinese people to survive that revolution. I ask people who endeavour to fight for the emancipation of people, at whatever level they see it, to realise that mad, outrageous policies of that nature head the people only towards destruction, not towards emancipation.
Further to that, I think setbacks occurred at the time when the Russians moved out of China. There is no doubt that they were exploiting the situation in that country. They walked out and left the Chinese holding the baby, with industries half set up and machinery half installed. I saw evidence of that fact. Yet the Chinese have recovered. They have gone on again. Despite the effect of the cultural revolution they have adopted policies which I think will enable them to develop their own industries at a slower pace but they will have an effective basis. They look forward to greater co-operation with western countries for the purpose of slow progress. They apply feasible policies that I am sure must one day lead China to become one of the most powerful industrial nations in the world.
As I said earlier, the gigantic proportions of the Chinese people's problem have to be seen to be believed. They are endeavouring, as my colleague from the National Country Party, the honourable member for Fisher (Mr Adermann), has indicated, to implement family planning as a basic concept of their proposals for the future. Negative population growth is probably an impossibility in the face of their historic tradition that large families reflect a person's development and wealth. However, they are endeavouring to do it. We saw that their endeavours in this direction have been given practical effect. I wish them well in those endeavours. As my colleague has also said, we could afford to give some assistance for development in the agricultural area. I am sure that in the future effective consideration will be given to that matter by whatever government sits on the Treasury benches of this country.
There is, of course, the other aspect of the modernisation of industry in China. It seems to me that the exploitation did not cease when the

2736 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Delegation to China and Japan

Russians moved out. Many Chinese people overseas and many other countries in the area have sent machinery to China that the Chinese people find impossible to use and cannot operate themselves alld have then walked out leaving the Chinese people holding the baby. It seems to me that at last the Chinese people have woken up to that situation, and I hope that they relentlessly pursue that policy.
Another thing I would like to refer to is the situation of south west China vis-a-vis Hong Kong. As far as I can recall, it was expressed to us that the Chinese were not interested in moving into Hong Kong. As the honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison) indicated, they regard Hong Kong in the same way as they regard Taiwanhistorically they have not changed their position on Hong Kong since my first visit there-as a province or state of the fatherland. Of course, 90 per cent of the people residing in Hong Kong are Chinese. The Chinese foresee probably a cooperative effort with Hong Kong to establish a nuclear power station and an effort on their own part to establish satellite cities around the south west of China for the purpose of developing the tourist industry, which I think has a great potential.
I would like to make a very brief reference to the Japanese visit. Unlike my colleagues, I wi\l be a little more critical of it in a direct way by saying that the Japanese visit was somewhat of a farce. It was hastily thrown together. I understand that the negotiations for that visit to take place simply did not enable any better organisation. It was not the fault of the post. We had little time there and there was little time to organise our visit. One or two things emerge from the visit. I think that all that glitters in the Japanese economy is not gold. There is hidden unemployment and, if the economy is at all brittle or if any of the markets fail, there will be difficulties for the Japanese economy and for other people on whom the Japanese rely.
I make in passing one other point in relation to the disposal of nuclear waste. I read recently that the Japanese propose to proceed with the dumping of what they refer to as low level waste in the Pacific Ocean. They are dumping it in and around Japan at the moment or storing it in drums because they cannot otherwise dispose of it. I see very serious implications in that situation. I think this Government and those involved in the nuclear energy debate ought to take notice of the implications of that development.
I commend my colleagues on the delegation. It was a very fine delegation. Senator Hamer did a

wonderful job, as did the deputy leader of the delegation. I had great pleasure in accompanying the honourable member for Kingston (Mr Chapman) and my friend the honourable member for Fisher (Mr Adermann). I would like to pay tribute to those people to whom the honourable member for Kingston paid tribute, namely, Richard Johnson, Charlie Edwards and our representative in Japan. I thank the House for allowing me the time to speak in support of the report.
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS (PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Street, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs) (5.14)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second lime.
The purpose of this Bill is to amend in two respects the International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Act 1963 to enable Australia to meet certain treaty obligations. The first amendment, dealt with in clauses 2 to 5 of the Bill, is achieved by making individual amendments to a number of sections of the Act. The need for this amendment has arisen from the terms of an agreement which is to be concluded between Australia and the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, which we expect will set up its headquarters in Hobart in early 1982.
Under the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, which was concluded at a conference in Canberra in May 1980 and which Australia ratified on 6 May 1981, Australia agreed to accord the Commission and its staff certain privileges' and immunities as required by international practice. International practice also requires that a person attending a conference convened by the Commission as a representative of a member country be accorded privileges and immunities.' These privileges and immunities for both staff of the Commission and representatives of member countries can be accorded under the 1963 Act as it stands. In the case of the Convention, however, not only countries may become parties but also regional economic integration organisations, such as the European Communities, may accede once the Convention has entered into force. In addition, representatives of regional organisations and international ogranisations in which Australia participates might be invited to attend meetings in Australia of the organs set up under the Convention.

International Organizations Bill

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2737

When the 1963 Act was drafted it was not contemplated that international organisations, as well as countries, would become members of other international organisations. It is necessary, therefore, to expand the power to make regulations under the Act so that representatives of international organisations attending the Commission's conferences in Australia may be accorded similar privileges and immunities to those a~corded to the representatives of member countries. The Bill makes a number of amendments to the principal Act to achieve this. In effect, every reference in the Act to representatives of countries will be extended to include a reference to representatives of certain prescribed international organisations.
The representatives of certain international organisations only will be eligible to be accorded privileges and immunities under the Bill. The international organisations are those of which Australia is a member and those which the Bill describes as 'overseas organisations' such as the European Communities, of which Australia cannot become a member because the organisations are composed of countries in a particular geographical region. For the Act to apply to an international organisation it must be so declared by regulations under the Act.
At the same time, the definition of 'international conference' is amended so that it will include not only a conference attended by representatives from Australia and representatives from another country, but also a conference attended by representatives from a prescribed international organisation. This will enable Australia in future to accord the appropriate privileges and immunities to those representatives.
The second amendment, deait with in clause 6 of the Bill, will enable Australia to implement by regulation a taxation obligation under two specific agreements-one establishing the Common Fund forCommodities and the other establishing the Asian Development Bank. Those agreements provide, among other things, that foreign experts and committee members be accorded exemption from Australian income tax when visiting or working in Australia. As the Act now stands, there is no provision in the Fifth Schedule which would enable regulations to be made to grant income tax exemption to persons in those categories. Clause 6 of the Bill will amend the Fifth Schedule of the Act to include such a provision.
If the Bill is passed, regulations will be made as soon as practicable to accord this exemption. I understand from the Treasurer (Mr Howard)

that exemption will be extended under present taxation policy to experts and committee members involved in the work of an organisation only if the agreement establishing the organisation specifically permits Australia to tax Australian citizens working for that organisation, regardless of their employment status or location. This is the case with the Common Fund and the Asian Development Bank. This measure should not be significant in terms of revenue forgone. The exemption is likely to be available in respect of few organisations in the future and the total number of persons involved should be small. 1 commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Lionel Bowen) adjourned.
DRIED SULTANA PRODUCTION UNDERWRITING BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Nixon, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (5.20)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to provide an underwriting arrangement to support, if necessary, returns to producers of dried sultana grapes in the 1982 to 1986 seasons inclusive. The arrangement is acceptable to the dried vine fruits industry. At the industry's request, it is to apply only to sultanas, which account for about 85 per cent of the production of dried vine fruits. A stabilisation scheme for dried vine fruits has been in existence for most seasons since 1964. The latest arrangement, which applied to dried sultanas of the 1978 to 1980 seasons, was terminated at industry request late in 1980, when it became evident that very favourable export prices in those Seasons had made Government support unnecessary.
Export prices for dried vine fruits are highly volatile and respond to variations in supplies from the main exporting countries. A major crop failure, as in the United States of America in 1978, can trigger off large rises in world prices. On the other hand, abundant supplies can develop quickly, leading to keen price competition. World production in 1980-81 was relatively high and prospects for further big crops for the second year in several major producing countries during the current northern hemisphere autumn have already brought some sharp reductions in world prices. Export returns in the next several seasons may therefore be below levels in recent years, although it is difficult, because of unpredictability

2738 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Dried Sultana Production Bill

of weather conditions in the main producing countries, to forecast the extent and duration of such a situation.
The domestic market absorbs about one-third of our production of dried sultanas. While, in future, sales and prices on this market should be maintained, the possibility of important competition is likely to ensure that any rise in home market prices will be moderate. The industry and the Government are, however, concerned that the income position of Australian producers could be vulnerable if an abrupt worsening of conditions on world markets should occur.
The Government has therefore decided to implement an underwriting arrangement to provide a measure of security for producers against sudden, large falls in world prices. The arrangement, which the Government has prepared after full consultation with the industry, will afford security for producers but will not insulate them from market price signals which might be indicating that fundamental changes should be made to the structure of production and trade. The industry has given the Government an undertaking that it will not seek, during the life of the arrangement, any increase in the import tariff on sultanas.
The underwriting arrangement is based on the Government guaranteeing minimum returns per tonne from production in the. 1982, 1983 and 1984 seasons equal to 90 per cent of the average of net returns per tonne to packers in the preceding two seasons and the estimated net return for the current season. In the 1985 and 1986 seasons, the guaranteed minimum return will be 95 per cent of the three-year average net return. If the net return for a season is less than the guaranteed level, an underwriting payment equal to the difference would be made in respect to the total production in that season. The provision for the guaranteed minimum return to be set at 90 per cent in the first three seasons reflects the very high export prices which the industry has enjoyed in recent years.
As I have said, the determination of the three year average return requires an estimate to be made of the average return for the current season. This is to be determined by myself after consideration of advice and information provided by the Australian Dried Fruits Corporation and the Bureau of Agricultural Economics. The administration of the underwriting arrangement is to be vested in the Australian Dried Fruits Corporation. In this regard, the Bill provides that the Corporation shall comply with any direction I might give it as Minister in relation to the exercise of its existing powers under the Australian Dried

Fruits Corporation Act 1978 concerning the determination of prices below which sultanas may not be exported.
The underwriting arrangement embodied in this Bill is similar to systems which the Government has introduced for the wheat, dairy and apple and pear industries. It is consistent with the export pricing policies which the Government has developed for those industries. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr West) adjourned.
PUBLIC SERVICE ACTS AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Viner, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister) (5.25)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this legislation is to give effect to the Government's decisions on two significant recommendations made by the Royal Commission on Australian Government Administration. One relates to the promotion and transfer procedures in the Australian Public Service and the other to the abolition of the divisional structure of the Service. The Bill also includes certain other amendments to the Public Service Act 1922 and related legislation, to which I refer later in my speech. In 1976 the Royal Commission made a number of recommendations to improve the promotion and transfer processes within the Public Service. The recommendations were examined extensively by the .Public Service Board, following consultations with the Joint Council, a statutory consultative body chaired by the Public Service Board, and including representatives of departments and peak union councils. This Bill gives effect to the Government's decisions on those recommendations.
The' proposed new promotion arrangements will revise procedures which were introduced in 1946. The Government believes that it is time for the introduction of new promotion procedures which are designed to meet the contemporary needs of the Service but which continue to uphold and indeed strengthen the tradition of a Public Service based on merit for appointment and promotion. The Bill establishes relative efficiency as the sole criterion for promotion in the Australian Public Service by repealing all references to seniority. Honourable members will appreciate that, besides providing an equitable basis for the

Public Service Acts Bill

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2739

advancement of officers, this change is an important manifestation of the primary purpose of the promotion process, namely, to advance the efficient operation of the Service. It will remove the last vestige of credibility from the mistaken view that advancement of officers under the Public Service Act is determined by length of service. The Bill introduces revised arrangements which will enhance the efficiency of the Public Service. In this connection I draw the attention of the House to the provisions relating to the advertising of vacancies and the appointment by the Governor-General of chairmen of promotions appeal committees for fixed terms.
The other important change made by the Bill is to remove the divisional structure of the Public Service, as was recommended by the Royal Commission. Since 1901 positions and officers have been grouped into four divisions. Significantly, the present structure requires different levels of educational qualification and skills for admission to the Third Division and Fourth Division. The original design envisaged a small number of separate salary structures: One the First Division for permanent heads and like officers; one the Second Division for senior executives; one the Third Division for clerical and professional positions; and one the Fourth Division for the remaining officers.
Some of the occupational groups which have been introduced in the structure of the Service in recent years do not sit well within the divisional framework and it has been necessary to develop complicated dual divisional arrangements. Further, whereas all Third Division officers were once paid in accordance with a uniform scale of salaries, there are now more than 60 separate pay groupings, many of them based on special training or qualifications. Consequently the divisional structure has become increasingly anachronistic. Clause 12 repeals those sections of the Act providing for the divisional structure. The proposed arrangements will enable the design of occupational groupings to be tailored more readily to the operational requirements of the Public Service. They will help to achieve better utilisation of the manpower resources of the Service. Staff in the Public Service will continue to be employed within separate occupational groups, each with its own salary structure and appropriate qualification requirements, but the label of Fourth, Third or Second Division will no longer apply. Movement within or between occupational groups will, as now, depend on efficiency and, where relevant, qualifications. Consequent upon the removal of the divisional structure the provisions of the Act relating to recruitment have been amended. The

new provision retains the central role of the Public Service Board to ensure that the Commonwealth continues to be served by public servants who are selected according to merit in open competition and not by processes based on patronage or nepotism.
I turn now in detail to the other provisions of the Bill and highlight the significant features. The promotion process is an important factor in the efficiency and economy of the Public Service. Procedures for the promotion of officers therefore must be devised to make the most effective practicable contribution to the efficient functioning of the Service. The Bill seeks to foster that objective. The proposed section 50B defines the sole criterion for promotion as the relative efficiency of officers available for promotion. That section requires regard to be paid to the capacity, work performance, experience, qualifications and personal qualities of the officer. In some cases it is desirable that greater weight be given to one or another of these factOrS and sub-section 50B (3) authorises the Board to so direct.
The promotion appeals system is an integral part of the promotion process. It is inevitable that such a system is a source of delay in filling positions by promotion and it has been much criticised for that reason. Nonetheless, the Government believes that, in the interests of strengthening the efficiency of the Public Service, an appeals system is necessary. The Government believes the present system, as it has operated in the past, with the promotions appeal committee comprising an independent chairman, a departmental nominee and a staff association nominee, is appropriate. It may not be generally realised that some 70,000 appeals are lodged annually and the promotions appeal committee arrangements have on the whole dealt with that annual volume expeditiously. This has been possible through established procedures not being overburdened by formality and by the committees avoiding procedures which place appellants in the unwanted role of adversaries.
Recent court decisions appear to indicate that, as the Public Service Act is presently worded, the promotions appeal system should be conducted within an adversary framework and require a greater degree oflegal formality than has in practice applied or is necessary or desirable to see that an appellant's case is fairly and fully heard and determined. The Government's view is that the objective of the appeals system-giving to public servants the opportunity to state their case for promotion in competition with others whilst facilitating the promotion of the most efficient officers in the interests of overall Public Service

2740 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Public Service Acts Bill

efficiency-will be best served by amending the Public Service Act to establish beyond doubt that promotions appeal committees can deal with the appeals coming before them without an undue emphasis on legal formalities or the creation of an adversary framework on a basis which gives to appellants a full and fair opportunity to put their own cases for promotion and to answer any matter before the committee ad~erse to their interests. Section SOD of the Bill seeks to achieve this. It will permit promotions appeal committees to develop procedures to ensure fairness in determining appeals while paying regard to desirable personnel practice and to the practicalities and costs of handling the very large volume of appeals made annually.
Sub-section 33 (2) is directed to timeliness in the filling of vacant positions. This provision allows the procedures to be initiated as soon as a vacancy is foreseen and for the completion of all formal steps-that is advertising, selection and appeal processes-to be taken in anticipation of the vacancy arising from, say, the age retirement of an officer. The amended provisions, of course, bring that staffing action into effect only when the vacancy actually arises. Section SOL provides the permanent head with more flexibility in allocating his resources within his department. The section authorises the permanent head to rotate officers between positions. It is important that the authority of the permanent head should be clear in order that he can best utilise the skills and abilities of officers available within the department to meet the changing needs and shifts of emphasis in the activities of the department.
The other changes introduced by the Bill are more limited in their effect. Clause 41 of the Bill inserts a new section 64, which updates the debt recovery scheme which enables creditors to obtain payments from debtors employed by the Australian Public Service by means of attachment of their salaries. The revised scheme introduces an administration fee payable by the creditor to offset the costs incurred by the Commonwealth in arranging collection of the debt. The amendments will bring arrangements for the recovery of debts from public servants more closely in line with normal practice in the community. Clauses 50 and 55 of the Bill include amendments which will provide that the agreement of the State Premier must be obtained where it is proposed to invoke the mobility provisions of Part IV of the Public Service Act in relation to State employment. Part IV of the Act specifies the rights of staff of the Service who transfer to other public employment.
Amendments are also made to the Superannuation Act 1976 and the Long Service Leave

(Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976. In the normal course, severance payments upon retrenchment are more favourable that those made upon resignation. The effect of these amendments will, upon certification of the Board, debar from entitlement to retrenchment benefits which would otherwise accrue, an employee of the Commonwealth covered by these Acts who is retrenched after declining an offer of suitable alternative Commonwealth employment. The Government does not consider that in this situation the person should be entitled to retrenchment benefits when it is in fact his or her own decision to sever his or her employment relationship with the Commonwealth when suitable employment within the Public Service is available.
The remaining provisions of the Act are of three types. The first deals with changes to the technical arrangements for appointment of acting permanent heads and other changes of a similar kind which experience indicates will lead to improvements in the administration of the Service. The second, including the changes made to the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act, are consequential on the changes made to the promotion process and the abolition of divisions within the Service. The rest are formal amendments to adjust references in other legislation. The Government believes that the changes introduced in this Bill have significant benefits for the efficiency of the Service. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr West) adjourned.
TARIFF PROPOSALS
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (5.38)-1 move:
Customs Tariff Proposals Nos 14and 15 (1981).
The Customs Tariff proposals I have just tabled relates to proposed alterations to the Customs Tariff Act 1966. Proposals No. 14 (1981), which operates on and from 1 July 1981, implements the Government's decision to add further goods to Schedule A of the New Zealand-Australia Free Trade Agreement. The Agreement provides that Australia and New Zeall:\nd shall from time to tim\! review the trade between the two countries with a view to including additional goods on Schedule A. The list of goods traded under the free trade provisions of the Agreement. In this instance, the duty applicable to electric soil heating apparatus of New Zealand origin will now be dutiable at 5 per cent, phasing to free in two years time.
Proposals No. 15 (1981), which operates on and from tomorrow, contains tariff changes

Tariff Proposals

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2741

resulting from the Government's decisions on

DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS AND

recommendations by the Industries Assistance

CONSUMER AFFAIRS

Commission in its reports on loudspeakers and chain of precious metal. The Government has accepted the Commission's recommendations in both reports. As a result, all loudspeakers will become dutiable at a rate of 25 per cent. At present, mountt;d loudspeakers dutiable at this rate with

Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs annual report 1980-81.

unmounted loudspeakers dutiable at the rate of

INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE

15 per cent or, if higher, 50c each. This decision

COMMISSION

will result in an increase in the level of assistance Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business

in the higher priced segment of the unmounted and Consumer Affairs)-Pursuant to section 45

loudspeaker market where the local industry is of the Industries Assistance Commission Act 1973 more competitive. At the lower end of the market, as amended, I present the annual report of the In-"

where the local industry is least competitive, the level of assistance will be reduced. The Government's decision to maintain the current level of assistance for loudspeaker systems should allow output and employment in this segment of the industry to continue to expand.

dustries Assistance Commission for the year 1980-81 together with a statement outlining the action taken during the year on reports made to the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs. Unfortunately, bulk copies of the report are not available for distribution to honourable members

The decision to accept the recommendation by the Commission on chain of precious metal will increase the rate of duty from 2 per cent to 25 per cent. This will remove an anomaly which has existed betwen assistance levels accorded chain of precious metal on the one hand and chain jewellery on the other. Chain of precious metal

because of delays in printing caused by industrial problems. I am advised that bulk supplies of copies will be received in the near future. I have, however, made a number of copies available for perusal in the Parliamentary Library. As soon as bulk copies of the report are available I will circulate them to honourable members.

when made up into jewellery will be dutiable at 25 per cent in the long term, whereas chain in the length is presently dutiable at 2 per cent. Im-

SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE Ministerial Statement

plementation of the Government's decision will Debate resumed from 22 October, on the fol-

mean that all chain of precious metal will be dutilowing paper presented by Mr Malcolm Fraser:

able at 25 per cent in the longer term.

Sinai Peacekeeping Force-Ministerial Statement, 22

Also included in Proposals No. 15 are a number October 1981.

of additions to the list of goods accorded special And on motion by Mr Sinclair:

preference when imported from Forum island That the House take note of the paper.

countries. A comprehensive summary setting out the nature of the changes has been prepared and is being circulated to honourable members. I commend the proposals to the House.

" Upon which Mr Lionel Bowen had moved by way of amendment:
That all the words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words: 'the House condemns the

Debate (on motion by Mr West) adjourned.

Government for-

(a) abdicating its responsibility in allowing the commit-

INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION

ment of Australian forces to the Middle East to be subject to the decision of other governments;

Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-For the information of

(b) its provisional decision to commit Australian forces in
the Middle East without any real prospect of a lasting solution to the Palestinian issue; and

honourable members, I present the report of the Industries Assistance Commission on

(c) its failure to actively pursue diplomatic initiatives which would contribute to a Middle East settlement by

loudspeakers.

provision of a United Nations sponsored peacekeeping force'.

INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION

Mr WEST (Cunningham) (5.44)-Once again, conservative governments have sold out

Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business Australia. It appears that we are still a servile ap-

and Consumer Affairs)-For the information of pendage of United States of America foreign pol-

honourable members, I present the report of the icy. It should be well known to the Government

Industries Assistance Commision on chain of that it is a basic condition of international re-

precious metal.

lations that nations should and generally do act in

2742 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

their own best interests. It could be argued that this commitment is in the United States's interests, it could be argued that it is in Egypt's
and Israel's interests and perhaps, even in the interests of the European Economic Community, but it can never be argued that it is in Australia's interests.
I want to digress briefly to condemn the attitude of the National Country Party on this matter. The Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) was initially opposed to this commitment to the Sinai peacekeeping force. He was opposed to it because he was afraid that trade might be damaged. Now he supports it because he feels sure that the $400m per annum trading arrangements with Egypt and other trading arrangements with the moderate Arab regimes of the Middle East are safe. So he has changed his view, not for any altruistic reason, not from any great commitment to international relations in the cause of world peace, but simply because he felt trade was safe; all is well. Never let it be said that National Country Party members are not good businessmen.
Since last week, it seems that the EEC may be involved. I understand that the very latest position is that four nations-Britain, France, the Netherlands and Italy-have said that they may yet agree in principle. I understand that France is the main instigator of this change of heart inside the EEC. I think that is understandable. Since the socialist victory in France, some months ago, and despite my applauding of France's economic poli-
cies, it clearly must be said that the socialist party governing France has emerged as the most proUnited States foreign policy nation in Europe and
the most vociferous in the commitment of American cruise missiles in West European countries. This is despite the huge rallies numbering hundreds of thousands of people marching in West European cities, including Bonn, over the last few weeks against rearmament and the placement of these missiles in Europe.
As in Europe, a major factor perpetuating conflict in the Middle East is the intrusion of United States and Union of Soviet Socialist Republic perceptions of national interest into the area. Frankly, the European nations should recognise. this fact: The best chance for peace in the long term in the Middle East is for the US and the USSR to renounce strategic interests in the area. They should do that, but of course they will not, simply because 20 per cent of United States oil imports come from this area. The USSR has a less vital interest since its produces 13 million barrels of oil per day and should be self-sufficient through to the year 2000. I believe that however

historically expansionist the Soviet Union has been-and there is clear evidence of this which goes back far past the October Revolution in 1917there is no evidence to suggest that its adventurism in Afghanistan and east European countries is linked to a desire to dominate oil fields in the Middle East. That is clearly not a correct assumption on which to base United States or Australian foreign policy.
There is small chance of a lasting peace in the Middle East, of ensuring Israel's future and establishing a homeland for the Palestinians, arising from the stationing in the Sinai of a peacekeeping force which is dominated by the United States, however broad the participation may be, as long as the Palestinians and other Arab states see the motive as being an extension of United States authority in the Arab world.
The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser)- the United States President does the same in regard to his country-gives total Australian commitment to Israel's rights to secure borders. He says that he supports Palestinian autonomy and he expresses disappointment at the lack of progress towards a broad peace settlement. But fundamentally, although the Government has given Israel specific guarantees, it still treats the Palestinians as merely a problem, an issue, a question, something it wishes would go away but which will not. The Prime Minister still thinks that the Camp David Accords can produce a broad space. He admits that a solution to the Palestinian problem is crucial but he ignores the fact that the Camp David agreement is fundamentally flawed, since although Egypt and the EEC want the Palestinians and their representatives, the Palestine Liberation Organisation, in peace talks, the United States and Israel continue to give a firm no.
I remind the Prime Minister that the Camp David Agreement should be operating on two levels. It should firstly be operating on the EgyptIsrael agreement with which the peacekeeping force in the Sinai and the Australian commitment to it is associated. The second front is entitled 'A Framework for Peace in the Middle East' and I table and seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the text of the framework for peace in the Middle East, the second part of the Camp David Accord.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
Framework
Taking these factors into account, the parties are determined to reach a just, comprehensive and durable settlement of the Middle East conllict through the conclusion of peace treaties based on Security Council resolutions 242 and 338 in all their parts. Their purpose is to achieve peace and good

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2743

neighbourly relations. They recognize that, for peace to endure, it must involve all those who have been most deeply
affected by the coflict. They therefore agree that this frame-
work as appropriate is intended by them to constitute a basis for peace not only between Egypt and Israel but also between Israel and each of its other neighbours which is prepared to
negotiate peace with Israel on this basis. With that objec'tive in mind, they have agreed to proceed as follows:

A. West Bank and Gaza:
Egypt, Israel, Jordan and the representatives of the Palestinian people should participate in negotiations on the resolution of the Palestinian problem in all its aspects to achieve that objective, negotiations relating to the West Bank and Gaza should proceed in three stages.

(A) Egypt and Israel agree that, in order to ensure a peaceful and orderly transfer of authority, and taking into account
the security concerns of all the parties, there should be tran-
sitional arrangements for the West Bank and Gaza for a period not exceeding five years. In order to provide full autonomy to the inhabitants, under these arrangements the Israeli
military government and its civilian administration will be withdrawn as soon as a self-governing authority has been
freely elected by the inhabitants of these areas to replace the existing military government.

To negotiate the details of transitional arrangement, the Government of Jordan will be invited to join the negotiations
on the basis of this framework. These new arrangements
should give due consideration to. both the principle of self government by the inhabitants of these territories and to legit-
imate security concerns of the parties involved.

(B) Egypt, Israel and Jordan will agree on the modalities for establishing the elected self-governing authority in the
West Bank and Gaza. The delegations of Egypt and Jordan may include Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza or
other Palestinians as mutually agreed. The parties will negotiate an agreement which will define the powers and responsibilities of the self-governing authority to be exercised in the
West Bank and Gaza. A withdrawal of Israeli armed forces will take place and there will be a redeployment of the remaining Israeli forces into specified security locations.

The negotiations shall be based on all the provisions and principles of UN Security Council resolution 242. The negotiations will resolve, among other matters the location of the
boundaries and the nature of the security arrangements. The solution from the negotiations must also recognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and their just require-
ments. In this way, the Palestinians will participate in the de-
termination of their own future through:

(i) The negotiations among Egypt, Israel, Jordan and the

representatives of the inhabitants of the West Bank

and Gaza to agree on the final status of the West Bank

and Gaza and other outstanding issues by the end of

the transitional period.

'

(ii) Submitting their agreement to a vote by the elected
representatives of the inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza.

(iii) Providing for the elected representatives of the inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza to decide how they shall govern themselves consistent with the provisions of their agreement.

(iv) Participating as stated above in the work of the committee negotiating the peace treaty between Israel and
Jordan.

The agreement will also include arrangements for assuring
internal and external security and public order. A strong local police force will be established, which may include Jordanian

citizens. In addition, Israeli and Jordanian forces will participate in joint patrols and in the manning of control posts to assure the security of the borders.
(C) When the self-governing authority (administrative council) in the West Bank and Gaza is established and inaugurated, the transitional period of five years will begin. As soon as possible, but not later than the third year after the beginning of the transitional period, negotiations will take place to determine the final status of the West Bank and Gaza and its relationship with its neighbours, and to conclude a peace treaty between Israel and Jordan by the end of the transitional period. These negotiations will be conducted among Egypt, Israel, Jordan and the elected representatives of the inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza.
Two separate but related committees will be convened, one committee, consisting of representatives of the four parties which will negotiate and agree on the final status of the West Bank and Gaza, and its relationship with its neighbours, and the second committee, consisting of representatives of Israel and representatives of Jordan to be joined by the elected representatives of the inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza, to negotiate a peace treaty between Israel and Jordan, taking into account the agreement reached on the final status of the West Bank and Gaza.
2. All necessary measures will be taken and provisions made to assure the security of Israel and its neighbours during the transitional period and beyond. To assist in providing such security, a strong local police force will be constituted by the self-governing authority. It will be composed of inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza. The police will maintain continuing liaison on internal security matters with the designated Israeli, Jordanian and Egyptian officers.
3. During the transitional period, the representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan and the self-governing authority will constitute a continuing committee to decide by agreement on the modalities of admission of persons displaced from the West Bank and Gaza in 1967, together with necessary measures to prevent disruption and disorder. Other matters of common concern may also be dealt with by this committee.
4. Egypt and Israel will work with each other and with other interested parties to establish agreed procedures for a prompt, just and permanent implementation of the resolution of the refugee problem.
Mr WEST-I thank the House. The basics of this agreement envisaged a self-governing authority to be set up on the West Bank and a five-year transitional period during which negotiations regarding the final status of the West Bank and Gaza would proceed. It was envisaged, if Camp David were to be successful, that autonomy must proceed and eventually lead to the establishment of a Palestinian state. But because of inherent differences in attitudes this basic requirement for a broad peace in the Middle East will not be concluded. That is because the Arab world is opposed to it. There is no Palestinian representation at the talks. Even if that were conceded those at Camp David gave no thought to who would represent the Palestinians. Would it be the regime in Jordan, which the majority of Palestinians despise since the days of Black September in 1970 when they were murdered and persecuted by the Hussein regime? Would it be the West Bank mayors or, curse the thought, according to

2744 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

the Israelis, their legitimate representative, the Palestine Liberation Organisation?
There is evidence also, unfortunately, that the Begin Government will not give up the West Bank. On the contrary, hard evidence suggests that the increased security in the Sinai derived from the Camp David talks are exciting Mr Begin and his Government to further adventurism and international attacks, particularly in Lebanon and in Iraq.
I wish to establish three separate chains of events which will illustrate the truth of what I am saying. Firstly, there was the attack on the Iraqi atomic reactor last June. I am opposed to an Iraqi reactor, whether it is wanted for peaceful power purposes or to make bombs. But it is very hard to accept that a nation which already has a nuclear bomb and which has not signed the nuclear non-proliferation treaty should assume the moral responsibility and authority of risking world war by striking at another nation which has signed the treaty and does not possess the bomb. It is a very bad and very questionable precedent which proves that the Begin Government has truly earned its reputation for extremism. I do not strictly believe what the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) said other night about Begin being the greatest current threat to world peace. I think, firstly, the foreign policy of the United States of America and, secondly, the foreign policy of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics are the two major threats to world peace. But I believe that the Begin Government runs a very close third.
Secondly, there was the attack on Beirut last July. An article in the Economist stated that the casualties resulting from the raids on the PLO headquarters in the middle of a Beirut residential centre were 200 people killed, 175 of whom were civilians who had nothing to do with the PLO, 48 children and 63 women. Five hundred people were killed by Israeli air raids in those terrible two weeks in Lebanon in early July 1981.
But perhaps the greatest indication of Camp David's failure to achieve a broad peace is that 40 settlements have been established by the Begin Government on the West Bank since the Camp David Accords were first signed in September 1978. Thus the basic contradiction arises: How can Palestinians see in the Camp David Accords a hope for peace with a homeland for them on the West Bank when the present Israeli Government continues to regard the West Bank as part of the biblical Israel, Judea and Sumaria-a claim that is never to be surrendered? I refuse to accept-as I think most people in this House would refuse to

accept after considering some of these facts-that voicing these facts represents anti-semitism.
This is the bitter heart of the tragedy of Jewish settlement in Palestine. The hatred since the 1890s between Arabs and Jews has been a relatively recent historical phenomenon. It has occurred only over the last 90 years. Historically, Arabs and Jews have not been antagonistic towards one another. The European civilisations have been the main persecutor of the Jews. This, of course, culminated in the nazi holocaust. I remind Begin that over the centuries it has not been the Arabs but the Christian European civilisation which has persecuted the Jews. It is most incongruous for the most persecuted of the world's people to seek to ensure their own future by inflicting further misery, persecution and perpetual homeless ness upon others. The obvious failure of these policies is illustrated by the fact that after 90 years of immigration and 33 years after the establishment of a Jewish state, Israel unfortunately is the most dangerous place in the world for a Jew to live.
There should be no Australian involvement in this peacekeeping force. Of all the military enterprises and wars in which Australia has been involved from the late 1890s when we first went to the Sudan and then we participated in the Boer War, it is arguable that the Second World War was the only military enterprise in which we should have been involved. I am not one who subscribes to the view that there are close parallels between the infamous intervention practised by Australian conservative governments in Vietnam and this present exercise in the Sinai. This is a far more complex situation. But I am of the most determined view that there must be no Australian involvement. It is not in the national or defence interests of Australia. I remind the National Country Party that it is not in our economic or commercial interests either.
Finally, there is little hope of Australia's presence-if I thought there were I would probably be in favour of it-contributing to a broad peace. The Camp David agreement is fundamentally flawed and it is biased in favour of Israel and Egypt to the detriment of the Palestinians' the dispossessed people, without whose agreement no enduring peace will be achieved. There is no question that this Government ought to be giving thought to what should transpire after the Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai because clearly at that point the original Camp David agreement will become superfluous. We' need to be looking at a new initiative which excludes the United States and the USSR and depends on truly neutral governments, certainly from the European Economic

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2745

Community, which can look at the area and perhaps espouse a plan similar to that put forward originally in June by the EEC, very similar to the Saudi Arabian proposal, which, as a fundamental first premise, involves the people who are most concerned-the Palestinians. The PLO, their legitimate representatives, should be given the chance to represent them at new talks. Any accord that emanates obviously must be directed at the fundamental problem of re-creating not only a homeland for the Israelis but also for the current dispossessed people of the Middle East, the Palestinians.
Sitting suspended from 5.59 to 8 p.m.
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs) (8.0)-1 deeply regret that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) has disregarded the appeal by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) that the Opposition not seek to divide Australia over the issue of Australian participation in the Sinai peacekeeping force. I particularly regret that the Leader of the Opposition has deliberately chosen to talk of war and military venture when the central proposition in this debate is the prospect for peace for one of the most war-torn parts of the world. Despite this, the Leader of the Opposition and Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) continue to attempt to mislead this House and the public by grossly misrepresenting the facts and the Government's position. Their suggestions and allegations are patently false, and that is serious enough. But something much more serious underlies the series of falsehoods we have heard from the Opposition-that is, the end of any pretence by the Australian Labor Party that a bipartisan basis for Australia's foreign policy towards the Middle East or the Western Alliance any longer exists.
A few might recall that in this very place on 21 September 1978, when speaking of the Camp David Accords and the efforts to create a lasting peace in the Middle East, the Leader of the Opposition, inter alia, said-I quote directly from page 1308 of Hansard:
The Middle East has never posed a mere regional threat; the implication always has been of a world crisis . . . Our hope is that all the parties and others who must necessarily become involved now--
I repeat 'all the parties and others who must necessarily become involved now'-
will maintain the momentum . . . I . . . assure him--
The Leader of the Opposition was speaking about the Prime Minister-
this House and the nation that on this great matter genuine concern for the achievement of lasting peace in the Middle East is a matter of bipartisan commitment.

Now, before the sands have settled on the tomb of President Sadat-the architect of the Camp David Accords-the Deputy Leader of the Opposition declares that, as far as the Labor Party is concerned, 'Camp David is dead'. It is tragic for this country to see the Opposition in virtual international isolation, associated only with those who celebrated the attempt to sabotage President Sadat's greatest achievement by firing their guns for joy at his death. In fairness, I recognise that this view of the Camp David Accords is not shared universally within the Parliamentary Labor Party. Indeed, in a singular act of personal integrity and courage the honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) rejected this proposition in this place on Thursday evening last. It is unfortunate that others known to hold similarly strong views outside this place are unwilling, for reasons of their .own, to match the honourable member for Robertson's courage.
The Leader of the Opposition and, I regret to say, the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), amongst others, also oppose participation in the multinational peacekeeping force because of its failure to achieve a United Nation's mandate. The Government, for its part, has made it clear that, while it would always have preferred a force under United Nations mandate, such an option is ruled out by the position adopted by the Soviet Union. This is an indisputable fact. All United Nations peacekeeping forces currently in operation have been established by. vote of the Security Council. On 26 May I tabled a letter in this House from the President of the Security Council which said that Council members were unable to reach agreement on United Nations involvement in the Sinai. On \0 July I discussed this matter with Dr Waldheim, the Secretary-General of the United Nations. The Secretary-General confirmed that United Nations involvement was not a possibility. In reaching the conditional decisions we have reached, the Government considered that it was not in the interests of peace in the Middle East, or in the interests of the Western Alliance to acknowledge that the Soviet Union should have the capacity, whenever it chose to exercise it, to veto efforts to achieve international peace within, or outside the United Nations context. I regret that, perhaps unwittingly, the Opposition supports placing such authority in the hands of the Soviet Union. The Government believes that in these circumstances an international peacekeeping force' outside United Nations auspices, no matter how desirable United Nations involvement might be, is preferable to no peace at all.

2746 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

Attempts continue to be made to draw an prepared to take decisions which do not necess-

analogy between Australia's attempt to contribarily coincide with those of the United States, and

ute to peace in the Middle East and earlier Austhe alliance is strengthened by our insistence on

tralian involvement in Vietnam. Such comparitaking our own independent decisions. In this in-

sons are absurd. Indeed, no one has made this stance, the time taken in reaching a decision

point more eloquently than the honourable reflected .a determination by the Government to

member for Robertson. The members of-the make our own decision in the light of our own

peacekeeping force will participate at the express national interest.

invitation of the former antagonists, Egypt and Israel, in accordance with a mutually agreed peace treaty. The text of that treaty makes it clear that complete withdrawal is conditional on the existence of a peacekeeping force which will supervise both the Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai and the implementation of ,the security arrangements agreed on in that treaty.

I now reassure this Parliament and the people of Australia on the questions of Australian sovereignty and the function of any Australian component to the multinational peacekeeping force. I regret that deliberate misrepresentations repeated by the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition make this necessary. Firstly, Australia's participation in a Sinai peacekeeping

The Government recognises that the Camp David Accords and the Egypt-Israeli peace treaty are not an end in themselves to the attainment of overall peace in the Middle East and that no lasting peace will be possible without resolution of the Palestinian issue. The Government has noted,

force is not-I repeat not-a military venture, as
alleged by the Leader of the Opposition. It is a venture in the pursuit of peace. Australia's contribution is expected to be an air support unit. Were hostilities to break out in its zone of operations, its peacekeeping role would have to come to an end

in this regard, that other proposals have been put and the force would be immediately withdrawn.

forward in an attempt to resolve the Arab-Israeli Secondly, although absolute guarantees on the

issue. None of these proposals, however, have yet achieved the degree of acceptance from Israel and Egypt that the Camp David ,Accords have achieved. There nevertheless exists a growing re-

security of any peacekeeping force cannot be provided, it should be remembered as a result of the Egypt-Israeli treaty that the Sinai is no longer an area of conflict in the Middle East. The prospect

alisation that many countries are seeking the same is that the Sinai, as a consequence of that peace objective-peace in the Middle. East. The treaty, will remain an area of peace in the Middle Government's concern over this question is East. Thirdly, the commander of the Australian

reflected by the fact that it has said it will expect force will be, instructed not to comply with any

the United States to exert and sustain the stronorders which he believes are contrary to, or go be-

gest possible pressure to ensure effective progress yond the agreed purposes of, the force until Aus-

in implementing the Camp David Accords with tralian authorities have been consulted. Fourthly, respect to the Sinai and negotiations on Palesno part of the peacekeeping force, including the tinian autonomy. The Government welcomes the United States component, is to have any associ-

decision, reported in the last few days, by Egypt ation with the United States Rapid Deployment

and Israel to advance the date of the next schedForce. Indeed, the United States has undertaken

uled round of autonomy negotiations by one month. Palestinian recognition of Israel's right to exist would contribute greatly to the success of those negotiations.

to provide reassurances on this point.
Fifthly, the duration of Australia's commitment will be limited to a specified period to be negotiated with the parties concerned. Sixthly,

The Leader of the Opposition has alleged that Australia's contribution will be strictly limited to

the delay in reaching a decision on this vital issue its initial contribution. I repeat for the benefit of

was simply to accommodate American strategic the Leader of the Opposition that there will be no

interests. Apart from being false, such allegations further expansion of Austraiia's contribution be-

indicate a deliberate misunderstanding of the yond that originally committed. Finally, the

nature of our alliance relationship with the Leader of the Opposition has alleged that no

United States. Indeed, the fact that the Opposingle significant nation in Europe, or government

sition has sought to undermine the basis of trust of const<quence anywhere, supports the Sinai

and confidence in this alliance is already wellpeacekeeping force. The Government is unaware

known in this place. As well as our receiving of any public statements which would indicate

advantages from this alliance, our relationship European opposition, with the possible exception

with the United States requires us to make contri- , of Eastern Europe, to the full implementation of

butions to the alliance. The Government has the Camp David agreements, the proposed Sinai

already demonstrated in other contexts that it is force, or the Egypt-Israeli peace treaty; in fact,

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2747

quite the reverse. The latest information we have indicates growing support in Europe for the multinational force, and the likelihood of a number of countries participating in it. The Leader of the Opposition is hopelessly and dangerously out of step with responsible world opinion.
The Government accepts that there is a limit to what Australia, as a middle power, can do to influence events in the Middle East. The Government believes, however, that Australia's decision has encouraged the formation of a more broadly based peacekeeping force, and honourable members will recall the emphasis I placed on this point in my statement to the House on 26 May. Australia's legitimate interest in peace rather than war in the Middle East is indisputable. In speaking on 'the resolution of conflict' in the 1979 Boyer Lectures the now honourable member for Wills said:
I do believe there is a possible way through what appears to be a virtual stalemate, and it does seem to be one where it is perfectly appropriate for Australia to take an initiative, given our good standing with the countries directly involved and with the United States.
It is a matter of regret that the honourable member for Wills has not yet chosen to explain his position, as a member of parliament, on this vital issue of peace, for it was on this subject that he also said in 1979:
Tn these processes of peace there are, and will be heroes, just as surely as' there are in times of war. And just as there are risks in war, so there are risks in the processes of pe'ace. The heroes will be those who see and know the risks and are prepared to face them.
I agree with the honourable member for Wills in that assessment. I have heard the honourable member speak on the Middle East issue in a major international forum, with great eloquence and conviction, and to great effect. He now has the opportunity to use his considerable influence in his party in the same way. I hope he takes this opportunity because he has the capacity to make a significant contribution to a much greater understanding in the Australian community of the complex problems of the Middle East and what we can do, what influence we can exert, to help resolve them.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIIar)-The honourable member for Hindmarsh persisted in interjecting in the course of the address of the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Mr Scott-The speech was most provocative.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member will not interrupt. I ask him to desist from that practice or I will have to deal with him.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (8.15)-The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in his statement to

the Parliament on the Sinai peacekeeping force referred to the essential elements of the Camp David Accords. He stated:
The Camp David Accords and the Peace Treaty contained two essential elements. One dealt with the procedures, for implementing 'full autonomy' for the inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza after the establishment of an elected self governing authority.
It was interesting to note that in the Prime Minister's printed statement the phrase 'full autonomy' was shown in inverted commas. In fact, under Israel's autonomy proposals, only local administrative councils with minor powers would be established. Candidates supporting the Palestine Liberation Organisation, the only legitimate body representing the Palestinian people, would not be allowed to stand for election. There would be no Palestinian radio or television stations, no separate currency, no flag and no judicial power. The confiscation of land for Israeli settlements and for military purposes would continue and Israel would control the water supply. There would be no Palestinian self-determination and no separate state. Is this what the Prime Minister means by 'full autonomy'? Surely it is obvious that the autonomy proposal is simply a method of making permanent the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza and the continuing harassment of pro-PLO elected officials, trade unions and national institutions which represent 1.5 million Palestinians.
I place on record my rejection of the policies at present being followed by the Begin led Israeli Government. For me, the Israeli attacks on southern Lebanon and the oppression of the Palestinians on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip by the Israeli army of occupation are reminiscent of the Nazi oppression of Jews prior to and during the last World War. Why cannot this most conservative of Israeli governments appreciate the harm it is doing to the desperate need of the Israeli people to live in peace and harmony with their Arab neighbours? Fortunately, many Israelis also reject the belligerent and aggressive tactics which their Government is pursuing. There are great divisions within Israel on those policies, as the recent general election indicated.
The proposed participation in the so-called Sinai peacekeeping force by the Federal Government defies majority world opinion and will further unite most of the Arab states against a process which denies the rights and virtually denies the existence of the Palestinian people. The last parallel Australian decision was to support the Anglo-French-Israeli intervention in the Suez. We are contributing to the same sorts of problems that occurred during the Suez fiasco. In fact, our

2748 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

intervention will be seen by Arab states as an aggression. Our real interest lies in opposing the introduction of new forces into the Middle East. The Arabs are bound to see our action as a further attempt to discipline them into compliance with the attempted domination of that area by the United States of America. It is now quite obvious that the Camp David process, which never had any real prospect of success as a peace process, has fallen to pieces. Also the real possibility-is raised of provoking the Soviet Union into a much more active Middle East policy over and above the policy which she has been following recently. The reaction of the Arab world has to be seen in the light of its desire to redress the occupation of Palestine and to restore the position of the Palestinian people.
As the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) has pointed out, Saudi Arabia has proposed a peace plan which is worthy of consideration by all nations which are interested in a just settlement in the Middle East. Its eight point plan is as follows: First, total Israeli withdrawal from all Arab territories occupied after the 1967 Middle East war, including the Arab section of Jerusalem; second, removal of Israeli settlements in the territories occupied in the 1967 war, namely, the West Bank of the Jordan River, the Gaza Strip and the Golan Heights; third, the guarantee of freedom of worship for all religions-Islam, Christianity and Judaism-in Jerusalem; fourth, recognition of the rights of two million Palestinian refugees from the 1948 war as well as the 1967 war for repatriation or compensation; fifth, United Nations trusteeship over the West Bank and Gaza Strip during a transition period of several months; sixth, the establishment of an independent Palestinian state with the Arab eastern section of Jerusalem as its capital; seventh, recognition of the rights of states in the region to live in peace; and finally, eight, guarantees by the United Nations and United Nations member countries to implement these principles.
It is interesting to note the reports that Mr Yasser Arafat, the head of the Palestine Liberation Organisation, recently described the Saudi Arabian plan as a positive step and a very important platform for a solution of Middle Eastern problems. The crux of the Arab nationalist view and the real flaw in the Australian position is that it does not recognise that the crucial question is Palestine. The operation we are debating today will do nothing to resolve the Palestine position. The truth is that it will be seen as a one-sided intervention against the Palestinians at a time when Israel has shown no goodwill in accommodating the problems. It offers Israel a prize for such

actions as bombing Beirut and Baghdad. The decision is clearly against the interests of the Australian people and as with Vietnam, as I could not help interjecting during the Prime Minister's speech, offers an open-ended commitment to an intractable quagmire of unnecessary death and injury for Australian servicemen.
Mr Coleman-A typically intelligent remark!
Mr MILTON-The honourable member does not like to hear that, does he? He does not like to be reminded of what happened during those years. His side of the House is responsible for the death of hundreds of Australians. Once again we are simply toeing the line and meeting the demands of the United States of America rather than having regard to our own interest and the need for a just settlement in the Middle East. The Vietnam analogy is recalled by the fact that we do not know for how long we will be in Sinai, nor have we been told about the circumstances under which we could withdraw. I reject any assurances that the force will remain under Australian control because it is not a peacekeeping operation but a military operation in which we will be under the command and control of the United States.
The proposition is contingent on the approval of n(l.tions such as Great Britain, Canada, Italy and France, so the real circumstances of the commitment obviously have not been fully speJt out by the Government. We know that, even putting aside a Soviet veto, the United Nations would never approve of the venture. But we do not know what nations we will be in league with in one of the most dangerous conflict situations anywhere in the world. We know that the Americans perceive this operation as one which would strengthen their own interests in the region. But the deteriorating situation in Egypt, which is a vital party to the so-called Accords, confirms that the American perceptions may be wrong. The Egyptian regime, which is now vigorously imprisoning its multiplying foes, is in trouble because it has repudiated the ethos of the Arab people of which the Palestinian issue is so fundamental a part.
lhe Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) has pointed out that Egypt is allowing its territory to be used as a base for the United States Rapid Deployment Force. The RDF-comprising three army diVisions, a marine division with an associated air wing, three aircraft carrier task groups, dozens of air force tactical squadrons supported by several hundred thousand men and women-can be seen only as a full-scale army searching for a war. The chances of finding a

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2749

war-as my colleague said, it is not a peacekeeping force-must be considered exceptionally high with President Reagan's Administration committed to the use of forces as a standard instrument of United States policy. As a result of the booming arms race, in which the United StaJes is the principal supplier, Middle Eastern countries are now far better equipped than ever before. Many of the United States most likely adversaries, such as Libya, Syria, Iraq and South Yemen,-are armed with the most advanced French, British and Russian military equipment which is available on the world market. Any United States forces sent to war in these areas are therefore likely to encounter far tougher resistance than they ever faced in South East Asia. It is precisely for this reason that Pentagon officials have raised the possibility of using tactical nuclear weapons to defend outnumbered RDF forces sent abroad. With Israel herself also possessing a nuclear arms arsenal it is easy to imagine how even a limited use of tactical weapons could escalate into a full-scale nuclear war. It is in this area of proven political instability and volatile military preparedness that the Government is proposing to send Australian troops.
In fact, in answer to a question yesterday from the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley), the Prime Minister had to admit that the United States component of the peacekeeping force could well be drawn from its rapid deployment army. He said:
It would be nonsense to suggest that we should be telling the United States from which division or which unit it should draw a battalion for this force.
If we look again at the Prime Minister's statements of last Thursday, we see that he said:
No part of the peacekeeping force-including the United States component-should have any association with the United States Rapid Deployment Force.
We can see that his reply to the honourable member for Swan only one week later can be interpreted only to mean that he is already repudiating one of the few safeguards offered to the Australian people in his statement.
The Egyptian regime will not be saved by Western intervention on its behalf. I forecast that even President Mubarakhimself will ultimately realise this fact. If he is to survive it will be because he has returned to the Arab folds. Western intervention supported a policy which made the late President Sadat alien to his own people and to the Arab world. It is a policy which can only undermine the Egyptian regime and place further into the distance any prospect of peace in the region.
At this point it ought not be out of place to mention the Israeli attacks on Lebanon, a country

which has never been at war with Israel. Between the two major Israeli invasions of 1967 and 1978 and in the past three years the Israelis 3ave been bombing, shelling and making military incursions into Lebanese territory. The result of these invasions has been the complete destabilisation of the country. Among the complexities of the problems of the area is the presence in Lebanon of 300,000 Palestinians. They are there because they have been forced to leave their homeland by the establishment and subsequent expansion of the state of Israel. The appalling problem of Lebanon is inextricably bound up with the problems of Palestine. Neither of these problems can be settled separately. Until they are both settled there will be endless conflict in the Middle East.
As I have mentioned previously, the political situation in the Middle East is very complex and volatile. One thing is certain, however, and that is that the Palestine Liberation Organisation will not recognise the state of Israel until the Western nations show positive intentions towards the achievement of Palestinian national rights. The acceptance by the Western nations-some of which are now expressing their support for the so called Sinai peacekeeping force-of the eight-part Saudi Arabian plan would go a long way towards achieving some of the national rights of the Palestinians. It is a poor reflection on the Prime Minister and his advisers that he has not come to grips with some of the most elementary propositions of Arab nationalism. It could be an extraordinarily costly mistake for both Australians and the Arab peoples resulting in death and injury for Australians and Arabs alike. It seems that the Federal Government has learnt nothing from the events in Iran. In that country we have an example of the clear rejection by the Arab peoples of the forces of imperialism. In all the countries of the Middle East colonial imperialist forces have been rejected. Let me finally refer to a report--
Mr Connolly-What about Afghanistan?
Mr MILTON-If the honourable member would listen he might learn something. I refer to a report which appeared in the International Herald Tribune which pointed out that in one day the Egyptian Government arrested 230 of its foes and that these arrests are a daily occurrence. Is this the kind of Middle Eastern government on which we wish to rely in relation to our so-called peacekeeping force? I come back to my original statement that the action of the Federal Government will serve only to unite the Arab states against what will be seen as a military intervention which is attempting virtually to deny the Palestinian people the right of an independent existence. I

2750 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

support the motion moved by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition.

Mr CONNOLLY (Bradfield) (8.30)-We are participating tonight in one of the most significant foreign policy debates to take place in this chamber for a long time. It depresses me greatly to hear members of the Opposition telling the Australian people exactly which side of the international equation they are on. Let the people of Australia be in absolutely no doubt whatsoever that when they hear from the clique of the far left-its members sit in the right hand corner opposite me-they see the Labor Party dominated today by the socialist left wing. We are facing the fundamental question of whether the Australian Government is to support a process of peace or whether, on the basis of some trumped up concept of national interest through an opinion poll, it is to run away from our fundamental responsibilities to the Western Alliance and to the people of this nation.

It is a regrettable fact that the Leader of the

Opposition (Mr Hayden), in his public statements

about the Israeli-Egyptian Peace Accords over

the last fortnight, has shown a complete failure

accurately to assess the facts in relation to this

peacekeeping force. He has a totally confused and

self-contradictory approach to the whole matter.

His approach is reminiscent of his lack of under-

standing and his failure to grasp the significance of

the recent Commonwealth Heads of Government

Meeting in Melbourne and his almost total inca-

pacity to understand the principles and important

elements of foreign policy. The Leader of the Op-

position has consistently made statements which

are wrong in fact. He has shown a careless disre-

gard for reality in reaching conclusions on a whole

range of vital matters.

.

I will mention just a few of these statements for the record. On 12 October he said that the peace proposal 'does not have much support at all internationally-certainly no support from the major nations of Europe'. Since then we have seen a fundamental difference. Following the lead taken by Australia, a number of most important members of the European Economic Community and members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation alliance-Great Britain, France and Italy and the Netherlands for example-have come out in favour in principle of being associated with the Sinai peacekeeping force. So much for those who take the view that there is not much support internationally. It has been fundamental to the Australian Government's approach that a wide ranging group of natiops, representative of all the continents, must be ib this peacekeeping force in the Sinai. It is quite obvious from the way

the trend is going that the objective will certainly be achieved. All the indications are that the major nations of Europe support the concept of a multinational peacekeeping force. The Leader of the Opposition has also failed to inform the House as to whether this fact would change Labor's policy. Quite obviously, as a result of the decision taken by Caucus, he and other members of the party are irrevocably attached to a policy which is fundamentally wrong. It is morally wrong, it is wrong in fact; and it is certainly wrong for the interests of the Australian people. On 11 October we were told this:
Ifanything, the tragic events in Cairo-
He was referring, of course, to the very sad assassination of President Sadat-
. . . strengthen the argument that any role by Australia in the proposal is utterly out of the question.
The extraordinary thing is that it was at Cairo at the time of the funeral that a large group of Western allies realised that this is no longer a case of pussy footing in terms of whether or not the agreement which the EEC was trying to offer as a settlement of the Middle East dispute vias more satisfactory than the principles of Camp David. The fundamental reality which the Western alliance is facing is that we must be prepared to stand and to support moderate regimes in the Middle East which are prepared to have the courage of their convictions and adopt policies based on the needs of peace. If not we will be proceeding on a line which undoubtedly, at best, will lead to a status quoin the Middle East with virtually negligible progress towards settlement or at worst we will see a further growth in Middle Eastern countries of extreme views and communist influence, backed by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and its lackies and supported regrettably by. Muslim fundamentalists and others whose influence is quite clearly growing in many of those states today.
The honourable member for La Trobe (Mr Milton) observed a few minutes ago what a terrible thing it was that in Cairo in recent days hundreds of people had been arrested, including the Coptic Pope, a Christian. He has also been arrested. The Government of Egypt is well aware of the fact that this is a most vital time in Egypt's national history. It is a time when it can once and for all irrevocably take a course of action directed at peace ,in its time, with all the advantages that peace can bring for all the people of Egypt and for the Middle East as a whole. Alternatively it is a time when the Middle East can allow its governments to be run by a group of people who really have no objective in life except to turn back the clock, to take their people back to the Middle

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2751

Ages which would be disastrous for the world and certainly for the futue of their people. Nevertheless, that is the situation apparently supported by the Labor Party in recent days.
The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) made it abundantly clear in this House when he made his statement last week that the assassination of President Sadat had the effect of making many nations conscious of the need to provide additional support for the Peace Accords. The Leader of the Opposition's failure to grasp this fact demonstrates his inability to read the international situation for what it in fact is. We have I\lso heard inaccurate statements from him about the Australian decision. He said, for example, that the Government is ignoring the rights of the Palestinian people. How can he say that? How can such a view be supported by the honourable inember for La Trobe, for example, when the fact of the matter is that the principles of the Camp David Accords quite specifically lay down that in addition to withdrawal from the Sinai, the recognition of the borders of Israel and the establishment of peaceful relations between Egypt and Israel is the requirement to find a satisfactory settlement to the problem of the Palestinian people, the West Bank and the Gaza Strip?
This Government, time after time, has emphasised in the United Nations, in this chamber and elsewhere that the Palestinian people have a right to self-determination, but equally that it is the right of the people of Israel to have their state remain inviolate. The Israeli people should have peaceful borders which are internationally recognised and behind which they can live in a state of peace and development for their own benefit and for the good of the people of the region. Tonight we have heard rio more than we heard the other night from various speakers for .the Opposition to give the slightest expectation that under their administration an Australian government would be able to live with the facts as we see them today. It was because governments in the United Kingdom and elsewhere in the 1930s fled from the realities of the day that the nation ultimately in 1939 found itself not only ill equipped but also morally bankrupt before the onslaughts of such people as Hitler and Mussolini. These realities of history are on the record to be seen by all who wish to read them. Unfortunately, we have socialists opposite who simply want to see the past as they see the future-through some extraordinarily rose tinted glasses, as red as the blood in the streets.
At least there is one honourable member of the Opposition who deserves some credit in recent days. I refer to the honourable member for

Robertson (Mr Cohen) who has demonstrated a degree of courage, unlike other members of the Opposition. Let me turn tp another of his dear colleagues in the Opposition, the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke). He and I have shared a number of experiences in Israel. I well recall his first visit to that country when he was feted throughout the land. All the doors were open to him. The Government of Israel even entrusted him with the most delicate diplomatic task of visiting Moscow, no doubt at their expense, to talk with Shelepin, who was then a member of the Russian Politburo, in an attempt to improve relations between Israel and Russia with the objective of seeking the release of Russian Jews who wished to leave the Soviet Union. That he was chosen for such a task was undoubtedly of great credit to him. That he should now, so many years later, following even further visits to that land which can best be .called his adopted country, fail to associate himself with the policies of the Government and to dissociate himself from the policy of his own party and his own leader and the views expressed in this Parliament by his party is an act of callous disregard for the trust and the friendship which the people of Israel gave him over so many years. Now is a time of destiny for Israel and the Middle East. For the first time we see real steps being taken towards establishing a durable peace, a lasting peace, between Egypt and Israel. The honourable member for Wills said this in his Boyer lecture in 1979:
I do believe there is a possible way through what appears to be a virtual stalemate and it does seem to be one where it is perfectly appropriate for Australia to take an initiative, given our good standing with the countries directly involved and with the United States.
Yet we see, in the situation we have at the moment, that when the realities are before him, he is prepared, regrettably, to hide behind the policies of the Labor Party, policies which undoubtedly in this case, as in so many others, have been totally led and dictated by left wing opportunists, some of whom we have heard from tonight. The honourable member for La Trobe has made the observation tonight that somehow or other whatever the West does is wrong and whatever the United States has done is wrong. What has he said about Afghanistan? What has he said about Russian infiltration of Iraq? What has he said about the Russian and the East German advisers and troops and their supporters throughout the Middle East region? What has he said about that small group of countries in the Middle East which have moderate leaders, such as-in Jordan, which are desperate at this time to achieve their own survival? He does not want Israel or the Palestinians to survive. He lives on the principle that the

2752 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

Middle East is to remain a cauldron in which people-men, women and children-die hour by hour. Somehow the honourable member-a great man of peace-sees joy in such a situation!
I return to the subject. I was referring to before-namely the honourable member for Wills. The honourable member's ambitions, of course, are well known throughout the land. He may, of course, seek the highest elected office, and that is his right. But let us face the facts for what they are. He stated publicly in his Press release of 22 October-if he has any credibility at all he will have to repeat it in this chamber tonight-that the reason for not supporting an Australian presence in the Sinai peacekeeping force is that the opinion polls do not support our involvement. Let us look at this in some detail. If that is the basis upon which he believes the Government should form its policies, we can only conclude that if Australia is ever unfortunate enough to have him as Prime Minister, he would lack the courage and conviction to lead the country in matters of national interest unless, of course, he had consulted the polls first, just as the ancient Roman emperors consulted soothsayers who interpreted the innards of a chook for the telltale signs which might mark their destiny. The Government believes that it was elected by the people to lead the nation and not to follow the capriciousness of the opinion polls, based in this case on little firm knowledge and not on a clear issue put before the people by the Government. The substance of responsibility requires--
Mr Milton-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond) -Order! I warn the honourable member for La Trobe not to take a fictitious point of order.
Mr Milton,-Mr Deputy Speaker, we are debating the Sinai peacekeeping force. We are not debating the philosophies of the honourable member for Wills.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no substance to the point of order. It has been a freeranging debate, as every honourable member who had listened to it would know. There is no substance in the point of order.
Mr Ruddock-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. I would like to ask where the honourable gentleman is now. He has not been in here for the whole of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.

Mr CONNOLLY-The fact that points of order have been taken against me merely demonstrates that what I am say is hurting many nerves on the Opposition benches tonight. The position is clear. The substance of responsibility rests with this Government making its own decisions upon which the people may then decide, but the decisions we have taken in recent days, which will be put in due course no doubt to an opinion poll, will demonstrate, I am sure, that as the weeks pass more and more Australians will appreciate that what we are doing is in Australia's interest and in the interests of the Western World. It is a great sadness to me and to members on this side of the House that we do not take with us on this journey members of the Opposition, that we cannot present to the Australian people a united policy, a determination that the objective of this Parliament and of the people of Australia will be vested in the principle of attaining and reaching, as far as we are able, a level of peace which to date since 1948, in 34 years of war, has not been seen in the Middle East. Those are the facts.
As I said earlier, over those years thousands upon thousands of people have died, and honourable members opposite apparently are prepared to let that situation continue. That is not the policy of this Government. We are prepared to grasp at any possibility for peace, whereas members opposite expect to have the bottom line signed in triplicate before they even consider the risks of putting a toe in the water. The water today is cold and the world in which we live is not an easy place. But it is time the Opposition realised that if it wants the responsibilities of office, if it wants to lead this country one day, it will have to do a lot better at demonstrating to the people of this country that it is fair dinkum, that it knows where it is going and knows what is in the interests of the Australian people in the longer term.
In the last few moments I wish to make one simple observation. The Middle East today is indeed a very difficult place. Every administration is facing the problem of extremism to one degree or another. If we are not prepared to support that small group of moderate Arab nations in the Middle East, ultimately We will. be abrogating our right as a member of the Western Alliance to ask the Third World ever to believe in us and to support what we stand for-the peace and welfare of mankind ..
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired. .
Mr UREN (Reid) (8.45)-1 am not going to use my precious moments to answer the smokescreen put up by the honourable member for

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2753

Bradfield (Mr Connolly) except to say one thing: We on this side of the House have the right to serve both in peace and war, and our records are as good as those of anybody in this Government or its supporters. Let us stop this hypocritical rubbish from members opposite who say: 'We are the people to rule and you should follow'.
Five days ago the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) informed this Parliament of an Executive decision of profound historic importance-to commit an unspecified number of military personnel and equipment for an unspecified period to serve under a foreign command in an Americansponsored force in the volatile Middle East region. The Prime Minister announced that eleven days before that that Executive decision had been conveyed to both the President of the United States and other foreign leaders. The Australian people have been among the last to be told.
The Australian Parliament is now debating a fait accompli. Contrary to all the indications of public opinion, a dangerous and divisive decision has been imposed on the Australian community. That is what we have to understand. The process by which the decision was made has not been open to scrutiny by the Australian people. The far-reaching implications of that decision have not been made clear. Yet the Prime Minister, in his statement the other night, said with arrogance:
I appeal to members of the Opposition not to seek to divide Australia on this issue.
What arrogance! He is a man who was a part of a decision that sent Australian troops into Vietnam and notwithstanding his record and the violence of his Government, he says: 'Let us not be divisive on this issue'. Are we to understand by this that it is the role of the Opposition to fall in behind the Government on this contentious decision just as the Government has fallen in uncritically behind that most reactionary Government of the United States, the Reagan Administration, in its dictates? Is it not the proper role of the Opposition to question the validity of the Government's policy, to assess its performance in relation to it and, where necessary, to criticise it and propose alternatives to it? On such an important issue as this why should we agree to default on that responsibility? We must meet our responsibility, and we on this side are meeting that responsibility.
On this decision the Opposition does not have to foster division. Division on this question already exists in this country. The Opposition, in opposing the Government's decision, is reflecting the viewpoint of the overwhelming majority of the Australian people. The division in our community exists in two areas: First, the complex

questions concerning the Middle East and, secondly, the commitment of Australian troops overseas. On the first issue, there is disagreement with the Reagan Administration's view of the problem in the Middle East and its approach to it. I will comment more deeply on this at a later date. On the domestic front there exist deep and potentially hostile divisions, especially among those who have some affinity with the Middle East region through ethnic, religious and political connections. There are many people in Australiatheir numbers are growing every day-who have strong feelings on questions concerning the Middle East. Australia's direct involvement in the region will intensify the feelings at home. The manner of the Government's decision will provoke wider division both between and within groups in our community. That is a heavy and long term price to pay.
On the second question, the committing of Australian troops overseas, the Government by its decision also risks polarising the Australian community. With the withdrawal of Australian troops from that bottomless pit of human suffering in Vietnam there emerged in Australia a national consensus concerning the deployment of our troops overseas. This decision to go in to bolster the credibility of the United States in pursuit of its global interests in the Middle East represents the first break with that consensus. The initial Australian involvement in Vietnam was relatively small and supposedly short term. The Australian troops were first sent to Vietnam in May 1962, and it was not until January 1973-nearly II years later-that they were fully disengaged from that country. It grew into a bigger and more protracted commitment that contributed to tragedy for the Vietnamese people, led to the senseless death of young Australians, overstrained our defence capacity, and caused intense political conflict at home. Through that tragic experience we have come to learn that Australian troops should not be used overseas to promote the military, economic and political interests of our colonisers and allies. Our priority is to organise, equip and deploy our forces for the defence of Australian security and the stability of our immediate area of strategic concern. The overseas involvement of our forces beyond that objective should be confined to selective peacekeeping operations sponsored by the United Nations.
I am fully aware that the Sinai is not Vietnam. I am also aware that the Sinai is not in Australia's immediate area of strategic interest. Our involvement will detract from the upgrading of our required domestic defence capacity. There are no guarantees that the operation will not be a long

2754 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

drawn-out one. There is no assurance that our forces will not be drawn into a larger, more protected and bitter involvement in that area. The course of events in the Middle East is in no way predictable. The Australian Government has no idea of what it is getting our troops into. The experience of the British peacekeeping forces in Northern Ireland and of the Syrian peacekeeping forces in the Lebanon underlines the real conflict that can occur with peacekeeping forces. In such an unstable area as the Middle East, where conflicts are grounded in generations of bitter hostility, we need to exercise caution, and I stress that. It is unlikely that our forces will not be the object of resentment and attack. Of course they will.
I would like to look at a few aspects of the real problems of the emerging situation in the Middle East, especially as they affect the Camp David Accords and hence the rationale for the involvement of Australian forces in the Sinai. It is a fact that the so-called peacekeeping operation in the Sinai is not to be under the auspices of the United Nations. The force is sponsored by the United States, contrary to the Camp David agreements, which call for a United Nations force, deliberately-I stress deliberately-excluding forces of the member countries of the Security Council so as to avoid further super-power intervention in the region. The fact that it is a United States ~ponsored force does not result from the exercise or threat of veto by the Soviet Union. The United States could not even get a majority in the Security Council sufficient to warrant a Soviet veto. It is a United States sponsored force because its deployment is part of United States strategy in the Middle East, a strategy which involves forging closer links between the United States, Israel and some moderate Arab nations against the rest of the Arab world and the Soviet Union. It reflects a distorted view of the Arab-Israeli conflict as an East-West face-off. It embodies the rejection of political settlements in favour of heavy-handed military confrontation.
There can be no apology for the menacing role of the Soviet Union in the Middle East, and I make no apologies in that regard; neither can there be any apology for the aggressive thrust of United States policy in that region. In fact, further United States military and economic intervention in the region will be counterproductive to the objectives of peace in the Middle East and will cut across the exercise of self-determination by the peoples of the region. Increased United States involvement will foster further opposition within nations such as Egypt and Saudi Arabia,

just as it did in Iran. In addition, an escalated military and economic involvement of the United States in the region will pressure the Soviet Union to retaliate by increasing its presence. That may serve the interests of the merchants of military hardware, whether it be the Soviet Union, the United States of America, France, Britain or Germany. It may serve to realise the kind of world envisaged by President Reagan, one that is carved up between the super-powers. It will not lead to peace for the people in the Middle East. It will continually threaten all peoples with the prospect of horrendous war, and we know that that horrendous war will be a nuclear war.
The Prime Minister justifies the decision to send Australian troops to the Sinai on the basis of the Camp David agreements and particularly On the changed context of Israeli-Egyptian negotiations following the assassination of President Sadat. Let us consider the status of the Camp David Accords and the emerging situation in Egypt and Israel. The Arab nations regarded the Sadat negotiations as a separate peace that left Syria, Jordan and the Palestinians in the lurch. Sadat continued to negotiate with Begin, who was forcefully opposed to autonomy negotiations for the Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
It is now widely recognised that the Camp David agreements have broken down and need to be replaced by a broader political settlement that includes the Arab nations excluded from the separate peace. Camp David never was a settlement of the Middle East problem. With the failure to make any progress at all on autonomy for the Palestinians, the Camp David Accords have failed to address the central problem. The Reagan Administration has no interest in the pursuit of autonomy negotiations. Its preference is to militarise the ~egion and entrench the Israeli regime. The Begin Administration is based on a fragile coalition, among whose members are splinter right wing parties that exist for the purpose of maintaining Israeli control of the Sinai, the West Bank and Gaza. As economic problems bedevil Israel, which now maintains an inflation rate of 130 per cent, the political pressure on Begin to keep the favour of these minority extremist parties in order to:hold off the Labour Party opposition is likely to increase. If they falter, a Labour government will take over Israel.
On those considerations alone such proposals as those advanced in August by Saudi Arabia for a broader settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict become more appealing. They have certainly captured the imagination of European leaders who have a close understanding of the complexities of

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2755

the region. They. have attracted the attention of people as far apart politically as former President Nixon and Vasser Arafat. If anything, the death of Sadat has firmed Israel's suspicion of the Egyptian intentions and threatens a delay in the withdrawal of Israel from the Sinai. Mubarak has to be tested in Israeli eyes, but he faces increasing problems for his own regime in Egypt. In 1974, Sadat plunged Egypt into a phase of rapid, unregulated growth characterised by short term speculation and a wild scramble to import Western goods. The majority of the Egyptian people have got nothing out of this. The new Egyptian President now faces growing problems of poverty, hunger, political resentment to American penetration, and religious opposition-particularly by the extremist elements-to Westernisation. Therefore I see enormous conflict.
Under those conditions, how can the Prime Minister send our troops to the Sinai? With the Reagan Administration pursuing such a dangerous policy of gunboat diplomacy, with the Begin regime entrenching its antagonism to its neighbours, with the Mubarak Government under extreme internal and external pressure, with such volatility in the Middle East region, how dare this Government gamble lives of young Australians by this. commitment to send forces into the Sinai! Therefore I believe that we should oppose this move with everything we have.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)-,- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (9.0)-We are indebted to the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) for the advice that the socialist Left is a cancer eating at the heart of the Australian Labor Party. This could not be better illustrated than by the debate on this matter in this House and outside. A desperate variety of arguments were advanced by ALP spokesmen. Some were absurd, some were inconsistent and all were weak. As one after the other was exposed another was put up. All the various ALP spokesmen appear to have in common is hostility to Egypt, Israel and the United States and the fact that they are apologists for the Palestine Liberation Organisation including its terrorists.
The main argument advanced repeatedly by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) was that the peacekeeping force would be acceptable to the Labor Party if it were under United Nations auspices. The honourable member for Wills repeated that statement in his speech. Other honourable members have said it. Today, however, the honourable member for Cunningham

(Mr West) did not bother to refer to it, nor did the honourable member for La Trobe (Mr Milton). It is clear that they are not interested in having a force under the United Nations auspices. The honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) stated to the defence conference in Canberra in July that his party was even reluctant to support a United Nations force. Nevertheless, Labor Party spokesmen have adopted the line of argument that they will accept a United Nations force. They adopt that line because they know it is impossible. There cannot be a United Nations force. From day one of the Camp David Accords the Soviet Union's veto-the honourable member for Wills stated that this was a tragedy but a fact-made a United Nations force impossible. There has never been a possibility of it. Labor Party spokesmen know that but they think that their total opposition to peace in the Middle East can be given a respectable front by saying that a peacekeeping force must be under United Nations auspices. That is their principal argument. It is completely hypocritical.
The Leader of the Opposition, the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley) and the honourable member for Wills have advanced the argument that our commitment means that we are handing over decision making to foreign governments. Of course, they are aware, I assume, that we are talking about a multinational force. We are saying that we will not be in it unless other nations are in it. That is what a multinational force is about. Labor Party spokesmen, in their desperation, distort that commitment to having a multinational force into the idea that we are leaving the decision to other people. That is the level of argument of the Leader of the Opposition and his supporters.
The third argument used by the Leader of the Opposition is that the polls are against Australian participation in' the peacekeeping force. Of course, the polls that have been taken to this time are against it. As the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) said, it is like asking people whether they are in favour of increased taxation. Of course they will say no. When the issues and the importance of this historic step are explained there is no doubt in my mind that the polls will change. The Leader of the Opposition relies on polIs. This is a matter to be treated fairly lightly. I believe that the honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter) made the best comment on the matter when he interjected to the Leader of the Opposition that if he believes in polls he should resign because the polls show that the honourable member for Wills should be the Leader of the party rather than the Leader of the Opposition.

2756 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

It is not quite so surprising that the honourable member for Wills, in his statement last week, also relied on the polls. He made the ridiculous statement that he could not support the force in view of the polls. It is sad but it appears to be the case that the political ambition of the honourable member for Wills is forcing him to abandon many years of admirable protestation in favour of Israel. We hope that he will participate in the debate tonight. We know he is on the list of sneakers. We are waiting to hear what he has to say. All we have heard is his brief statement last week. We hope that he will come into the chamber and expand on that statement. He must state that there has to be a peacekeeping force. He must state that we will not allow our decisions to be subject to the Soviet Union's veto. He must state in the interests of Middle East peace that Australia should contribute to that force. If he does not say that his years of protestation in support of Israel are empty hypocritical rhethoric and an abandonment of friends, principles and any possibility of community leadership.

Let us turn to some of the other arguments used by the Leader of the Opposition. He said that the Government of Israel is not a fit government to deal with. He was not refering to the actions of the Soviet Union in Afghanistan or those of its client, Vietnam, in Kampuchea. He. has not referred to Dr Castro or Colonel Gaddafi with their troops all over Africa. He said that the Government of Israel is the greatest threat to peace in the world today. I was interested to hear the honourable member for Cunningham add a codicil to that statement. He said that he did not agree with it. He said that the greatest threat to peace in the world today is the United States of America.

Mr West-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point

of order.

.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)- If the honourable member for Cunningham thinks that he has been misrepresented he can bring up the matter at a later time.

Mr COLEMAN-The Israeli Government is prepared to return territory to Egypt which is the rightful owner of the territory. It is prepared to give up oil wells, air fields and towns. It is the first government to make peace on this scale. Yet the Leader of the Opposition says that it is not a fit government to deal with. He also referred, as did the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren), to the Vietnam analogy. There is no similarity with the Vietnam situation. Australia is not being asked to take sides or to fight in a war. It is being invited to joint in a peacekeeping exercise. It is being invited by both parties who were once

engaged in a bitter conflict and are now at peace. Nothing could be less like Vietnam. The Socialist President of France realises this. The Foreign Minister of France, Mr Cheysson, said that if we are not interested in peace in the Middle East we must keep up this era of 'blah, blah' and do something about it. That is good advice to the Leader of the Opposition.
He also said that the whole thing is a farce because this step towards a Middle East settlement and peace does not solve the Palestinian question. That is so. It is something that we on this side of the House are anxious to see advanced. At the very time that the Leader of the Opposition was complaining about this, a meeting was being held in Tel-Aviv on the Palestinian autonomy question. The Leader of the Opposition is asking us to reject the possible in favour of the impossible-a total settlement here and now. What we have now is the possibility of the first big step, the settling of the Sinai question. When that is settled we can move on to the Palestinian autonomy question. This Government is certainly committed to that.
Another of the ridiculous arguments in the dozen or so strange arguments advanced by the Leader of the Opposition is that the matter is outside our area of interest. Ninety per cent of our imported oil comes from that area. It is vital to the free world, especially Japan. But the Leader of the Opposition believes that peace in this area is outside our interests. I have heard about provincial politicians but that approach is the most extraordinary of all.
The honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison) advanced yet another argument. It was inconsistent with the commitment to a peacekeeping force under the United Nations, but that does not matter. He said that there is no need for a force at all as the two countries are making peace. One minute the Labor Party says that it will support a United Nations force if that is possible, which it is not, and the next minute it says that we do not need a force. As the honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) pointed out, Israel and Egypt insist on this force. If there is no peacekeeping force there will.be no withdrawal.
;So much for the arguments of the Leader of the Opposition. Let us look at those of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen). He thought up another one. He suggested that our force wil1 be part of a rapid deployment force. It is one of the conditions of our commitment that our component be not part of any rapid deployment force and that no other component be part of a rapid deployment force. Apart from that, as the honourable member for La Trobe conceded, a

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2757

rapid deployment force involves divisions, squadrons and aircraft carriers. We are talking about sending 200 or 300 men in an air transport unit with helicopters and some fixed wing aircraft. It has no possible similarity or connection with a rapid deployment force.
The Deputy Leader of the Opposition thought up another unique argument. He thought up the idea that there was something illegal about the whole thing because the multinational force is part of an ancillary document and not part of the basic Camp David Accords. He said that therefore it was illegal. We are talking about the future of peace in the world. We are talking about Israel's handing back a large slice of territory to Egypt. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition talks as though we are considering some sort of suburban conveyance-a pathetic legalism.
Then, to find something else, he suddenly discovered the Saudi Arabian proposals. Speaking on behalf of the Labor Party he said: 'We fully support the Saudi Arabian proposals'. I am indebted to the honourable member for La Trobe for reading the proposals of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition into the record tonight, including the idea of a Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital. That is his suggestion as to where we should go now. At the moment we have the possibility of getting stage one of peace in the Sinai but the Deputy Leader of the Opposition jumps straight into the Saudi Arabian proposals including the idea of a Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital. That is the absurdity of these arguments. I have not mentioned one other argument put forward earlier by the honourable member for Corio who said that we do not have enough troops and that we could not be part of a multinational force. I mention that only to round off the dozen or so weak, inconsistent arguments. Of course the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) dealt with that in the chamber in the absence of the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen).
Why do we have these dozen or so weak and inconsistent arguments? Obviously we have them because of the influence of the socialist Left in the Labor Party. Of course we saw that before the visit of the leader of the Opposition to Mr Yasser Arafat. At least the honourable member for Wills called Yasser Arafat a murderer in an interview in Australia-Israel Review. He was not prepared to shake hands with Yasser Arafat but of course his leader was. He is not the only one. I think the hon.ourable member for Scullin (Dr Jenkins) and the honourable. member for Melbourne (Mr Innes), along with Senator Primmer, called for briefings and orientation on the arch transnational terrorist, Dr George Habash, in Beirut. It is

that line of thought that we heard tonight in the speech of the honourable member for La Trobe and in the speech of the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) before dinner. It culminated in the incredible statement by the Leader of the Opposition that the Government of Israel is the greatest threat to peace in the world today.
Along with all that Palestine Liberation Organisation theme goes an ingrained antiAmericanism, and the master of that is the Deputy Leader of the Opposition. That should be noted. Whenever the Deputy Leader of the Opposition is asked about the matter he says that he is a great pro-American; he supports America. But on any particular policy which gives flesh to supporting America, whether it be the B52 agreement, the Moscow Olympics boycott, or bases in the Indian Ocean or EI Salvador, and now the Sinai, on any particular American policy whether from a Democratic government or a Republican government in the United States, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition articulates an opposition to it. That is his idea of what being pro-American is. But of course it is this PLO sentiment and the anti-American sentiment which weaves together this strange collection of arguments that the Opposition has advanced in this debate.
This is an historic time and Australia is contributing to this historic step. We are contributing to a force which will be limited in size and which will be limited in duration. It will not be part of a rapid deployment force and the commander will be under instructions not to comply with any orders which go outside the terms of the mission. Australia will contribute to this. It will not have its foreign policy subject to a Union of Soviet Socialist Republics veto or subject to the socialist Left. This peacekeeping force will join a long line of Australian peacekeeping forces beginning with that in Indonesia in 1949 and extending to those in Kashmir, Cyprus, Rhodesia-Zimbabwe, Vanuatu and various parts of the Middle East. They have contributed to world peace and they have brought honour to Australia. This peacekeeping force will do the same and I welcome the Prime Minister's statement.
Mr WEST (Cunningham)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)- Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr WEST-Yes. I was misrepresented during the speech of the honourable member for Wentworth (Mr Coleman). The honourable member said that I had said this afternoon that the United States foreign policy was the greatest threat to

2758 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

world peace. This was a misrepresentation because-
Mr Carlton-You said it yesterday.
Mr WEST-No, what I said was that I had a slight disagreement with the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) when he said that the Begin Government was the greatest threat to world peace. I said that the United States was the greatest threat to world peace, closely followed by the Soviet Union and that the Begin Government ran a close third.
Mr HAWKE (Wills) (9.16)-Mr Deputy Speaker, so many people have expressed an interest in what I have to say on this subject that I trust that if I cannot get it all said in 15 minutes I will be granted an extension of time. I deeply regret that what is one of the most important issues to be discussed since I have been a member of this House has been debased by the unprincipled political opportunism most glaringly exemplified by the behaviour of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) this morning. Honourable members will recall that at the end of the Prime Minister's speech last Thursday he said:
I appeal to members of the Opposition not to seek to divide Australia on this issue.
He and his supporters have blatantly sought to use the issue to divide the Opposition and, in particular in that process, to question my integrity as a supporter of Israel. Those who have asked for non-divisiveness have done their best to create it. Until this morning, the more objectionable comment had come from the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton) who in his offering chose to refer to me as 'so-called friend of Israel'. Whatever was said by the honourable member for Higgins or any other honourable member opposite pales into insignificance beside the deliberate, calculated and gratuitous statement of the Prime Minister this morning that:
He:
That is, the member for Wills-
has now embarked on the greatest betrayal of the only thing which he ever had a really sincere belief in in his whole life, and that is, in respect of the state ofIsrael.
That is politics at its lowest level. The Prime Minister has used an issue of the highest moment to play the lowest political game. Where the high road of principle is open to him, this man seems inevitably driven by some perverse internal gyrocompass to dive unerringly not simply for the low road but for the gutter. The Prime Minister has done an immeasurable disservice to the cause he would profess to champion and to the possibility of understanding in the community on this issue

by the miserable tactic he so enthusiastically embraced this morning in this place.
I have never shrunk from standing up in this country and, as the Minister for Foreign AffaJrs (Mr Street) can testify and has testified tonight, in international forums for the rights of Israel, for its right to exist in peace behind secure and recognised boundaries. I would rather it had not been necessary to say this but that unwavering support, as a matter of record, has been at times-and has wiIIingly been I emphasise-at considerable cost to the comfort of me, my wife, my children and my position within my party. That has never caused nor wiII it cause me to deviate from my total commitment to the rights of Israel.
Let us examine the facts as they are before this House. Let me, on that basis, state what my position is and in so doing expose not only the error but also the absolute hypocrisy of these innuendoes that have been directed against me. As the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) has said; I seconded in the Caucus of our party the resolution carried unanimously on this matter in these terms:
That it opposes Australian participation in any multinational peace-keeping force in the Sinai not under UN. auspices.
It is perfectly clear to me that the Caucus is on this issue a microcosm of the Australian community which has, by a very clear majority in the polls, expressed its opposition to Australian participation in a non-United Nations peacekeeping force. I cannot bring myself to disregard that evidence of the polls and what I believe to be at least part of the reason for that expressed majority position. While I reject completely the Vietnam analogy as I will make clear, nevertheless it is the case that Australian involvement in Vietnam was a deeply divisive issue in this country and has, I believe, coloured the attitude of our people to the commitment of Australian troops overseas. To what extent that factor has operated neither I nor anyone else can say. But the fact is that a very clear majority of our fellow Australians are against Australian participation in Sinai. I do not think that that can or should be ignored.
,If I believed that Auitralian participation was absolutely vital to the success of a multinational peacekeeping force we would .be facing a different situation. But that is not the position. Herein lies the total hypocrisy of these gratuitous innuendoes that have been directed against me by the Prime Minister and his cohorts. They have not said, and do not say as at this moment, that Australian participation is essential. The Prime Minister said to this Parliament that whether or not Australian

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2759

troops would be committed would depend upon the decision of Britain and Canada to participate.
If I am in any way to delegate or share my decision-making about what is right for Australia then I would prefer to do that with my fellow Australians rather than with Margaret Thatcher or Pierre Trudeau. If the Prime Minister and the honourable member for Higgins assert that agreement to commit Australian troops to the peacekeeping force is the litmus test by which to judge one's integrity on Israel, where then do they find themselves by their own test? This is what they say to Israel: 'We believe Australian troops should participate in a peacekeeping force. We know that there will be a peacekeeping force but we refuse to make a definite decision to participate. Whether or not we do so will be determined in London and in Ottawa. If they do not, we do not'. By this Government's own test what a fragile and dependent thing is its integrity-the integrity which it so easily calls into question in others. This Government's integrity is the integrity of a surrogate. It says to Israel: 'Agreement to commit troops is the test of integrity towards Israel but if London or Ottawa says no, we say no'. Our integrity is in the hands of others. It will be determined by others. I say to the Prime Minister and to the honourable member for Higgins: 'By your own stated standards you are shameless hypocrites'.
Having said that and having said why I agree with the decision of my Party on this matter I must in conscience say that I cannot and do not associate myself with some of the arguments that have been advanced in support of that position by some of my colleagues. My good friend and colleague the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) put it well when he said:
. . . views held by those on the Government benches are diverse, just as the views held on the Opposition benches are diverse. There are degrees to which people commit themselves on issues of this nature.
I must in conscience state my view. I share the views of my good friend and colleague the honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) who said: 'In putting my views I do not, in conscience, seek to give any comfort to my party's opponents'. In the first place I reject completely the analogy that some people have sought to draw between Australia's involvement in the war in Vietnam and the proposed participation in the multinational peacekeeping force in Sinai. Neither the operation itself nor the process of invitation in the latter case is sensibly comparable to the former. In the case of Vietnam it was active participation in war on one side against the other. In this case it is participation in the processes of peace at the explicit request of both parties to

those processes of peace. In the case of Vietnam our involvement was surreptitiously,concocted on the basis of an alleged autonomous invitation from the Government of South Vietnam which, in fact, did not exist. In this case the establishment of the multinational peacekeeping force emerges explicitly and openly from an exchange of letters associated with and of the same date as the treaty of peace between the State of Israel and the Arab Republic of Egypt-letters between the leaders of Egypt, Israel and the President of the United States of America. This multinational peacekeeping force was recognised" in those letters as the second best alternative to a peacekeeping force under the auspices of the United Nations. That letter of 26 March 1979 from the then President of the United States of America, copies of which were sent to the Prime Minister of Israel and the President of Egypt, stated in its final paragraph:
The United States believes the Treaty provision for permanent stationing of United Nations personnel in the designated limited force zone can and should be implemented by the United Nations Security Council. The United States will exert its utmost efforts to obtain the requisite action by the Security Council.
The letter states further:
If the Security Council fails to establish and maintain the arrangements called for in the Treaty, the President will be prepared to take those steps necessary to ensure the establishment and maintenance of an acceptable alternative multinational force.
It is a fact that the Soviet Union would have exercised its veto right in the Security Council. I certainly believe-it can be argued with merit-that action should have been taken to make this a matter of record. So the distinction between Vietnam and this situation is clear. I am in the fortunate position, as one who opposed the Vietnam commitment from the outset, of having spoken much earlier of the contrast that can be made between Vietnam and Sinai. Speaking in Sydney on 20 April 1975 in the Sydney Opera House on the occasion of the twenty-seventh anniversary of Israel's independence I had this to say:
No country, any more than any individual, is incapable of error. This is true of the United States. I happen to believe, and have believed from the outset, that the military intervention in that country and subsequently our own in South East Asia was wrong. We had no moral commitment to the succession of corrupt and totally unrepresentative regimes that were involved, nor could the self-interest of the United States or Australia be seen to be identified with keeping those regimes or their ilk in power. To say this is not to welcome the awful bloodiness and misery represented in the inevitable collapse we are now witnessing of those US. policies and commitments in that area. Nevertheless, those of us who believe they were wrong should not refrain from expressing that view because of some fear that such criticism will drive the United States into a new isolationism which would imperil the viability of Israel.
I also said this about this important distinction:

2760 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

There is all the difference in the world between, on the one hand, those rotten regimes of Indo-China whose leaders, having had others to do their dying for t'em, now lIee with the wealth they have raped and diverted from others into a luxurious exile, and, on the other hand, Israel, the only parliamentary democracy amoI)gst the disputants in the Middle-East. It is a difference, I repeat, which will continue to be perceived. We who are friends of Israel best assist her by emphasising that difference and not, as I fear there is a tendency to do in some quarters, by lamenting the collapse of US. policies in Indo-China and equating in any way at all the interests of America in that area with her entirely correct commitment to the integrity of Israel.
The objectionable nature of the analogy was, as perhaps is to be expected, taken to its most nauseating extreme by one Hartley in his 3CR program on 30 May where he compared President Sadat with the notorious Air Vice-Marshal Ky of South Vietnam. This is the same Hartley who, in today's Sydney Morning Herald, referred to Egypt as 'the regime whose legitimacy is under challenge', which I presume is his touching euphemism for the bullets of the fanatics. I must say to this House that I cannot and do not accept the assertion that the Begin Government is the greatest threat that the world has to international peace. It is fair enough to be critical of many of Mr Begin's decisions and attitudes. It is fair enough to make that criticism, as I did directly when I met with him on three separate occasions in Israel. Indeed, it would come as no surprise to anyone in this chamber, or I guess to Mr Begin, to know that if I had been in Israel voting earlier this year I would not have voted for him. But the point is th,at I would have had a vote. It is the only democracy in the Middle East, as the Leader of the Opposition asserted.
The second point I wish to make is that the majority of Israeli voters are represented by the coalition government of which Mr Begin is now the Prime Minister. His legitimacy was under challenge by the ballot, not by the bullet. But having said that it is fair enough to make the criticisms of Mr Begin, as I have done directly to his face, I believe that it would require a new political lexicon if we are, in fact, to say that he is a greater threat to the peace of this world than are the Soviets and the Gaddafis and several others that one could name. (Extension of time granted). I thank the House for the extension of time. I am disturbed by the tendency of some speakers to assume that history starts at some particular point which is convenient for their purposes. The history which is relevant to this current debate before the House did not start with the bombing of Beirut on 17 July, as deplorable as the loss of innocent civilian life was in that raid. It did not start then any more than it did with the consistent shelling of the Galilean panhandle in the preceding days by Palestine Liberation Organisation forces in

Lebanon using katyusha rockets and new Soviet 130 millimetre cannons which produced dead and wounded in the hospitals of Kiryat Shmona and Nahariya. No one can, with honesty or precision, put a date upon the beginning of all. the passions and hatreds which have gone to make up what has been the sorry state of war and conflict between the Arabs and Israelis since 1948. One of the few absolutely certain things we cim say is that in
November 1977 one courageous man took an initiative to which the Begin Government responded and from that act of courage by the late President Sadat emerged the recognition by the largest Arab state, Egypt, of what had been consistently denied-that is, the right of the state of Israel to exist behind secure ane! recognised borders.. From that courageolls act by the late President Sadat emerged the Camp David Accords and the processes of peace under those Accords to which I have referred.

The Camp David processes have enormOus achievements on the board already. The two major antagonists are at peace which is reflected
in positive relations between Egypt and Israel as well as in the absence ofwar between them.l believe that more can be achieved through these processes. One has only to refer to today's Australian newspaper. It states:

Tel Aviv, Wednesday

The Egyptian Foreign Minister, Mr Ali, speaking at the end

of two days of talks in Israel, said both countries wanted to

achieve full autonomy for the Palestinians in the West Bank

and Gaza.

.

This, he said at a joint Press conference with the Israeli Defence Minister, Mr Sharon, was the cornerstone for a peace
process encompassing the entire region.

Mr Sharon said Mr Ali's visit was another step on the road to overall and lasting Middle East peace.

A meeting at ministerial level between Egypt, Israel and the

United States had been arranged for next Wednesday in Cairo

to discuss autonomy for Palestinians in the West Bank and

Gaza.

.

So one must say on the evidence that not only has there been a great achievement already under the Camp David processes but also more is already being chalked up. I believe that more can be done. I know from discussions that I was fortunate eI).ough to have in March of last year with then Vice President Mubarak of President Mubarak's total commitment to peace and to the Camp David processes. Having had the good fortune on two separate occa.sions to have long discussions with the Crown Prince in Jordan, I know that Jor~ dan also desires peace in the region. I certainly know how passionately the Israelis wish to live in peace in theirarea. I said in that same address-in 1975 in Sydney:

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2761

It is legitimate to be working and arguing for the return of territories by Israel.
It is certainly legitimate to be concerned about the rights of the Palestinians and their desire for a homeland. In talking about this we should remember that between 1948 and 1967 when the West Bank and Gaza were under the control of nonIsraeli states 400,000 Arabs left that area because, at that time, there was no commitment on the part of the relevant Arab states to create a state of Palestine. But we have to remember the rights of those Palestinians and we have to remember what is still the stated position of spokesmen for the PLO. I refer to the statement on 30 July this year in the West German magazine Stern by Kaddoumi, who is a prominent political spokesman for the PLO. He said:
We shall never allow Israel to live in peace, we shall never allow it total security. Every Israeli will feel that behind every wall there might be a guerilla aiming at me.
Just as the late President Sadat changed his position, and changed his position dramatically, about the rights of Israelis to exist, so must the PLO recognise Israel's right to exist. At the point that the PLO recognises the right of Israel to exist then we all must impose the utmost pressure upon Israel to negotiate with the PLO. The essence of the problem in the Middle East is to get those two things happening together-to get the PLO to recognise the right of Israel to exist and to get Israel then to ensure that it will negotiate with the PLO.
The area of which we speak is truly significant for the future peace of the whole world. I want it known that I have not voted and will not vote against the Camp David processes. I wish those engaged in the peacekeeping part of those processes well. I trust that those processes will, together with the other necessary developments to which I have referred, lead in the reasonably near future to a full and durable peace where the rights of Israel and of the Palestinian people are honourably secured.
Mr BIRNEY (Phillip) (9.37)-The speech that I have just heard Hom the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) can only be regarded as the greatest sell out of Israel and the great Israeli people. The honourable member for Wills shed a tear at the table and then he shed a tear for the people who will die in the Middle East because of the actions of the Palestine Liberation Organisation. He believes, as I do, in the existence of Israel as a full and independent state. But that existence surely must relate to and must rely on the success of this peacekeeping force. The success of the peacekeeping force is critical to the survival of the independent state of Israel.

From the outset it should be made perfectly clear to the House and to the Australian nation what is the real underlying difference between the Government's stance in conditionally committing an Australian force to the Sinai and that of the Opposition. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) has expressed the view that the most extraordinary aspect of the statement by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is that the final decision about Australia's commitment of personnel and equipment rests in the hands of others-Britain and Canada-and not Australia. Of course, recent reported commitments indicate that this is not now the case. In stark contrast, the curious and sinister part of the Opposition's policy is utterly and completely dependent on the wishes of the Russians. Put simply, if the Russians agreed not to veto a United Nations peacekeeping force then the Opposition would be all in favour of it.
Mr Barry Jones-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. I find that last suggestion-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian Robinson)-Order!
Mr Barry Jones-I am raising a point of order.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member will please state his point of order.
Mr Barry Jones-I find that statement utterly outrageous.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
Mr Barry Jones~1 demand that it be withdrawn.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no point of order. The honourable member will resume his seat.
Mr Barry Jones-Ask him to withdraw. It is absolutely outrageous. You tell him to withdraw.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The House will come to order. The honOl.!rable member did not state a point of order.
Mr Barry Jones-I demanded a withdrawal.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-If the honourable member wishes to state a point of order he may proceed with the point of order. If he does not state a point of order there is no point of order.
Mr Barry Jones-The point of order is that the honourable member reflected gravely on me and other members of the Opposition by stating that our foreign policy was determined by the Russians. I demand that that be withdrawn.
Mr Kent-I raise a point of order.

2762 REPRESENTATIYES 29 October 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- The House will come to order. The honourable member for Hotham will resume his seat. I remind honourable gentlemen that the matter before the House is one which, of necessity, must be contentious and challenging to personal views and consciences. I suggest that honourable members will best advantage themselves and this House if they exercise all the restraint they can muster. The honourable member for Lalor had taken a point of order on the basis that there had been a reflection made against him in the course of the speech of the honourable member for Phillip. I suggest to the honourable member for Phillip that if he has no good reason for insisting on the reflection, which would invite the Chair to rule on the matter, he might withdraw in the interests of the position at it presently stands.
Mr BIRNEY-Mr Deputy Speaker, with great respect I repeat what I said. I am repeating it only so that you can properly adjudicate on the statement. I said that in stark contrast the curious and sinister part of the Opposition's policy on sending a peacekeeping force to the Sinai is utterly and completely dependent on the wishes of the Russians in relation to whether--
Honourable members interjecting-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Phillip will resume his seat. Honourable members will be seated. The point put by the honourable member for Phillip is certainly challenging and contentious. It is essentially a debating point, but the sinister connotation attritubes to the Opposition spokesman a questionable motivation. I suggest to the honourable member for Phillip that he could well put his point in more restrained terms.
Mr Armitage-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. The honourable member's remark is a reflection upon every member of the Opposition. Mr Speaker has ruled on many occasions that reflections of that nature on a party-it does not have to be a reflection on an individual; it can be a reflection on all members of the party concerned-should be withdrawn. That has been a ruling of Mr Speaker. I suggest, in this instance, that it should be withdrawn as it is of precisely the same nature as remarks'upon which Mr Speaker has ruled.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The House is very much alert to the fact that in very recent times there has been established a very substantial difference of view as to what constitutes a reflection. Rulings were made from the chair this morning that did not altogether satisfy the House, regardless of where the merits might lie. It is the

Chair's view that the case being put forward by the honourable member for Phillip does not necessarily invite the extremity of language used by him. I am not of the view that the reflection is, of necessity, one which would be withdrawn but must, by its very nature, be somewhat offensive. I again appeal to the honourable member for Phillip to exercise greater restraint in his language without diminishing the point he wishes to put.
Mr BIRNEY-In the opinion of the Opposition, its decision on this vital issue regarding the Sinai depends on two factors: Firstly, the way in which Russia is prepared to act and, secondly, the way in which the opinion poll pendulum is swinging at any given time. The Leader of the Opposition has stated quite unequivocally that the Australian Labor Party is opposed to the commitment of Australian troops overseas in any multinational military force unless it has United Nations sponsorship. When he uttered those words in this chamber he knew full well that that was an impossibility as Russia had already stated its position regarding a veto. The Leader of the Opposition may hoodwink some of the people some of the time but not all of the people all of the time. As matters now stand, according to all reports we now have a multinational military force ready, willing and able to take part in the peacekeeping process. I believe all Australians will welcome the commitment of Britain, France, Italy, New Zealand and the Netherlands to the Sinai force. This stance by the Opposition then is surely one of disreputable politicking-using this issue for political gain. Members of the Opposition are prepared to jump whichever way the gallup needle points.
The real interest of Australia, and indeed of the rest of the world, is that peace be kept in the Middle East. A blow-up in this highly sensitive area could cause a concatenation that would reverberate throughout the world bringing Australia into it whether it liked it or not. That the Opposition is prepared to throw that interest aside in an endeavour to divide the nation and use this debate as a vote catching exercise with ever eager and avaricious eyes on opinion polls is to be deplored. I am firmly of the be1iefthat the majority of those people who voted against an Australian commitment in a recent gallup poll were never fully appraised of all the relevant facts. The question that was put was simply whether Australia should send a peacekeeping force to the Sinai. I believe that if all the facts had been made known at the time of the poll the results could easily have been different. I believe that most Australians at the time of the announcement believed that we were sending troops armed to the teeth,

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2763

which could eventually lead them into another Vietnam situation. Nothing could be further from the truth. The Vietnam experience is a red herring used as a ploy to engender anger and dismay in the minds of the Australian people.
I ask all those who had even the slightest reservations about an Australian commitment to think again and to bear in mind the following facts: Firstly, Egypt and Israel, after being at one another's throats for nearly 30 years are now at peace; secondly, both have asked for an Australian commitment to oversee, monitor and observe the withdrawal from the Sinai; thirdly, what is envisaged to help in its monitoring and observation is only the supply of air transport units equipped with helicopters and fixed wing aircraft and some 200 to 300 personnel; fourthly, there is no open-ended commitment; fifthly-this is not generally understood-from July 1976 to October 1979 Australia was involved in the Sinai by the provision of four helicopters, two Royal Australian Navy and 44 Royal Australian Air Force personnel for the second United Nations emergency force; and, sixthly, should any hostilities occur the force would be withdrawn immediately.
I deplore and deprecate the Leader of Opposition's vile and miserable attack on Mr Begin when he said of him that he posed the greatest threat to international peace that the world has seen. I am sure that all men of peace and goodwill will join me in those sentiments. If there has been no betrayal of Israel by the honourable member for Wills-actions will always speak louder than words-we ask him to join us, to join the Government in supporting this force and so supporting the state of Israel. The Leader of the Opposition directed the major part of his speech to a fierce and unfounded broadside on Mr Begin, this man of peace, this hero in a world of many cowards. By his statements the Leader of the Opposition obviously regards Mr Begin as some latter-day Middle East Hitler intent on military escapades as if he were some unprincipled war-mong,;:r. It is history now that Mr Begin and the late President Sadat brought that peace process into existence. Indeed, were they not both given the Nobel Prize for Peace?
This valuable and strategic territory-the Sinai-contains two airfields and is a region that supplied Israel with some 40 per cent of its oil. Previously, before Egypt could mount an attack on Israel it had to cross the Suez Canal and fight its way across the Sinai Desert giving Israel the necessary breathing space to regroup. This now will be no more. Is this not in itself the greatest testimonial to the bona fides of the Begin Government in its search for peace? Is this the action of

someone described by the Leader of the Opposition, as I said earlier, as the greatest threat to international peace? The Leader of the Opposition said th\lt the Accords had been discredited internationally. This is a shocking, discreditable misstatement of the facts. The same statements are being put abroad by those who have a vested interest in tearing the Camp David Accords to bits, their ultimate aim being to thwart international recognition for without international recognition both Egypt and Israel would be held up by jealous Arab nations to further hatred, ridicule and contempt.
Let us never forget that it is not so long ago that the Leader of the Opposition was shaking hands with Arafat, that butcher of humanity-the selfsame hands that have been eternally stained with the blood of so many innocents. The rantings and ravings of the Leader of the Opposition in this place against Mr Begin, his Government and the Israeli people, appear to have been ghosted by Arafat's much-publicised view of Israel and unmasks at long last his real attitude. (Extension of time granted). I thank the House. Yes, let this peace process continue. Let us not just pay lip service to it. Let us take our place amongst the great nations of the world and play our part, however minute. I say that if the honourable member for Wills allowed Israel's call in its moment of need to go unheeded and allowed it to be and to remain a voice crying in the wilderness, as he is one who in the past has profusely and profoundly professed support for that state, he would be guilty of an act of betrayal. In conclusion I say: God bless the state of Israel and all its brave and courageous people. Mayall those efforts to bring peace and stability to the Middle East be crowned with the success so richly deserved.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (9.55)---:-1 say to the honourable member for Phillip (Mr Birney) that not only do the Israelis believe in God but also they believe in helping themselves and protecting themselves. One of the sad things about this debate as it has gone on-I have listened to every word-is that the quality of the debate has demeaned many Government spokesmen in this institution. Until last Thursday one of the few things that this House, I thjnk, could say with perhaps some feeling of pride was that successive Australian governments had tended to have a uniform approach to the problemsof the Middle East. It is true to say that all governments-Labor or Liberal-have recognised the right of the state of Israel to exist. When honourable gentlemen opposite want to cast slurs on my own party I remind them that it was a leader of this party, Dr Evatt, and the role that he played in the United

2764 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

Nations, that helped to give birth to the state of Israel. Over a period both Labor and Liberal Country Party governments declared their willingness to recognise a Palestinian state alongside Israel as long as this state emerged as a result of negotiations between parties to the conflict. There was agreement amongst all parties that whatever the entity that controlled the new Palestinian state it must be prepared to live in peace with Israel and abjure the threat of the use offorce. We were agreed as a parliament and as a nation.
Last week that consensus was broken. How was it broken? There was a party meeting at 1o'clock. We are aware of the considerable divisions that existed within the Government ranks on this issue. We are aware of that because we have read of the quality of the debate that took place within the Liberal party room. Let me say this: The quality of that debate seems to me to have been of a far higher standard than we have heard in this House tonight. There was legitimate and proper division and argument within the Liberal Party on this matter just as there was legitimate and proper argument within the Australian Labor Party because that is how the democratic process works. At 1 o'clock last Thursday the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) announced to his party the decision that had been made by the Government. At 3 o'clock-some two hours later-the Opposition was informed. Within a matter of an hour the House was informed.
Does anybody in Australia seriously believe that the Government is concerned to produce a bipartisan approach, to maintain a uniformity of approach, towards the problems of the Middle East about which this Parliament and the people of Australia were, until last week, in fundamental agreement? Is it not the action of a Prime Minister who is concerned to produce consensus that he informs the Leader of the Opposition? He should contact him some time before to say: 'Look, this is the dimension of the problem. These are the pressures that are upon us. These are the requests we have received from Washington. These are the approaches we have received from Egypt and Israel. What would be the view of the Opposition?'. We had not a bit of this. What we had was the Parliament being treated to the same kind of treatment as members of the Prime Minister's own party, whatever view they had. That, I believe, having regard to the tradition of this Parliament, was a bad thing.
The Prime Minister walked into the Parliament today and in response to a question which was unrelated -to the issue of Israel chose to read a prepared script of abuse against the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke). That procedure

has been followed in the course of this debate tonight. I have stood on many platforms with the honourable member for Wills. I have stood on many platforms with him on this very issue. I would have thought that in the once great Liberal Party there could have at least been the view that not all the talent exists on the Government side of the House. There could at least have been the generosity of spirit to concede that no Australian has done more to stand by the Jewish people in Australia and by the state of Israel in the inter- . national arena than the honourable member for Wills. Is that disputed or denied? What took place in this Parliament today did this Parliament no credit, did this Government no credit and showed the Prime Minister for the mean, despicable character that he is.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order!
Mr HOLDING-On an issue-let me repeat it-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member is invited to withdraw that reflection.
Mr HOLDING-Is it unparliamentary?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The term is unparliamentary.
Mr HOLDING-All right. As it is unparliamentary I will withdraw it. I just say that if the people of Australia and, above all, those Australian citizens who have a fundamental commitment to the State of Israel heard what took place today they would know what this Prime Minister is about. This is not an issue that ought to be debated in this House in terms of the nonsensical rhetoric and the dishonesty that has been hurled across this chamber tonight. I say this for the Prime Minister: At least he is a cautious Prime Minister. Before I commenced my speech I was handed a document by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition which was able to confirm that 24 hours before the Prime Minister made his Sinai statement last week the Australian embassy in Beirut was evacuated for fear of reprisals, and that all other Australian missions in the Middle East had been alerted to the danger of possible repri~alsagainst them following the Government's decision. That action was prudent and cautious but it indicates that this Government recognises, as it ought, that there is grave consternation within the Arab world about the merits of this decision. Without any attempt to produce a bipartisan position, without any attempt to minimise the potential for division within this House and without any concern for the opinion polls that reflected the attitude of the Australian people,

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2765

who are overwhelmingly against the Government's policy, we have had an exercise in which the differences between the Government and the Opposi~ion have been maximised and characterised in terms of attempts at character assassination of the honourable member for Wills.
What is the difference between the Government and the Opposition? The difference between us is simply that the Australian Labor Party is opposed to any commitment of Australian troops that are not part of a United Nations peacekeeping force. We are told. by Government members opposite-and I accept their view-that they believe that because the Soviet Union would veto this proposal it should not be put. I take a contrary view. I think it is far more important, if we are endeavouring to produce peace in the Middle East, that the proposal should be put. We should engage the Soviets in discussion and, perhaps, confrontation. Out of that a new formula mayor may not emerge. Part of the tragedy is that although the death of Anwar Sadat was mourned in most of the capitals in the Western world, such is the tragedy of Middle Eastern politics that one cannot say, unfortunately, that he was mourned in all the Arab capitals.
One of the problems of this peacekeeping force is the perception of it. It has to be perceived by all nations within .the region, including Egypt and Israel. They both have to concede that this force is United States inspired, equipped and motivated. Part of the problem that this gives Australia and other Arab nations is the present tendency of the United States Government-the Reagan regime-to see every trouble spot and every problem anywhere in the world as being attributable to Soviet meddling at best or to conspiracy at worst. Secretary of State Haig, when he journeyed to the Middle East, failed to get from Egypt, Israel, Jordan and Saudi Arabia a consensus of strategic concern directed at the Soviet Union. The Saudis said that they regarded Israel, not Russia, as their principal enemy. In acquiring airborn radar planes-AWACS-they reserved the right to use those aircraft against Israel. Israel, in its attack upon Iraq's Osirirak reactor, the attack upon Palestine Liberation Organisation headquarters in the heart of Beirut, indicated clearly where it perceived its immediate threats to lie. That perception was not in accord with the attitudes of the United States.
What is sad about the divisiveness of this debate is that to date it has been more significantly based upon the perceptions within this House of the Middle East in terms of the East-West conflict than upon the perceptions, hopes, aspirations and

principles of the people in this trouble-torn region. Unless we are prepared to comprehend those perceptions and to base our policies upon them we may finish up like the British Army in Ireland, satisfying no-one but simply adding one more dimension to the litany of human suffering.
While we are looking at perceptions I wish quickly to deal with the perceptions of the state of Israel. I believe that a great deal of nonsense has been talked about that state in the course of this debate. Israel as a state today is a reflection of the suffering, anguish and victimisation of the Jewish people throughout history. The state of Israel has survived not because of the rhetoric of this House or, indeed, of any Western parliament but in the final analysis because of the determination of the Israeli people that it would survive. That determination has caused Israel to make hard and unpopular decisions. Unlike some of its Arab neighbours, all Israeli governments, irrespective of their political complexions, have known that there was no war that Israel could afford to lose. Israel, on one view, has paid dearly for its peace treaty agreement on the basis of a promise of a now dead leader. It has been prepared to withdraw from the Sinai. In practical terms that has meant a loss of strategic depth. Several crucial assets were lost. Two large, sophisticated and costly airfields were lost and, of course, the process of dismantling Israeli settlements in the northern Sinai has proved to be painful, acrimonious and expensive.
It is not good enough for this House simply to say: 'By the way, we support the creation of a Palestinian state'. If this Government is prepared to commit troops to the Middle East I would like to know what initiatives it is proposing to take to bring about the creation of that state. It is not good enough to talk in terms of generalities. If it is true-I think it is true-that the United States can affect the attitude of the Government of Israel, it is equally true that one of the governments that can affect the attitude of the PLO is the Soviet Union. In my view, if we are to get peace in the Middle East, it can be done only by abandoning some of the prescriptions which have been thrown around this House tonight.
I conclude on a very important point. In defence terms Australia has recently moved to the view that we have regional obligations and regional areas to serve. It is very important, in my view, ina community such as Australia with a great range of ethnic people that when we move on major foreign policy decisions we try to keep our people united. There are clearly different views between members of Australia's Jewish community and members of Australia' Arab community on this point. There comes a time in

2766 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

Australia's history when the most important thing we can say to our United States ally is this: 'If you want us to perform a real role in terms of the Western alliance the best thing we can do is to service our regional obligations and not become in-
volved in overseas missions where we cannot affect the ultimate outcome'.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (10.1 0) -There are some points that the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) raised that I would like to support and others that I found very difficult to take. I agree with him that the level of disagreement between many members of his party and certainly the great bulk of the Government has been exaggerated. I think those differences are more imagined than real and filled more with
rhet.oric than with reality. Unfortunately many members of the Opposition, including the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden), have taken a position which is very different from that expressed by the bulk of Government members and by a small but thinking and feeling group with the Australian Labor Party. I think it important to recognise that when the honourable member for Melbourne Ports sought to minimise the differences between the positions taken by the parties as. a whole-that is, by the Government on the one hand and by the Opposition on the other hand-he glossed over the reality of a major and fundamental difference. That difference is that the Government seeks to assist the new leaders of the state of Egypt in initiating their efforts for peace and assisting the state of Israel to withdraw from the Sinai.

It is interesting to contrast the statements of the Leader of the Opposition in 1978, when he welcomed the Camp Dav.id Accords, with the state-
a ments he is now mil~ing. In 1978 the Leader of the
Opposition took, position which, had it been consistent with that being taken now, would have
required the Opposition to support the sending of a peacekeeping force to the Middle East because it was an inevitable consequence of the Camp David Accords. For the Labor Party to pretend that because there cannot be a United Nations force there should be no force at all is not only to fly in the face of the spirit of what the Leader of the Opposition said in 1978 but also to deny the reality of the Camp David Accords. In 1978 the Leader of the Opposition said:

President Carter's initiative in convening the meeting, and

his political skill and courage in keeping it going, have created

the essential-monientum for the next steps, which may well be

even more difficult. Our hope is that all the parties, and others

who must necessarily become involved now, will maintain the

momentum.

,. ,

.

The one group among all those other parties which is obstructing that momentum is the Australian Labor Party, which by its decision, contrary to the view expressed by the Leader of the Opposition in 1978, is refusing to support the sending of a peacekeeping force to the Sinai. In those days the Leader of the Opposition said:
After Camp David, it is at last possible to believe that progress is also being made in a positive way in this direction . . . We are pledged to do whatever we can towards their achievement-
That is, towards peace in the Middle East. To continue:
In that context, particularly, I am pleased to hear the clear statement of the Prime Minister that the Australian Government 'stands ready to give its support to the terms of any settlement agreed upon between the parties in the Middle East', based on the principles already agreed.
Then, most significantly, the Leader of the Opposition said of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser):
I commend him for that and assure him, this House and the nation that on this great matter genuine concern for the achievement of lasting peace in the Middle East is a matter of bipartisan commitment.
Where is that commitment today from the Labor Party? What has happened to the Leader of the Opposition, who at that stage was stating with clear and unequivocal force his commitment to a peacekeeping force, to the inevitable consequences of the Camp David Accords? This is the same man who, on 22 October this year, said:
We are opposed to the commitment of Australian troops in that region of the world because we agree with the assessment of the Minister for Foreign Affairs; that is, it is well removed from our area of strategic interest.
That is the man who had commitment in 1978. Now he says that the area is removed from our strategic interest. He said:
It means Australia is going to be drawn into another openended military commitment overseas.
That is a man who had commitment himself in 1978. We can ask: Why has that commitment of the Leader of the Opposition changed? Members of the Opposition say that this is because the Labor Party says: 'We support the Camp David Accords and would have nO objection to participating in a United Nations force'. On the one hand,on 22 October the Leader of the Opposition said:
We are opposed to the commitment of Australian troops in that region.
Four days later he said: 'We have no objections to participating in a United Nations force'. Quite frankly, I do not know-I do not believe the Leader of the Opposition knows-what his position is on the question of support for peace in the' Middle E~st because it appears tome from the

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2767

numbers game that we have seen in this House that the Leader of the Opposition is being driven to a position by a requirement to support the extreme Left within the Labor Party. Let us see why a force is required?

Mr Beazley-What about what John Spender

said?

.

Mr BAUME-I heard the interjection about John Spender. I acknowledge the point made by the honourable member for Melbourne Ports that there was a much more intelligent debate within our party room on this than we have heard in this House largely because the level of disagreement within our party room was of an intellectual level rather than at the level of supporting the Palestine Liberation Organisation by continually attacking Israel. It was alleged in this House by the Labor Party that the greatest threat to peace in the world is the government of Mr Begin, a'man who won the Nobel Peace Prize. That is a comment that reflects not on the donors of the Nobel Peace
Prize but on the Australian Labor Party.

Why is this Sinai force needed? It is needed so that Israel will withdraw from the Sinai, the territory that it captured. It is prepared to give it up in the name of peace, provided there is a peacekeeping force there. Is that a disgraceful objective? Is that an objective that the Labor Party does not support? We need a peacekeeping force so that Egypt will get its territory back. It is more to Egypt's benefit than to Israel's that there should be a peacekeeping force in the Sinai so that it can get its territory back. We need to have a peacekeeping force under the Camp David Accords so that the new leaders of the moderate Arab world-that is, in Egypt-will be seen to be supporting the continuing Sadat peace initiative that is abhorred and opposed by the PLO and quaintly opposed by the Australian Labor Party in this House. How disgraceful!

There is one significant sanction that this House should recognise in terms of control over Israeli 'misbehaviour'. We have heard all about the so called wickedness of the Israelis from the Labor Party in this House. If a peacekeeping force goes in there as a condition ofIsrael's withdrawal from the Sinai, the threat of withdrawal of that force would be a very meaningful sanction indeed because it would mean the removal of the condition under which Israel had given back the land which it had captured from Egypt. I cannot stress strongly enough that a refusal to join the many European nations that are now going into this peacekeeping force is in fact a rejection of the new and moderate leaders of Egypt. It is not an attack on Israel. We have heard continually in this

House an asinine concentration on how this peacekeeping force will give Israel some offensive advantage. The reality is that the reason this has become such a matter of immediate urgency and of such significance is the absolute need to indicate to the leaders of Egypt and to the Arab world that Egypt has support and that its peace initiatives must be maintained.
Are we looking at a Labor Party which seriously wants to destroy the capacity of the leaders of Egypt to maintain their peace initiative? That is the inevitable consequence of what it is doing. Is the Labor Party's objection simply that it will not be a United Nations force, or is this a convenient excuse? It is extraordinary that the Labor Party has criticised the Government for saying that its participation is dependent on the support of European countries. The Labor Party's position is that its support for a peacekeeping force is dependent on the support of Russia. It needs Russia not to give a veto. The Labor Party would not put a force in the Middle East unless it had Russian agreement, Russian acceptance. Here we have the Labor Party complaining that we are surrogates, that we are held to the decisions of European nations, when the Labor Party's position is that it is subject to the agree- . ment of Russia.
There are two different views of what is right and wrong in the world on this matter. It seems to me that if members of the Labor Party come into this House and say: 'Provided the Russians let us, we will join a peacekeeping force', that is a most curious line to adopt in such a matter, particularly when the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has particular vested interests in-that region and for many reasons has a determined view that Egypt is adopting policies which do not appeal to Russia. Can one imagine an objective and reasonable view from Russia on this matter? Yet the Labor Party says: 'We will agree only if the Russians agree'. I seek leave to continue my remarks later.
Leave granted; debate adjourned.
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR CONFERENCE
Ministerial Statement
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-For the information of honourable members. I present the text of the International Labour Organisation instrument adopted by the Sixty-sixth Session of the International Labour Conference held in Geneva in June 1980, Recommendation No. 162-Older Workers. I seek leave to make a brief statement regarding this instrument.
Leave granted.

2768 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

National Capital Development Commission

Mr VINER-Honourable members will be interested to learn that the instrument has been referred to the appropriate Commonwealth and State authorities for examination and comment. This procedure accords both with the requirements of the ILO Constitution and with established Australian practice for examining ILO instruments, which are regarded as appropriate for joint action by the Commonwealth and the States. The matters raised in this recommendation are very complex ones, and at this stage are still under consideration by the appropriate authorities. The question of possible future action in relation to the instrument will also continue to be considered by the joint Commonwealth-State Consultative Machinery on ILO Conventions and by the National Labour Consultative Council.
NATIONAL CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
Ministerial Statement
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-Pursuant to section 24 of.the National Capital Development Commission Act 1957, I present the twenty-fourth annual report of the National Capital Development Commission. Pursuant to section 24 of the National Capital Development Commission Act 1957, I present the financial statements of the National Capital Development Commission for the year ended 30 June 1981. I seek leave to make a short statement about progress in the development of our national capital, and in doing so to refer to some of the particular achievements of the Commission in 1980-81.
Leave granted.
Mr HODGMAN-I thank the House. It is worthwhile reminding ourselves that in 1958, when the National Capital Development Commission was established, Canberra consisted of 38,000 people living in scattered communities with few amenities. It was often referred to as 'six suburbs in se'arch of a city', or 'the bush capital'. Today, this country has a national capital of which all Australians can be justifiably proud. This has been due to the Federal Government's continuing commitment to Canberra's development and the unique partnership which exists between government and private enterprise in undertaking the actual development and construction.
The activities of the National Capital Development Commission in co-ordinating planning and development for all the various requirements of the community, government and private

enterprise investment have led to the Commission's Australia-wide and international reputation for excellence and innovation in planning and development. I believe 1980-81 to be yet another year of fine achievement. Two national building projects completed this year by the Commission are particularly worthy of mention. The first is the magnificent National Gallery building on the shore of Lake Burley Griffin, which has created a lot of interest in anticipation of the Gallery opening next year. I draw the attention of the House to the presence in the chamber of the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson), who has been closely connected with this project, as was his predecessor, the Honourable R. J. Ellicott, now Mr Justice Ellicott.
Another project, the National Indoor Sports Stadium, which also provides headquarters for the Australian Institute of Sport, the responsibility of my colleague the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, was designed and constructed within 16 months-an outstanding achievement in anyone's measure. Other major projects completed during the year include the Australian Archives Repository, the Family Court of Australia and Australian Capital Territory Juvenile Court, the Australian Federal Police complex, and the McLachlan Offices, a major office complex for the Public Service Board which was constructed in only two years.
I turn to the future. The Government has allocated approximately $120m to the Commission and other agencies for capital works in Canberra during 1981-82. This commitment, taken with the obvious interest of the private sector in investing in Canberra, as evidenced 'by the Jolimont development proposal I have recently announced, means that Canberra's construction industry, which is a vital part of private enterprise endeavour in the national capital, can look forward with confidence to a continuing program of balanced development in our national capital on behalf of the Australian people. I commend the report to honourable members.
COMMITTEE OF PRIVILEGES
Report
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (10.29)-1 move:
That the House take note of the report of the Committee of Privileges relating to a printed reference in an article in the Sydney Daily Mirror of 2 September.
Mr Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering the report relating to a printed reference and an article in the Sydney Daily Mirror of 2

Committee ofPrivileges

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2769

September, and a report relating to an advertisement in the Melbourne Herald of 16 October. Separate questions will, of course, be put at the conclusion of the debate.
I have moved the motion in the form of only taking note of the reports because, quite obviously, neither the joint parties nor the Labor Caucus have had an opportunity to consider these reports of the Committee of Privileges. There are matters which I think most members of this House would like to have considered and perhaps submitted to the Parliament for consideration. The whole question of privileges and their administration has been of considerable debate in this place. My sympathy is certainly towards having an examination of the matter of privilege in the manner that has been suggested by the Privileges Committee. Yet I feel reluctant to move a motion to that effect without the party rooms having had an opportunity to consider it. Therefore I suggest that we examine, as we can here tonight, the general subject of the two Privileges Committee reports we have received in the last few days, that we take note of the recommendations of the reports, and at an early date move on to deliberate on the suggestion that there be a joint committee to examine the question. There are, of course, issues as to whether or not it should be a joint committee or a committee of this place. The very matter of privilege is one which seems to have some aspects that pertain to both chambers, and other aspects which, more properly, should be dealt with by this chamber on the one hand and by the other place on the other hand. In those circumstances my own inclination is that it would be preferable for us to have some opportunity for consideration of the best way by which we should proceed before a deliberate motion is moved for the constitution of a committee, be it joint or several. I put to the House that we deliberate, consider the reports and take note of them. I believe that the members of the Privileges Committee have undertaken their task with a proper sense of concern. In each instance the reports are such that this House should give its support to them.
Mr Lionel Bowen-Mr Speaker--
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the House was speaking by indulgence to suggest that there be a general debate. He went further and gave some reasons. Although I gave him the indulgence he sought he went beyond that, so I will give the same indulgence to the Deputy Leader of the Opposition.
Mr Lionel Bowen-I just want a small residue of his indulgence.

Mr Sinclair-I began my remarks by moving a motion.
Mr SPEAKER-The question is: 'That the House take note of the report of the Committee of Privileges relating to a printed reference in an article in the Sydney Daily Mirror of 2 September'. After the right honourable gentleman moved accordingly he said: 'Mr Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering the report relating to a printed reference and an article in the Sydney Daily Mirror of 2 September, and a report relating to an advertisement in the Melbourne Herald of 16 October. Separate questions may, of course, be put at the conclusion of the debate'. At that point the right honourable gentleman gave reasons why he was making that suggestion. If the Deputy Leader of the Opposition wishes to talk to the question whether there should be a general debate I will hear him without regarding him as speaking to the motion.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford Smith)-Mr Speaker, that will be most satisfactory. There is much business to be dealt with and I do not want to detain the House. Some of my colleagues are anxious to make a contribution in respect of the detailed matter contained in the reports of the Privileges Committee. I will help the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) by saying that the Opposition has formed a party view on one specific matter. We support the idea of a joint committee or, if that cannot be arranged within a specified time. I think by April next yearcertainly a committee of this House. I know that the honourable gentleman is not aware of that. He referred to it as being a reason why we might have a general debate. We can sharpen up the debate. We do not need to talk about our view on this matter. We have already come to a party decision. It is about time this House had a recommendation from the Committee as to what its privileges should be and how they should be identified and enforced. I indicate to the Government that our party has made a firm decision in that respect. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence.
Mr SPEAKER-Is it the wish of the House to have a geneal debate covering the reports? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed. The question is: 'That the House take note of the report of the Committee of Privileges relating to a printed reference in an article in the Sydney Daily Mirror of 2 September'. I know that the honourable member for Port Adelaide seeks indulgence to raise a point. I will permit him to do so.

2770 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Committee ofPrivileges

Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide)-I was absent overseas at an Inter-Parliamentary Union meeting during the period that the referral took place. I looked at the Hansard record of the debate when I returned. I noticed that my name was listed as being paired for the purposes of the vote. This may in the first place have been unusual because of the type of vote it was. Nonetheless, 1was shown as being paired. There is no indication in the printed report as to whether 1 was here, whether I was paired or whether I abstained. On a question of this nature in which 1 have taken a substantial amount of interest because of the Browne-Fitzpatrick case and because of the calling of Gerry Karidis before the Senate in 1974,1 certainly would have voted against this motion. I cannot have my name included in the vote but I ask you, Mr Speaker, whether the printed report could be altered to show, as the Hansard does, that 1 was, in fact, paired in the Parliament at the time that vote took place.
Mr SPEAKER-I will examine that matter. Pairing is usually done by the Whips. 1 would not want to take any action unilaterally which might undo some arrangement that was made but I will have inquiries made.
Mr YOUNG-As I said, Mr Speaker, the pair appears in Hansard. In the reprinting of that section of Hansard the pairs have been chopped out. The Hansard record shows that six members were paired.
Mr SPEAKER-I can understand the honourable gentleman's point. The Clerk has shown me that page 106 of the report shows the pairs, although page iv does not.
Mr YOUNG-Page 106 is a facsimile of Hansard but the pairs have been chopped out of page iv. I would be much happier if the pairs appeared on page 1 than on page 106. Having read the report I know that many more people will read page 1 than 106 pages.
Mr Donald Cameron-Oh no, Mick.
Mr YOUNG-It is the worst report 1have ever seen.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Fadden can defend his report later. Page iv contains a photocopy of an extract from the Votes and Proceedings. It customarily does not include pairs. Page 106 is a facsimile of Hansard which does include pairs. What would the honourable gentleman like to be done?
Mr YOUNG-I would like the pairs included on page 1. When I investigated some years ago

earlier cases of matters being referred to the Privileges Committee-specifically the BrowneFitzpatrick case-I was very interested to see honourable members of parliament individually voted. Perhaps in the years ahead people will want to know how Mick Young voted on this case. Unfortunately, 1 was not here. 1 would prefer my name to be shown as being paired which would mean that I was absent from the Parliament. 1 did not abstain. I would not have ab-
stained from voting in a case such as this.

Mr SPEAKER-I shall make the appropriate inquiries to see whether there is any good reason why pairs cannot be included on that page.

Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (10.38)-1 wish to speak on most important matters of principle, arising out of
the deliberations of the Privileges Committee relating to the printed reference and article in the Sydney Daily Mirror of 2 September last, which has become known as the Oakes case.

Accepting as 1 do that lawyers have for cen-
turies been scorned and ridiculed for being pedantic and meticulous to the point of virtual absurdity, and noting that it is now almost 20 years since I was admitted to the Bar of the Supreme Court of Tasmania on 19 February 1962, I nevertheless feel that J would be failing in my public responsibilities to both this Parliament and the law if I did not make some very fundamental
points.

1 refer the House to page 57 of the report which

deals with the minutes of proceedings of the Com-

mittee of Privileges for Wednesday, 23 September

last. On that afternoon the minutes disclosed that

the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes)

formally moved a motion in three parts. What

ensued, for the purposes of my remarks, is set out

on pages 57 and 58 of the report, and I seek leave

of the House to have these two pages incorpor-

ated in Hansard.

.

Leave granted.

The document read as follows-

COMMITTEE .oF PRIVILEGES

MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS

Parliament House-Canberra

Wednesday, 23 September 1981

32nd Parliament-Fifth Meeting

Present:

Mr D. M. Cameron (Chairman)

Mr Birney

Mr Jarman

Mr Duffy Mr Hodgm~n Mr Holding MrJacobi

Mr B. O. Jones Mr Millar Mr Porter Mr Scholes

Cqmmittee ofPrivileges

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2771

The Minutes of Proceedings of the meeting held on 21 September 1981 were confirmed.

The Committee deliberated.

Suspension of meeting: At 9.35 a.m. the meeting was suspended.

Resumpti(Jn of meeting: At 3.15 p.m. the meeting was resumed.

Mr Scholes moved-
That: (I) the Committee finds that the printed reference and
the article contained on pages I and 9, respectively, of the Daily Mirror of 2 September 1981 constitute a contempt of the House. of Representatives by the author, editor and publisher; (2) having considered the reference and the article referred to herein, the Committee is of the view that sections of the article and its presentation are irresponsible and reflect no credit on its author, the editor or the publisher, and (3) while finding'a contempt of the House of Representatives has been committed, the Committee is of the .opinion that the matter is not worthy of occupying further time of the House.

Mr Hodgman moved, as an amendment-That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the followingwords:

'Mr Laurie Oakes be given the opportunity to come before this Committee and given every opportunity to be heard on his own behalf.

Debate ensued.

Question-That the amendment be agreed to-put.

The Committee divided (the Chairman, Mr D. M. Cameron, in the Chair)-

Ayes, 7
Mr Birney Mr Duffy
Mr Hodgman MrHolding Mr Jacobi MrJarman Mr Porter

Noes, 2 Mr B. O. Jones MrMillar

And so it was resolved in the affirmative.

Question-That the motion, as amended, be agreed to-put.

The Committee divided (the Chairman, Mr D. M. Cameron, in the Chair)-

Ayes,4 Mr Birney
Mr Hodgman Mr Holding Mr Porter

Noes, 4 Mr Duffy
Mr Jacobi Mr B. O. Jones Mr Millar

The numbers for the 'Ayes' and the 'Noes' being equal, the Chairman gave his casting vote with the 'Noes'.

And so it was negatived.

Mr Porter moved-That Mr Laurie Oakes be given the opportunity to appear before the Committee.

Debate ensued.

Question-put.

The Committee divided (the Chairman, Mr D. M. Cameron, in the Chair)-

Mr HODGMAN-I thank the House. It will be noted that I formally moved an amendment, the effect of which was totally to delete all words

after 'That' in Mr Scholes's motion and to substitute the following:
Mr Laurie Oakes be given the opportunity to come before this Committee and given every opportunity to be heard on his own behalf.
My amendment was carefully drafted and expressly provided that Mr Oakes be given 'every opportunity to be heard on his own behalf'. The words 'heard on his own behalf' are time honoured andhave been known to the law for centuries. The principle, absolutely fundamental to the administration of justice, is simply that a person against whom allegations have been made shall be given every opportunity to be heard on his own behalf and to say to his accusers and his judges everything that he wishes to say in his defence. If, as Lord Denning has said, the burden of proof is 'the golden thread of English law', it must also be said that the right to be heard is fundamental, axiomatic and absolutely basic to the administration of justice in a parliamentary democracy under the rule oflaw.
It has been my honour to serve as a member of the Committee of Privileges of this honourable House since 1975, including a brief period when I was Acting Chairman of the said Committee during the absence of the Chairman. My service in the recent inquiry was as the nominee of the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair). The Committee is, in my view, pre-eminent over all committees of the Parliament. It is and always should be meticulous in its proceedings, absolute in its commitment to the fundamental principles of justice and insistent to the degree of aggressiveness in upholding the highest standards of the law. As can be easily inferred from the wording of the subsequent resolution passed by the Committee after my amending motion had been defeated, the majority of the Committee, for reasons which I find legally untenable and logically indefensible, chose to delete those final and fundamental words 'to be heard on his own behalf'. I want to thank publicly the honourable member for Phillip (Mr Birney), the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) and the honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter) for joining with me in supporting my proposed amendment. The votes being equal, the Chairman cast his vote with the noes. My amendment therefore was negatived-in my view, to the eternal shame of our Committee.
Mr Oakes, whom I do not know very weU, is a professional journalist with considerable experience and dependent upon the carrying on of his professional calling for his very livelihood. Our Committee of Privileges had the power to imprison Mr Oakes or to recommend to you, Mr

2772 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Committee ofPrivileges

Speaker, the suspension of his rights and privileges in the Parliamentary Press Gallery, and thereby arbitrarily to deprive him of his right to earn his livelihood.
The most humble and menial defendant charged before the most inferior court of competent jurisdiction in the land on the most trifling charge imaginable has, as the law demands, the total, absolute and fundamental right 'to be heard on his own behalf. The Committee of Privileges, sitting as the court of the Parliament and charged with reporting to the House on matters involving, potentially, the liberty of Mr Oakes and his proprietary right to earn his livelihood, chose, incredibly in my view, to delete the very words which enshrine one of the most fundamental principles of the rule of law and the search of justice. The mealy-mouthed and watered-down resolution subsequently passed which asserted 'that Mr Laurie Oakes be given the opportunity to appear before the Committee' was a woeful apologia and an utter abdication of our responsibilities, reflecting in my judgment no credit on our Committee of which I am so proud, and placing Mr Oakes in the unbelievable situation wherein the 'invitation' for him to appear before the Committee was expressed in such a way that he did what I in fact expected him to do, and what I myself would have done, and simply declined, acting upon legal advice, to waste his time or ours by coming before us. Had my original motion been passed, Mr Oakes would have been fully aware that our Committee was reaffirming his basic and fundamental right 'to be heard on his own behalf'-that he would be given every opportunity to answer the 'charges' which had been levelled against him. If I had been in Mr Oakes's shoes and received a communication that 'I be given the opportunity to appear before the Committee'-no more, no less-I would have said: 'No way'. I would have asked: 'What is the charge?' I would have asked: 'What are my rights?' And I would have asked whether I would be legally represented in view of the fact that my liberty and my livelihood were potentially at stake. Mr Oakes, predictably, stayed away, and we adjudicated upon him in his absence.
Mr Speaker, as long as I have the honour to be a member of this Parliament and a member of the Committee of Privileges, I hope that never again will our Committee baulk at reaffirming one basic and inalienable right of each and every Australian citizen who enjoys the privilege of living in a country governed by a parliamentary democracy under the rule of law. My remarks will win me no compliments from those who voted against my resolution, but if I remain silent I will, by default,

be giving credence to the grave error into which I believe our Committee fell when it took that crucial vote on the afternoon of Wednesday, 23 September last.
I now turn to two fundamental propositions which I believe the proposed joint committee, if it eventuates, and I hope it does, should pursue with considerable vigour. If I am charged in the court of petty sessions with a menial traffic offence, I am told exactly when and where it is alleged that I breached the law, and even the degree by which I committed the alleged offence. If the speed limit is 80 kilometres per hour and the prosecution alleges that I travelled at 98 kilometres per hour, I am told just that in the complaint and summons which demands my attendance in the court of competent jurisdiction.
When you, Mr Speaker, rule that a prima facie case exists and that a matter should be referred to the Committee of Privileges, and when the House votes upon that motion to refer the matter to the Committee of Privileges, I believe the House itself should, in that referring motion, clearly and unequivocally particularise the ingredients of the 'charge' against the person who will inevitably be called before the Committee. As I said earlier the Committee must-and no other word is appropriate-call that person. before it and give him or her, to quote my original words, 'everyopportunity to be heard on his or her own behalf'. Furthermore, because the liberty and the livelihood and all other proprietary rights of the person so 'charged' are, to use a legal phrase, 'in jeopardy', I have reached the firm and unequivocable conclusion that that person must be afforded full rights oflegal representation.
I have carefully studied all the arguments for and against this proposition and I unhesitatingly conclude that nothing less than the same rights available to a citizen charged before a court oflaw should be made available to a person ~alled before the Committee of Privileges. I totally reject suggestions both in the Australian Senate and in the Canadian Parliament that a person should be permitted to have a legal adviser present but that that legal adviser should be mute and should not be heard, but should apparently simply be there to whisper advice from time to time during the hearing. I totally reject the claims that such a reform as I have proposed would turn the Committee into a court. I respectfully advise those who propound that position that our function is without any doubt whatsoever quasi-judicial in any event, and even if it were not I would take the clear and unqualified view that, we were obliged to act judicially in any event.

Committee ofPrivileges

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2773

I deeply regret that in my view our Committee's deliberations miscarried by the deletion of those words 'to be heard on his own behalf'. To that extent and quoting if I may the profound words of His Honour Mr Justice Fullagar in the High Court of Australia in the case of Mraz v. The Queen, Mr Oakes has not received 'that to which he was entitled'. To that extent, in my judgment, Mr Oakes has been wronged although I unhesitatingly concur in the overall conclusions of the Committee. The wrong which Mr Oakes has endured was the deprivation of his fundamental right 'to be heard on his own behalf'. It must never happen again. It is no excuse to say that he could have come before the Committee because, I repeat, the letter which went to him was in such a form that nobody in his right mind would have come before the Committee.
Two further matters remain. As at present advised, I am clearly of the view that prima facie the Committee should continue to meet in camera for reasons which I will explain more fully at a later date. I must add .that I would only propose that view if it were accompanied by the constant practice that-saving exceptional cases involving national security and other special considerations-the full transcript of events of the proceedings should be laid upon the table of this House and, by direction of this House, published. With the events being made public at the conclusion of the proceedings, as has properly been done in this case, I believe that most of the objections to in camera hearings would disappear.
Last but not least, I totally reject suggestions that the handling of matters of privilege of this Parliament should be transferred to the courts. The privilege belongs to this Parliament and I seriously question whether we CQuid lawfully hand it over to anybody else in any event. The proposition that the courts-respect them though I do-should determine the privileges of the Parliament, its members and its officers, is in my judgment legally and constitutionally untenable. Privileges of this Parliament come-through the traditions of the House of Commons over several centuries-to us as things which have been won in the struggle to establish parliamentary democracy. Let none of us act in such a way as to hand over these privileges, to give up hard won rights, and to abdicate our fundamental responsibilities.
I will expand on this matter at greater length at a later time, but I make the point here and now that if we were so foolish and so ill-advised as to pursue this line of thinking we would effectively, in one fell swoop, destroy the entire concept of parliamentary privilege. If we do not have the courage, the character and the integrity to defend,

to maintain and to administer parliamentary privilege in a democratic fashion we shall surely have failed not just ourselves but the institution of parliament itself.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (10.52)-There were three dissenting reports in the Oakes case. The first of these reports was by the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy) and myself. I wish to summarise what was said in that report. We said:
The authors of this dissenting report support the general findings in the paragraphs 1-20 of the Majority Report which describe the conduct of the Oakes inquiry and we agree, on the evidence, that a constructive contempt was committed. However, we express our deep concern at the unsatisfactory nature of the hearings, due principally to defects in the law of privilege and the Parliament's failure to restate and update this law.
The major objection to the present conduct of privilege cases relate to-
(a) secrecy,
(b) denial of representation by counsel, and
(c) Parliament acting asjudge in its own cause.
In practice the Committee of Privileges operates as a secret committee. Explicit warnings are given by the Chairman both to witnesses and to Committee members that they must not divulge any detail of evidence or of procedures adopted or resolutions debated to any other person.
This specifically included a warning to people who had engaged legal counsel to give them advice outside the conduct of the Committee hearings that they were not allowed to communicate the substance of any cross-examination that they underwent. The report also stated:
Counsel has not been permitted to appear before the House of Commons Privileges Committee to defend a person accused of breach of privilege during the hearing of evidence since the I 770s.
Because in the time frame we are stuck in the year 190 I, the practice of the Committee of Privileges in Australia is not determined by what has happened in the House of Commons subsequently but by what was the practice of the House of Commons on 1 January 1901, three weeks before Queen Victoria died. Arthur Balfour, who was then a leading Minister in the Conservative Government, remarked of the law of privilege that it was 'as antiquated as the cross-bow and the blunderbuss'. In 1908 there was the 'Quick report', oddly named in the circumstances, a joint select committee on privilege presided over by Sir John Quick, who was one of the authors of the Constitution, a noted lawyer, an MHR for Bendigo, and a fitting predecessor for the Government Whip. The report said:
The ancient procedure for punishment of contempts of Parliament is generally admitted to be cumbersome, ineffective, and not consonant with modern ideas and requirements in the

2774 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Committee ofPrivileges

administration of justice. It is hardly consistent with the dig-
nity and functions of a legislative body which has been assai.led by newspapers or individuals to engage within the Chamber in conflict with the alleged offenders, and to perform the duties of prosecutor, judge, and gaoler.

editor of the Daily Mirror we were in a position to reach a judgment. It was a humbug to continue the matter any longer. That was the basis on which we voted.

I want to talk about the circumstances of the Oakes case and to take up a couple of the points that were made quite unfairly and quite out of context by the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman). The conclusion of the Privileges Committee on the so-called Oakes case was that the case 'is neit worthy of occupying the further time of the House'. That decision was only arrived at after nine meetings of the Committee-a total of some 19 hours or 20 hours of deliberation. It took 19 hours or 20 hours to reach the conclusion that it was really not worth talking about. Mr Speaker, I would have preferred the matter to have been disposed summarily by you if Standing Orders had permitted you so to do. It could have been done in two or three minutes.

I should say something about the editor of the Daily Mirror who was the only witness calIed before us. I think perhaps the Committee has done the editor of the Daily Mirror something of an injustice, if that is possible. If honourable members look at page 121 of the transcript they will find that he really was given an assurance that the transcript of evidence would not be presented to the House unless the House agreed to it. I am very
much against secret proceedings and I am very much in favour of the fact that it was determined that the evidence would be presented. But I think
it is fair to say that the Chairman said that it would become a public document only if the House were to decide that that was the course it would follow; that is to say, publication. On page 121 of the transcript we find these words:

Section 15 of the minority report says that the inordinate length of time taken to deal with this matter was the result of the archaic state of the law and being hogtied by precedent. I want to take up a point to correct the Minister. He asked for incorporation of part of the minutes which indicated whether Mr Oakes should be given the opportunity to come before this Committee and given every opportunity to be heard. I point out that at a very early stage a motion was put by the
honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) to the effect that the matter be dealt with then and there and got out of the way. The Committee did not really need to call anyone. In effect it was the Scholes motion that, with agonies and tortuous deliberations, we ultimately agreed on another seven or eight meetings. It was an absurd waste of time to go through this whole procedure hogtied, as we were, by precedents and our inability or reluctance to deal with anything later than had happened in the 1770s. The reason that there was a division between the ayes and the noes-an equal vote of four and four-was not that the people involved were passionate defenders of civil liberties, such as the Minister, and fierce opponents of civil laberties, such as the honourable member for Holt, the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi), the Deputy Speaker the honourable member for Wide Bay (Mr Millar) and myself, butbecause by that stage we had come to the conclusion that the case was a complete waste of time, that it ought to be dispensed with and got out of the way altogether. On the basis of the publication and the evidence given by the unfortunate

Mr Wylie-I understand that the full transcript of this Committee hearing does not necessarily go to the House.
CHAIRMAN-It is something which tlie Parliament itself decides.
There was no such decision. When the report was brought down it contained the whole works. To that extent I think the Committee has been hoist by its own petard about publication. Nevertheless, I do not think there is any case whatsoever for not providing material. Whatever was done by that Committee should be open to the greatest scrutiny. I go further and say that if a transcript-of our actual deliberations over those nine meetings were to be published we would never hear another word about privilege spoken in this place.
The editor of the Daily Mirror, who was brought along to give evidence, did not make a very impressive witness. He exhibited his arrogance and his obtuseness on many occasions, as the transcript reveals. Politically, he was an absolute ,babe in the wood. He was exactly the sort of person I would imagine as the editor of a bestsellihg Murdoch paper. Nevertheless I felt he should have had the benefit of counsel. I deplore the fact that precedents, which the Privilege Committee felt constrained to follow dating from the 1770s, made it impossible for him to be so assisted. The whole proceedings were tainted by fundamental defects in procedure right from the start. It is a most unsatisfactory way of asserting the privileges of the House. I point out that the law of privilege has been static for nearly three centuries

Committee ofPrivileges

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2775

while the world of politics has changed dramatiPrima facie, if the Oakes' case was a breach of

cally. May reports that in 1704 the Lords comprivilege, so was the Australian Financial Review

municated a resolution to the House of Commons editorial. On 10 September, the same honourable

at a conference in these words:

member who had raised the Oakes matter in the

That neither House of Parliament hath any power, by any House and who.had moved the motion of referral

vote, or declaration, to create to themselves any new privilege, made a statement in the Hqust}. but did not m:ove

that is not warranted by the known laws and customs of Parliament.

to refer the editorial to the Com:mittee. The Oakes article did not distinguish. between senators and

That was assented to by the Commons. May members of the House of Representatives; both

comments:

were covered by his broad-brush approach. Prima

It is agreed that by itself neither House can create a new facie, if the article constituted a contempt of the

privilege.

House of Representatives, it was also a contempt

Prima facie, it would be a strange way to. protect the Parliament to say that no new element in politics, administration and the media which has arisen since 1704 can be raised as a breach of privilege. The vexed question of the relationship between Parliament and the Public Service is a far more fundamental issue than the action of journalists who figuratively thumb their noses at parliamentarians. If privilege is to survive, as the movers of this dissenting report contend is essential, it must be re-examined, renovated and its administration must be subject to the application of natural justice, open procedures, the right of defence by counsel and the principle that people should not be judges in their own cause, that those who are the targets of abuse and who rai&e the

in the Senate. Nevertheless, the matter was not raised in the Senate. I mentioned the fact that hearings are held in secret and witnesses are warned that they may not even discuss. the conduct of the hearings with their legal advisers. I mentioned that persons summoned are penied the right to be assisted by counsel and that 'members of parliament, attacks on whose dignity and function are the subject of contempt proceedings, not only are the victims but also take roles as prosecutors and judges. These three elements constitute a denial of natural justice. There is a popular view that the Privileges Committee operates as a Court of Star Chamber. This is an exaggerated view because that court had power to fine and mutilate which the Privileges Committee la9ks.

matter by complaint should not also be the judges

of it.

Overuse of the powers of privilege would lead

The Oakes case is a locus classicus for illustratto undesirable results. If we act arbitrarily and in

ing the inconsistencies and anomalies involved in secret and override natural justice we will under-

applying the law of privilege. The article by mine the whole justification of parliamentary

Laurie Oakes which was referred to the Commiprivilege. Similarly, if no new development in so-

tee of Privileges appeared in the Sydney Daily ciety since 1704 can be raised as a matter of privi-

Mirror of 2 September 1981. It appeared also, lege, parliamentary privilege will be reduced to

under different headings and in slightly altered the status of a mere exhibit in the museum of par-

format, in the Adelaide News of 4 September, the . liamentary practice.

Brisbane Sunday Sun of 6 September and the

Northern Territory News of 9 September. However, only one act of publication, that in the Daily Mirror, was raised in the House and referred to
the Committee of Privileges. Only one editor was summoned before the Committee and inter-
rogated without benefit of counsel. Yet, if the editor of the Daily Mirror committed a contempt,
what of the other editors? Are they guilty too? .

I say this about the operation of the Press:. I agree with the words of the other minority report from the honourable member for. Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding), the honourable member for Hawker and the honourable member for Phillip (Mr Birney), although after events earlier to!light that might seem like a very odd troika. I do not think we have much ground for satisfaction at the

On Thursday, 10 September, the Australian quality of political reporting in this Parliament. It

Financial Review published an editorial entitled is not surprising that the electorate has a some-

'Privileged Parliamentary Boozers' which began what jaundiced view of the Parliament and how it

with the words:

works. Exceptions should perhaps be made in re-

Some members of the Federal Parliament are drunks, some spect of the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald, the

are lazy and some are political time servers. Some are all Canberra Times and sometimes the Australian

three.

Broadcasting Commission. But the Press Gallery

The editorial challenged strongly the whole basis is prone to exhibiting groupthink. Many of its

of the law of privilege and deplored the reference members are journalistic clones of each other.

of the Oakes case to the Committee of Privileges. The quality of reporting is not good.

2776 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Adjournment

I conclude by making the observation that the Press only heard of parliamentary privilege after the Oakes case. Earlier it took no interest at all in the Berthelsen case of last year, which was handled, I think, very well by the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron) as Chairman. Much more fundamental issues were raised in that case because it dealt with the whole survival of the parliamentary institution. The historical basis of parliamentary privilege was that honourable members had to be under threat: There has to be a real threat to the way in which they carry out their operations. That was the case in the Berthelsen case; it was not the case in the Oakes case. When I spoke to a journalist fro~ the Age and asked: 'Why did you never report about the Berthelsen case the way you reported about the Oakes case' he asked me: 'What is the Berthelsen case? I have never heard of the Berthelsen case'. That was the case about which we should have made much more. I regret that we have not brought on a debate about the recommendations about the form that were part of the Berthelsen recommendations. I hope, in the Oakes case, we will have a fundamental inquiry into it and that it will be an open inquiry.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Debate (on motion by Mr Bradfield) adjourned.
PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE Mr BAUME (Macarthur)-I present the seventh report from the Publications Committee sitting in conference with the Publications Committee of the Senate.
Report-by leave-adopted.
SPECIAL ADJOURNMENT Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
That the House, at its rising, adjourn until Tuesday, 17 November 1981, at 1.45 p.m. unless Mr Speaker fixes an alternative day or hour of meeting.

ADJOURNMENT
GranviIIe Central Branch of Australian Labor Party-Medibank-Child Care
Facilities-Post-graduate Students--Security Staffing in Government
Establishments-Community Youth Support Scheme-Parramatta City Council--Social
Welfare-Education-Automotive Parts Industry-Political Refugees-Australian
Almond Industry-New Parliament House-Tertiary Education-Motor Vehicle
Industry-Maritime Coastal SurveiIIance-Convention Industry-Norforce-Transfer of Public Facilities-Home Units for the Aged
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr UREN (Reid) (11.8)-On Tuesday, 27 October, members of a joint task force, including Federal and New South Wales detectives, seized 800 grams of high grade heroin from a man resident in Granville in the electorate of Reid. The police have advised me that when refined the heroin would have had a value of several million dollars. I make no comment on the guilt or innocence of the man who has been charged. But as he is a member of the GranviIIe Central Branch of the Australian Labor Party, of which I am also a member, I feel it is important that some aspects of his relationships with theLabor Party are explained. He was one of 17 people who were accepted as members of the GranviIIe Central Branch in August of this year. He was introduced by a Mr Doueihi, who was himself a member of the Harris Park Branch of the Labor Party. I should make it clear that in recent months there has been an unusual increase, to say the least, in the number of members in the GranviIIe Central Branch of the Labor Party. According to a senior person in the New South Wales Branch of the Labor Party, the inflow of new members has not been designed to chaIlenge my preselection for Reid but to determine my successor.
There are several disturbing aspects of these unusual events which are unprecedented in the Reid electorate, including the alleged involvement of some of the sponsors of these new members with gambling and prostitution in the Granville-Harris Park-Parramatta area. I state quite clearly that I am deeply concerned that there is now evidence of hard drugs being involved in this area. It is also the case that certain people are being encouraged to join the Party on the promise of personal gain from the rezoning of land from residential status to' flat development. One such application has already been made.

Adjournment

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2777

In 1980 the Parramatta City Council requested the New South Wales Minister for Planning and Environment to approve the rezoning of residentialland in Blaxcell Street, Granville, for flat development. Of the II blocks that were proposed on the application to be redeveloped, five were owned by Messrs Doueihi and Assizi, who at that time were members of the Harris Park branch of the Labor Party. The rank and file members of the Labor Party in the Granville area were opposed to the rezoning. Consequently, the State member for Granville, Mr Flaherty, and I made representations to the New South Wales Minister not to approve the applications until such time as the land already rezoned for flat development had been fully developed and the grossly inadequate community services and recreational amenities for the area were improved. The Minister rejected the application from the Parramatta City Council.
Certain people in the Granville area are now being told that if they join the Labor Party they can exercise influence through their numbers to have the residential land within the area rezoned. I might say that it is always disturbing when people within political parties can have the land which they own themselves rezoned and benefit from it. It disturbs me greatly. I place on record that requests have been made by the Granville Central Branch to the Assistant General Secretary of the New South Wales branch of the Labor Party to have certain aspects of land rezonings in the Granville-Harris Park area investigated, but the head office of the Labor Party in New South Wales has taken no action to date.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (11.13) -Honourable members might recall that last August I expressed great indignation about the way I had actually been threatened by Medibank Private following some of my observations about that organisation's viability. At that time. I did, in fact, inform this Parliament of certain aspects of the threats which were made. From memory, I think I incorporated the text of a telegram which had been sent to me. An article appeared in a newspaper called the Albert and Logan News, which is one of the better read newspapers-its office is situated in my electorate-about my having questioned in this place the viability of Medibank Private. The article referred to the threats that Medibank Private had made to me. I notice that in the 30 September 1981 edition of the Albert and Logan News a representative of the Australian Democrats, a Mr R. J. Webb of Jimboomba, which is in my electorate, supported me on the grounds that Medibank was rather audacious in endeavouring to influence me by threats.

Mr Webb went on to say-I am paraphrasing in view of the fact that I have only a couple of minutes left in this debate-that if I did have to defend myself legally the Australian Democrats, or he individually, would help to spearhead a fund-raising effort to provide my legal expenses to fight that organisation. It was not my intention to divulge publicly the contents of a letter of apology, which was dated 8 September but was not received by me until some days later-in fact, I think I received it some days after my appearance at an Estimates Committee hearing at which I severely questioned the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar)-sent to me by Medibank in relation to the decision that it had taken in relation to the threats. In my mind, a number of reasons existed for this. I felt that if I stood up in this place and waved around a letter of apology people might say: 'Well, Cameron not only kills; he likes to display in the chamber the blood of those that he has taken on'. I was very quiet about having received that letter. But the point is that since Mr Webb and other people in my electorate are contemplating a fund-raising exercise to assist me to fight Medibank, I believe I have an obligation to state publicly that it has apologised, that it is going to leave me alone and that the contemplated court action is a thing of the past.
Finally, in the one and a half minutes left to me, I wish to make further reference to Medibank. At the end of June 1981 when I raised this matter I had certain discussions with Medibank. I was promised absolutely faithfully that it would make a report before many weeks passed to indicate publicly that its performance had been better than that of the previous year. If this Parliament resumes in a few days' time it will be just fortuitous. The fact is that Medibank's timing for the presentation of its report is such that I cannot help but wonder whether Medibank is simply putting aside another disaster, keeping it under cloaks, until such time as 30 October has arrived when that two-month period has passed in which people who join up receive immediate benefits for pre-existing ailments. I cannot help but wondermaybe I am being unfair-in view of its earlier performances, the way it has reacted and the fact that it has performed badly in so many States in the previous financial year, why is it delaying the presentation of this report. Is it because it wants to present it after the Parliament rises in which case a person such as myself will not be given an opportunity to be critical? I have learnt one thing: In dealing with Medibank, never do it outside parliament.

2778 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Adjournment

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (11.18)-1 wish to voice very strong concern at the Government's flagging commitment to providing adequate child care facilities for men and women in the work force and in the Australian community. Specifically I wish to raise the matter of the design of the new and permanent Parliament House which makes no provision for a child care centre to cater for the needs of members and staff working in the new building. Over recent years child care in Australia has been the victim of massive funding cuts and shifts in government policy. The gains made during the early 1970s, with the introduction of the Child Care Act 1972 and particularly the Whitlam Government's new policy in 1974, are in serious danger of being eroded altogether.
The positive achievements of those years were: Firstly, the recognition that married women have a right to. work if they choose to-indeed the facts speak for themselves. In the 15 years to 1979 the number of married women in the Australian work force increased by 125 per cent and, secondly, the development of new community approaches to child care services was the second major achievement of the 1970s. Community child care programs, such as child care co-operatives, playgroups .and after school programs have mushroomed throughout the suburbs of Australian cities in the last few years. These gains, and especially the slowly developing learning process whereby the Australian community, men and women, came to break down sexist stereotypes and support the new child care movement are increasingly being eroded by current Federal Government policy.
I am particularly disturbed by the Fraser Government's ideological attack on child care programs aimed at driving women back into the home and buttressing private child care services at the expense of other child care programs.
This year's Budget saw no real increase in funds for child care services. Every year budgeted allocations for child care are consistently underspent-not because child care needs do not exist in the community. The Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) has more than 450 submissions for child care programs around Australia sitting on his desk. The Minister has said that no grants for neW programs will be given this year. That means that some 450 child care programs that should be established will not be funded. That includes two submissions for desperately needed programs in the city of Northcote in

the electorate of Batman. More horrifying still is the Government's proposal to fund private child minding centres. Child care for profit is one of the lowest forms of economic exploitation and Australia's children are the victims.
A major omission in the recent development of child care services is the meeting of the needs of working men and women. Very little progress has been made in the area of work-based child care. This has seriously disadvantaged blue-collar workers, particularly migrant workers who have received very little benefit from child care programs. This is despite the fact that migrant women workers have expressed a preference for child care located close to their work places. Australia's progress in work-based child care services is appalling by comparison with wide acceptance of the need for such services in countries as diverse as Japan, the Soviet Union and Iraq.
. Closer to home, the provision for an on-site child care facility appears to have been given little or no attention in the design for the new and permanent Parliament House. The present design brief for the new and permanent Parliament House, costing $220m, makes no provision for a child care centre. I am most concerned that such an essential facility for both men and women working in the Parliament as well as for members of parliament who are parents is not yet included in the plans for the new buildings. More as an afterthought, members of parliament were surveyed recently to determine their child care needs. Conspicuous by its absence was any survey on the similar needs of workers in the House. Staff and members of parliament work long and irregular hours and thus their child care needs cannot be met by any other present facility. Severe strains are often imposed on other family members.
The Australian Labor Party is now committed to affirmative action, with a target of 30 per cent of members of parliament being women by the next decade. Few women, and men, can combine a political career with the task of bringing up children. A child care facility on site at the new and permanent Parliament House would assist in breaking down some barriers to mothers entering pdlitics. Any such proposal which encourages a broader representation of the Australian community in political life should be encouraged. A permanent child care centre catering for 40 to 50 children should be included in the design. It could, be of use to some parliamentarians, staff working in the House and visitors. There appear to have been no consultations with unions or staff associations on this matter as part of the planning process. The cost of incorporating a child care centre

Adjournment

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2779

as part of the new building is clearly significantly less than building a centre at a later date.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (11.23)-Tonight I raise in the House a matter of some concern to members on both sides; that is, the level of postgraduate students working towards higher degrees

in Australia. I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard some tables that I have referred to the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) relating to the number of post-graduate and research degree students in the University of New South Wales.
I"eave granted.
The tables read as follows-

APPLICATIONS FOR COMMONWEALTH POSTGRADUATE RESEARCH AWARDS 1976-1981 AT UNSW-ALL APPLICANTS

1981*

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

Applied ScienceApplied Geology
Chemical Engineering Chemical Technology
Food Technology Geography Metallurgy Mining Engineering
Textile Technology Wool & Pastoral Science

4

2

2

4

18

5

6

10

18

16

17

4

2

6

13

2

8

3

2

5

2

I

2

6

2

4

I

I

4

I

3

I

4

I

2

3

2

2

4

2

2

21

28

20

40

39

51

ArchitectureArchitecture Building Industrial Arts Landscape Architecture Town Planning GSBE

2

2

5

2

4

I

3

2

3

2

2

2

2

3

5

5

6

7

7

12

ArtsDrama English French German Studies History History & Philosophy of Science Philosophy Political Science Russian Sociology Spanish and Latin American St.

2

3

3

I

3

6

2

6

4

II

2

I

2

I

2

I

I

13

9

15

15

14

12

3

3

2

7

2

3

o

2

o

6

2

6

6

3

7

7

I

II

17

17

24

9

12

3

I

I

42

54

51

69

44

51

Biological SciencesBiochemistry Biological Technology Botany Microbiology Psychology Zoology

14

13

10

7

8

7

5

2

I

4

7

5

I

7

3

6

3

7

10

6

5

8

3

7

II

16

15

23

20

26

14

7

10

10

13

18

55

51

44

59

54

70

CommerceAccountancy
Economics Marketing

2

4

3

I

I

II

16

20

2

2780 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Adjournment

Organisational Behaviour
EngineeringCivil Electrical/Biomedical . Mechanical & Industrial Nuclear Surveying
LawLaw
MedicineSurgery Anatomy Community Medicine Medicine Obstetrics & Gynaecology Paediatrics Pathology Physiology & Pharmacology Psychiatry
Military StudiesDuntroon
Professional StudiesEducation Health Administration Librarianship Social Work
ScienceChemistry Mathematics Optometry Physics
AGSM General Studies SWRC Broken Hill CMERD
Total
Total recommended
Offers made Total awards-
Accept Decline
Accept UNSW Other Universities
Decline UNSW Other Universities

1981"

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

3

3

5

2

18

19

22

4

3

3

8

9

17

7

II

13

24

18

22

3

2

7

13

22

20

2

I

I

I

3

3

5

4

3

8

17

21

29

49

53

68

3

3

7

4

3

I

I

I

2

3

3

3

2

I

I

2

2

I

2

4

2

2

5

I

2

9

9

10

6

8

12

2

3

3

5

2

4

I

2

3

2

2

2-

2

3

4

5

4

7

6

9

3

7

6

9

II

10

9

6

10

14

16

12

4

3

3

2

I

10

14

17

6

7

14

26

30

36

31

35

36

6

3

8

5

6

3

3

2

I

I

2

194

218

213

294

278

336

159

152

195

195

204

108

89

107

109

157

43

49

52

60

65

65

40

55

47

112

36

39

43

47

46

7

10

9

13

19

34

19

29

26

50

31

21

26

23

42

Adjournment

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2781

SCHOOL OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING AND COMPUTER SCIENCE-UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES-SOME ENROLMENT TRENDS, 1975-1981

Research degrees (Ph.D., M. E., M. Sc.)

Coursework higher degrees (M. Eng. Sc., Grad. Dip.)

Full-time

Total

Full-time

Total

Undergraduate
degrees (B.E.) Total

1.975

50

74

II

122

610

1976

40

69

16

122

593

1977

30

67

II

128

604

1978

26

63

12

123

580

1979

23

68

17

124

699

1980

16

56

12

98

673

1981

21

59

13

129

716

Mr BAUME-I thank the House. Those figures show a rather substantial fall in the number of full time time research degrees undertaken at the University of New South Wales. This fall, in fact, prompted the university to have an inquiry by the Research and Higher Awards Committee into what was, in fact, going wrong in that university. This study showed, by the way-the figures will demonstrate this-that whilst there has been a considerable fall in the number of students undertaking research degrees from 50 in 1975 to 21 in 1981, at the same time the number of part time students has, in fact, increased from 24 to 38. In course work higher degrees, which are not the same as research degrees of course, there has been a slight increase in the number of full time and part time students. This relates to a similar rise in the numbers undertaking undergraduate degrees at the university.
It is a matter of some concern that there has been a reduction in the number of research degrees being undertaken. The reasons for this were, in fact, the subject of an inquiry by the committee chaired by Professor Shearer which reported in March of this year. It concluded:
. . . the present situation of the University in respect of the allocation of Commonwealth Postgraduate Research Awards is dictated by economic conditions and market forces beyond its-
That is, the university's-
control. The opportunity cost gap which strikes the UNSW harder than other universities might be ameliorated slightly in the ways suggested-
That, of course, is by increasing the value of the award and so on-
but this factor will continue to operate to the disadvantage of the University until current economic conditions change.
In reality what the university is saying is that because private industry can make such large salary offers to graduates with good undergraduate degrees it is particularly difficult for the university to attract students of calibre into its post-graduate research degree areas. For example, the School of Chemical Engineering and Industrial Chemistry

cited starting salaries in industry for first class honours or honours 2 (I) graduates at approximately$17,000 per annum. The School of Mining Engineering cited starting salaries of $20,000 or more and other schools in the engineering field mentioned job opportunities within the range of $11,000 to $17,000 per annum. All schools stressed the unattractiveness of the awards compared with immediate job opportunities. In most cases PhDs were not required in order to elevate job prospects. In fact, the head of one school offered the opinion that the University of New South Wales being more technologically oriented than the other universities meant a higher proportion of its graduates were in demand. To the
graduates a bird in the hand attitude seems to prevail with students understandably feeling that a good job now is worth more than the mere possiblility of a better one in three or so years time.
I raise these matters to indicate that whilst there clearly is a problem r.elating to research degrees it may be unreasonable, based on the evidence of this report, to suggest that all the blame lies in the Government's attitude to post-graduate research scholarships. There is no doubt that the decline in the real value of support to postgraduate research students has been a factor in that decline. I do not want to withdraw from that proposition; I want to present to the House figures against which any further discussion of this matter can be based. These are the facts relating to probably the hardest hit university in Australia in respect of the number of people undertaking research degrees on a full time basis.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (11.28)-1 raise a matter tonight which is of concern to me and is generally of concern, I think, to a number of people in the community. Recently the Government has taken a decision to replace with staff of private security firms its own employees working in a security capacity in the Commonwealth building at

2782 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Adjournment

Geelong and in other places. There are two reasons for this. One is that it is seen as being a reduction in government employment and an increase in private sector employment. We will see the Ministers in this House stating eloquently how public sector employment has been reduced and private sector employment has increased and that this is a result of the success of their economic policies. In fact, they will be spending more of the taxpayers' money to perform the same tasks. The persons employed will be paid by the public purse even if they are not on the public payroll. That is not my main problem with this matter. I stress that there is a widespread operation within the Government to provide a false set of private sector employment figures and a false set of public employment figures by merely transferring the payroll requirements of those employees from government firms to private firms. This is just another example.
] wish to deal with this matter in a more serious vein. Firstly, private security firms are not subject to any checks or control by the Government; nor are their employees required to have the same rigid clearances concerning past records, et cetera, as is required for Government employment. I think it should be understood that in a Commonwealth building in a provincial city there are many thousands of personal files to which security personnel, if they wish, can have access, especially as they have the keys to the doors of such places as the Commonwealth Electoral Office, Commonwealth Department of Social Security, the Commonwealth Department of Health, the Australian Federal Police and the Commonwealth Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, all of which are housed in the building. We are about to move to a situation in which private employees, who have no screening other than by their employer, will have access to the files in all of these areas. This, I would have thought, involves an important principle of protection of the right of privacy of the persons concerned, the right to some degree of confidentiality with respect to the incomes and the private files of these people.
The Commonwealth, in order to create what can only be described as a fraudulent set of fig~res and to meet an ideological political position which has no relevance whatsoever to good economic management, is prepared to take the risks in this area. It will be only a matter of time before files or copies of files are handed over, as has happened in the past, to credit agencies or other organisations which are prepared to pay good money for them. Not only is there now to be no security protection which, I would suggest, is reliable, but also access

to Commonwealth files and keys to Commonwealth departments will be placed in the hands of persons not employed by the Commonwealth and not subject to the types of screening which would normally take place with security officers in Commonwealth buildings.
I wish also to register an objection, that I will have as a member of parliament, to my office being available to persons at times when I do not have access to the building and can be locked out. Such persons, if they so desired, could go through papers which include confidential information provided to honourable members by people who want to have matters resolved. I think this is something which the Government should look at very seriously. I do not think even ideology is sufficient justification to create this type of situation. To maintain that it will save money is a load of nonsense. It will cost more than the present system.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (11.33)-Some weeks ago there was some discussion in this place and in another place about the future of the Community Youth Support Scheme. I made some comments in the debate in this place about the way in which the Community Youth Support Scheme had operated and the importance of local participation in the Scheme if it were to survive. I mentioned the important role that local government, for instance, is able to play in communities in support of local employment schemes such as the Community Youth Support Scheme. I mene tioned the positive role that had been played in my electorate by the Shire of Hornsby and the Municipality of Ryde in providing suitable accommodation for the schemes that have operated in those parts of my electorate and the very positive way in which local government had supported the Community Youth Support Scheme.
As the former member for Parramatta I was instrumental in the formation of two other schemes in the City of Parramatta. Over a long period I have taken an interest in the operations of an organisation called The Exchange. That was one of the projects that I originally sponsored. In a previous debate I read some correspondence that passed between the project officer of The Exchange and the City of Parramatta concerning the provision of accommodation for Community Youth Support Scheme staff in Parrama,tta. I should like to reiterate one of the important notes than I read on that occasion. The letter, dated 17 August of this year, stated:
Indeed we cannot believe that Council considers 9 O'Connell Street, credible alternative accommodation, and must conclude from Council's continued offer of unacceptable

Adjournment

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2783

premises and unwillingness to discuss other possible alternatives that it is systematically attempting to rorce The
Exchange to close.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

When moves were made to discontinue the funding of the Community Youth Support Scheme the Parramatta Council-this involved Labor members and a number of Independent members-passed a resolution urging this Government to continue the funding of CYSS. It also called upon the State Government to consider support for CYSS if the Federal Government did not do so. We know that CYSS has been reprieved and we know that certain additional inquiries at this time are considering the way in which it will operate in the future. The fact of the matter is that, notwithstanding the reprieve, Parramatta Council has not been willing to find suitable accommodation to enable its scheme to continue. I am pleased that the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) is in the House tonight. I know that he has a very sincere interest in the future of this Scheme. I am sure that he will offer his best endeavours to ensure that his former colleagues on Parramatta Council consider requests from the Parramatta staff of the Community Youth Support Scheme for suitable premises. I am sure that he is in a unique position to influence the Council in this matter. I look forward to his success in that endeavour.
A number of people on that Council-I do not doubt their sincerity-espouse a sincere interest in the future of the young unemployed. The honourable member for Parramatta, when he spoke in a previous debate, indicated the extent to which Parramatta Council had an enviable record, as he would no doubt put it, in the provision of subsidised accommodation for many community activities in the district. If that is the case-I know that it is the case in relation to some organisations-one would have to ask why the Council would not put itself out, with the many public buildings-not just houses-that it has in the City of Parramatta, to provide suitable accommodation for this Scheme. I ask why it is that we have to read in the local newspaper that an alderman of the Council, together with his coHeagues-unless, of course, he is prepared to break the Caucus arrangements-has obviously set his heart against providing suitable accommodation, and is asking people to co-operate in the inquiry in relation to CYSS. I have to ask myself how people can speak out on an important issue such as this when they were party to the decisions which deprived this important organisation of accommodation.

Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (11.38)-1 commence my few remarks by thanking the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) for his very unsolicited remark that I have some compassion towards the Community Youth Support Scheme. I might tell him that my compassion towards CYSS is a very sincere and personal one. I feel in this situation that I cannot return the compliment. The last time. I had to defend the Parramatta City Council and its very proud record in taking over what are really the responsibilities of this Federal Government to provide social welfare for the residents of Parramatta, I listed all of the many ventures in which the Council has involved itself over a number of years, with a budget approaching $lm a year in terms of social welfare support for the deprived people in the City of Parramatta. I take great umbrage at the remarks of the honourable member.
The honourable member for Dundas, formerly the member for Parramatta-fortunately he was replaced by a much more competent member whose name I shaH conceal for reasons of modesty-has a surrogate alderman on the Parramatta City Council who happens to be his electoral assistant. It pleases me to report to the House that the last time this matter was discussed by the Parramatta City Council there was debate as to whether the Council would support the CYSSgroup in Parramatta. The voting was 19 to one in favour of the motion. There are no prizes for guessing which one voted against it.
Mr Morrison-Who was the one?
Mr JOHN BROWN-It was Alderman Janet Boothby, who happens to be the electoral assistant to the honourable member for Dundas. Let him deny that. Let me go further. This man with his proud record of concern for deprived and desolate people is now about to use every influence he can use to see that a housing commission development in the street where I live, which is adjacent to where the honourable member for Dundas lives, is thwarted. He wants to see almost 200 people who are on the list of 49,000 people in New South Wales awaiting welfare housing are pushed out to St Mary's, Emu Plains or somewhere else because he does not want them in his electorate or near where he lives. Let me put my position very plainly. I welcome this development in my street. I hope that the people who live in my street-most of them support the honourable member for Dundas; they are

2784 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Adjournment

fairly ill-advised politically-will join me in welcoming these people to our very comfortable environment, a beautiful street.

'Mr Dean-What are you talking about?

! r JOHN BROWN-I am talking about the honourable member's colleague, this gentleman who bleats about the lack of support that Parramatta City Council gives to deprived people when his own record in that area is absolutely appalling. It is on the record for all to see that this man, the Federal member for Dundas, faces with some fear the presence of some welfare housing people in his electorate. I welcome them to my street. I defend the very proud record of the Parramatta City Council in every area of welfare support. The fact that it has not been able to supply the Community Youth Support Scheme group with suitable premises is a matter of some regret for me particularly.

Mr Ruddock-It is a disgrace.

Mr JOHN BROWN-It is not a disgrace. It has many properties which it has leased at no cost to welfare groups. The Salvation Army has one house belonging to the Council for a refuge. The City Mission has one also. The Parramatta Community Aid Group also has one house. The Macquarie Legal Service in Parramatta also has one, replacing the legal system that the Government that this man represents has taken away. It strikes me as arrant cant and empty hyperbole for this man to blast a council for not giving premises to a CYSS group when his own Government was prepared to shut down almost 300 of them withOijt premises and without regard to the kids. It w~s only because of the great campaign that those kids waged, supported by most honourable members on this side of the House and by very few on that side of the House, that that decision was reversed. That is no credit to the honourable member for Dundas. All he can do is bleat in this House with empty hypocrisy about the Pari"amatta City Council. I defend the Parramatta City Council as one council in Sydney with a great social conscience. I am very happy to report that I am a former alderman.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-

Order! The honourable member's time has

expired.

'

Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (11.43)-1 wish to draw the attention of the House to a very interesting and important report which has recently been published and which has been the subject of a great deal of Press commentary which I believe to be wrong in almost every case. I think that it is a pity and I would like to explain why. I am referring to the report entitled 'Performance

in Literacy and Numeracy: 1980', a report to the Australian Education Council on the Australian Studies in Student Performance Project. The point is that this has been perceived in the media commentaries as proving something very important and as contributing very importantly to the debate about average standards in schools. It has been interpreted as showing that there has been no decline in average standards in schools, thereby debunking critics such as myself who have expressed concern about standards in schools. If that were true, if this report did establish that, it would be good news indeed and I would be very pleased to be proven wrong. But I do not think it does that. The commentaries are, therefore, misleading the public. There is no doubt about the way in which the matter has been reported. The Adelaide Advertiser said:
Standards in literacy 'improved'.
The Age said:
Study gives pupils top marks for 3Rs,
The Sydney Morning Herald said:
Getting better at 3 Rs, says survey.
It then quoted Mr Landa, the New South Wales Minister for Education, as saying of the report:
. . . supported the view of a great mariy educators that there had been an improvement in literacy and numeracy in recent years.
It has become much too fashionable in some quarters to allege a decline in the current standards of performance of our young people.
This most authoritative report, which has the backing of all States and the Commonwealth should finally put paid to this myth.
The education correspondent of the Australian asked parents and teachers to read the report and throughout his article put in capital letters: No decline, some improvement'. The P and C Secretary of the Griffith Primary School in the Australian Capital Territory had published in the Canberra Times on 15 October a letter saying the same thing. In today's Canberra Times there is a thoughtful article by a teacher, Mr Jim Coates, which is introduced by the words:
Despite widespread and oft-expressed fears that educational standards are falling in Australian schools, objective tests suggest that in fact standards are rising over a wide range of skills,
Tihe report does not do that. What it sets out to prove is that there has been no decline in minimum standards. That is all it sets out to do. Even in its preface it says that there should be further inquiries into more advanced tests but that it is concerned only with the absolute minimum tests that a child would have to pass to have any chance whatever in life. I refer to pictorial tests such as a picture of six girls running and being asked to put

Adjournment

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2785

a cross on the girl who is running fourth-that sort of absolutely minimum standard. It even found that one in four lO-year-olds could not work with or in many cases'tell the time. Nevertheless, there has been no decline in absolutely minimum standards. That is not the same at all as saying that there is no decline in average standards or even an improvement in average standards, and it is average standards and not minimum standards that the debate is about.
There is one other point that should be brought out. Professor Lauchlan Chipman drew attention to this in an article in the Bulletin. I will seek leave in a moment to have it incorporated in Hansard. He drew attention to the fact that the report is silent on comparisons between state and non-state schools whereas the 1975 report did bring out the fact that there were significant differences in the performances at those various kinds of schools-state schools, Catholic schools and non-Catholic independent schools. These results are actually extracted in the research but were not published because apparently the Australian Council for Educational Research, made up principally of Ministers for Education, did not want that information. I seek leave to have Professor Chipman's article incorporated in Hansard.
Mr Dawkins-Have we seen it?
Mr COLEMAN-It is the article of 6 October 1981 in the Bulletin. I seek leave to have it incorporated.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage) -Is leave granted?
Mr Dawkins-I am not sure that the honourable member has shown it to us.
Mr COLEMAN-If the honourable member does not want it incorporated in Hansard-
Mr Dawkins-You know the rules.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is leave granted?
Mr Dawkins-On condition that the honourable member shows it to us, of course.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I will revert to the matter as soon as the honourable member for Fremantle has had a look at the article.
Mr COLEMAN-I conclude by saying that the report does not show no decline in average standards and it does not show no decline in government schools.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Fremantle has agreed to the incorporation of the document in Hansard. Leave is granted.
The document read as follows-

QUALITY OF TEACHING THE X FACTOR
By Lauchlan Chipman
Australia's school popUlation is falling. Average class sizes are at their lowest since World War II. Teachers are in over supply and school buildings, libraries and equipment have, in general, never been better. Never have so many back-up staff been employed. It is therefore natural that public concern about the quality of education, particularly State education, should shift from the physical to the human element. Just how good are Australia's teachers?
Any answer must depend on the answer to another question: How do we measure teacher quality? One measure, but only one, is the quality of work done by their pupils.
Arguments about declining standards of teaching and declining standards of student achievement appeared destined to turn into assertion and counter-assertion, with both sides accusing each other of lack of evidence, particularly evidence of a disinterested, quantitative sort.
All this seemed about to change this month with the release of the 1980 study of performance in literacy and numeracy, produced by the independent Australian Council for Educational Research (ACER). Commissioned by the Australian Education Council, which represents the Federal and all State Ministers for Education and the Northern Territory Education Minister, the report compiled the details of a national test of competence in literacy and numeracy.
Its release produced universal glee from Labor and Liberal Education Ministers, teacher union leaders, and the more progressive education correspondents. 'No fall in 3Rs' screamed the headlines. We learnt that 'conservative' and 'traditional' education lobyists, such as the Australian Council for Educational Standards, had lost the debate. There had been no decline in standards over the last five years. True, there were areas of deficiency, particularly in numeracy (one in four 10 year olds could not work with, or in many cases tell, the time), but, the Press reports said, there had been a significant improvement in many areas (particularly among girls) and no decline in any.
In fact, a close examination of the report shows that the Press coverage, and in particular a number of the ministerial and teacher spokesmen reactions, betrayed significant misunderstandings. The report does not show, and does not attempt to show, that there has been no decline in the average level of achievement, but only that there has been no decline, indeed some improvement, in the minimum levels of achievement. As one educationist put it, to interpret the report as proving that there had been no decline (of any sort, at any level) of educational standards would be like trying to prove that the average height of Australians had not fallen over the last few decades because there were fewer dwarfs now than five years ago.
The report makes quite cl~ar that it is concerned only with very basic levels of achievement. One of the authors of the report, Syd Bourke, pointed out that enormous difficulties would be involved in attempting to define an average level for measurement purposes, for this is itself the subject of endless debate. While it would be churlish not to welcome the report's evidence of the rise in the level of minimum competence, it would be a blatant error to cite it as proving, or even claiming, anything else.
More significant, however, is the fact that it is silent on the relative performance of government and non-government school pupils. One would have thought this information was important, particularly in the light of the drift to nongovernment schools. The report involved a follow-up study of a 1975 study which applied comparable tests to a comparable distribution of students.
The 1975 test showed quite clearly that there were significant differences in the performances of children from the

2786 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Adjournment

different sectors. By and large pupils in private independent schools did best of all, pupils in government schools did worst, with pupils in the Catholic schools in between. It was correctly pointed out at the time that this was in no sense a direct indictment of the quality of government school teaching. Government schools were obliged to take pupils who would be rejected by non-government schools as academically or behaviourally unsuitable.
In conducting the 1980 research every effort was made to ensure that the distributions in the samples matched the distribution between government and non-government schools in the wider population. The reason given was the significance of this factor in the 1975 results. Yet, although the report extracted data for such variables as sex and whether the school was metropolitan or non-metropolitan, no extract was made for the type of school.
Why was this not done? Was this really, in effect, an attempt to cover up the differences between government and non-government schools? Not so, according to spokesmen for both the researchers (ACER) and the Australian Education Council. Syd Bourke, of ACER, commented that it was not within their brief to deliver that information. The steering committee responsible for the project's initiation did not want it. According to Dr K. Browne, of the Australian Education Council, what they wanted was a national profile that related to the 1975 ACER survey. The samples were so small that he doubted whether such differences as school type would manifest in useful or representative results.
The upshot is that the report does not do the two things that apologists for State education claim for it. It does not show, in any general sense, that there has been no decline in standards. Nor does it show, in particular, that standards in State schools, even the minimum standards for which it tested, have not fallen. Has the performance of the government systems improved relatively since 1975? The researchers were not authorised to provide us with this information.
So how good are the teachers? We still do not know if they are teaching better than they were five years ago or whether those in the State systems are performing as well as those in the other systems.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) ( 11.48) -This evening I would like to raise in the Parliament the future of the automotive parts industry in Australia. I have sought the permission of the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) to incorporate in Hansard a letter I received from one of my constituents, the Honourable J. S. Thompson, A.M., M.L.e., who is State Secretary of the Vehicle Builders Employees Federation of Australia. Mr Thompson has spent most of his adult life working for the employees in the vehicle building industry and for the industry itself, and he and his union are most concerned about the turn of events that is occurring at present in the vehicle building industry in Australia. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a recent letter I received from Mr Thompson.
Leave granted.
The letter read as follows-

Dear Leo, As you are no doubt aware, the Federal Government will in
the near future bring down a Plan on assistance to the Passenger Motor Industry Post 1984.
In the view of the above Union this decision will be one of the most important decisions which the Government has taken as it will have a major effect upon very large sections of Australia's Secondary Industry.
We believe it is most important that all members of the National Parliament are fully aware of the ramifications of any decision which would have the effect of winding down either the manufacturing and assembly section of the Industry or the vehicle component part manufacturing industry.
We are also perturbed at a booklet, produced by General' Motors Holden setting out their views on what assistance should be given to the motor vehicle industry after 1984, which was recently distributed to all members of the National Parliament. We believe this booklet portrays a most biased view and one which if implemented, could cause serious problems to major sections of our nation's manufacturing industry.
We believe that what is good for General Motors Holden may not necessarily be good for Australia.
All members should be fully aware that General Motors Holden are part of a global enterprise, and all their views are obviously in favour of the best deal possible for General Motors Holden on a world-wide basis, irrespective of what occurs in the various host countries in which that Company operates.
We find it difficult to reconcile earlier statements in the booklet of how concerned General Motors Holden are that many thousands of jobs will be lost if quotas are lowered or some protection is removed, and further on the booklet makes very strong representation that the export credit programmes
be increased.
The Company is obviously aware that the present agreed 5 per cent Export Credit Post 1982, rising to 7+ per cent, will obviously cause the closure of many Australian companies engaged in component manufacture. This is evidenced in their booklet where, on Page 15, they state that around 25 per cent of their existing component part suppliers will be withdrawing from the motor vehicle industry over the next 3 or 4 years even under the existing current conditions.
Our Union believes that many members of Parliament are not aware of how the 85% Local Content is arrived at.
It should not be considered that 85 per cent Local Content means that 85 per cent of the component parts used in building a motor vehicle in Australia are of Australian origin. This is a grave distortion of what is the actual Local Content.
The computing of the 85 per cent Local Content is made up in the following way.
I. Approximately 60 per cent of local content is earned by purely assembling the vehicle in Australia irrespective of the country of origin of the parts used in the assembly of the motor vehicle.
2. If we include the use of Australian manufactured glass, trim (upholstery), tyres, battery, paint, etc., this then takes us to an allowance of approximately 64 per cent Australian content.
3. If we include an engine made in Australia as part of the motor vehicle, we are then credited with building a vehicle with in excess of 70 per cent Australian content.
Under the existing plans after 1984 with the Export Credit Scheme, any Company including General Motors Holden will be allowed for effective purposes to drop the Australian content from 85 per cent to 77+ per cent.
This clearly means that the required componentry to be built in Australia will be extremely limited, and if General

Adjournment

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2787

Motors Holden's request to the Federal Government to increase the degree of Export Credits if acceded to, it will have the effect of allowing that Company to use vast quantities of imported component parts including transmissions and would deal a severe blow to huge sections of the Australian component part industry.
The importance of the component part industry should not be underestimated.
Currently at least 24,000 people are engaged in this section of industry producing component parts valued at approximately $800 million.
With the implementation of the existing Export Facilitation Policy by 1984 only 16,400 people will be left in the industry and they will be producing component parts which will have dropped in value to $600 million.
If Export Facilitation is increased post 1984 from 7t per cent to 10 per cent the workforce will then drop to 7,000 people and the value of their production will drop to $325 million.
This is one reason why we find it so difficult to reconcile General Motors Holden's statements on how perturbed they are at the job losses which will occur if some protection is removed from the industry, and at the same time they are calling for a policy of major increases in the Export Facilitation Scheme which, if granted, will cause dramatic losses to both companies and their workforces engaged in Australia's component part manufacturing industry.
To illustrate a point, General Motors Holden plans to export more than 200,000 engines in 1982 for which they will be granted export credits to bring into this country component parts duty free.
At this stage no accurate figures have been produced by General Motors Holden on what they will be charging for each engine which they export. There is no doubt, however, that the amount of money they will earn under the Export Credit Plan will be of a huge magnitude and allow them to import into Australia a vast range of componentry duty free.
It therefore, should clearly be seen that any increase in the percentage allowance for export credits will deal a very severe blow to our component part manufacturing industry.
I write to you not only as the Secretary of our Union closely associated with the Australian Motor Industry, but as a person deeply concerned at the future of much of our country's Secondary Manufacturing Industry.
I believe it is vital that under no circumstances should we allow any extension of the Export Credit/Facilitation Scheme.
I am aware that both the existing and proposed Plans may appear complicated For people not in the Industry. If I can assist in any way in the future, in explaining the ramifications of changes in these Plans, please do not hesitate to contact me. IF necessary, I am prepared to speak to any group of Parliamentarians irrespective of Party that desire any Further assistance on clariFying any proposal for Future Plans for the Australian motor vehicle industry.
Thanking you.
Yours FaithFully Hon. J. S. THOMPSON,A.M., M.L.e.,
SECRETARY
Mr LEO McLEAYMr Thompson points out in his letter that one of the most important things which will occur if the Government's post-1984 program for the Australian car manufacturing industry occurs is that, with the implementation of the existing export facilitation policy by 1984,

only 16,400 people will be left in the automotive parts industry and the amount of production by that industry will be reduced from $800m this year to approximately $600m then. I believe that that would be a very detrimental thing. The parts industry provides a vast range of employment for people in my electorate and in adjoining electorates. It also provides a great deal of high technology in Australia. Companies such as TRW Products Ltd, Girlock Ltd, and a number of other smaller suppliers of material, are right in the forefront of technological apvances in this country. If the Government's proposals go forward, the activities of many of those companies will be put very much in jeopardy. I think that that would be very much to the detriment of Australian industry and the building up of a base of skills in this country.
In recent weeks in this Parliament we have seen the Government's attempts to curtail the activities of Telecom Australia, which employs a wide range of highly skilled technical staff. The attack on the vehicle industry is somewhat the same thing. The important point Mr Thompson makes in his letter is that members of Parliament and the general public should not get carried away with the program being put forward by General Motors-Holden's, whose whole idea is to increase its share of the car market in this country and to ensure that by a back-door method we will not have viable parts and automotive industries. I think it is very important for the Parliament to take account of that. While many people would think that allowing the present manufacturers to get larger will protect the Australian car industry, unfortunately, as Mr Thompson quite lucidly points out in his letter, that is not the case.
I hope that the Parliament will take note of the points put forward by Mr Thompson on behalf of the Vehicle Builders Employees Federation and the people employed in the vehicle building and parts manufacturing industries. We should not be seduced by the quite extensive arguments put forward by major manufacturers that we should increase their chances of becoming involved in the world car. This would relegate the Australian parts industry and many jobs in the vehicle building industry in Australia to oblivion. I know that many apologists for that proposal on the other side of the House will probably stand up and put their point of view. I can see that some of those apologists are about to rise very quickly. They should be warned to look at the effect such a course would have on employment and on the level of skill in this country. In my view, if we destroy the skill base of Australia we will sell out the

2788 REPRESENTATIVES 29 October 1981

Adjournment

right of Australian industry to have its chance to compete on world markets.
Mr FALCONER (Casey) (11.53)-1 wish to comment on a matter arising out of the recent case of the Romanian soccer player, Mr Viscreanu. I do not want to comment particularly on the gentleman himself because the Determination of Refugee Status Committee has made a determination in his case and his future is presently the subject of consideration and further discussions. However, I do want to comment on the type of activity which led this gentleman to defect from the visiting soccer team. I put to the House the point of view that it is not to the advantage of Australia or of people in Mr Viscreanu's position for groups such as migrant groups in Australia to seek to entice people in visiting soccer teams, cultural organisations, or whatever they may be to defect and seek refuge in Australia.
I understand much of the background of many of the people who comprise the migrant groups I have in mind. Many of them have come from communist countries. They have suffered persecution. They have found a new and free life in Australia and are keen to see others share that life. I put it to them thai: there are dangers in seeking to entice members of sporting teams, cultural groups, scientific exchange groups, to defect in the way that we have seen recently.
The first danger I see is that visits from such groups will cease fairly soon if it becomes a practice for people in Australia to entice visitors to defect from their sporting team or whatever. Secondly, it will become harder for Australia to process genuine family reunion cases, genuine humanitarian cases of reunions between members of families from East European countries, for example, if it becomes known that we encourage or at least turn a blind eye to the activities of people who encourage visitors to defect. It is quite likely that the authorities in those countries will become even harder than they are at present in dealing with applications, which as members of parliament we handle from time to time, to bring about genuine family reunions between people in Australia and their relatives in East European countries.
Thirdly, such activities place the individuals concerned and their families in a very difficult position. No one in a migrant group in Australia is able to guarantee to a visiting sportsman or dancer or scientific adviser that he will obtain permanent residence in Australia. The case has to be examined after the person defects, so there is no guarantee that he will be allowed to stay. He may therefore be in the very difficult position of having

put himself and his family at odds with the authorities in his home country.
I make these points because I had the experience earlier in the year of discouraging a Hungarian fellow, who was with a visiting scientific group, from defecting. People with whom he made contact in my electorate came to see me about the possibility of enabling him to stay in Australia. I advised them that there was no way that any guarantees could be given and that for his own sake and the sake of his family, he ought to be encouraged to return and to put in an application in the normal way, knowing full well the great difficulties he would face when such an ordinary application was processed. Nevertheless, I did not feel it would represent a responsible attitude on my part to encourage him to defect when even I, as a member of parliament, was not in a position to give him the guarantees he would require.
I think we would be better served if these groups concentrated on trying to improve the processes by which we facilitate ordinary family reunions between people in these countries and in Australia rather than seeking to encourage them to defect in this way. It would be a different situation if, for example, someone jumped across the Berlin Wall and we just had to do something with that person and reset'le him somewhere else. 1 think that when people are in Australia on visitor's visas, in a sense as guests of Australia, it does not do us or the individuals any good if people in Australia take it upon themselves to entice them to defect and seek refugee status in this country.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (11.58)-1 take the opportunity provided at this late hour to draw the attention of the House to the problems now being faced by the Australian almond industry, which is under dire threat of being swamped by the large scale dumping of United States product in this country. Dumping will take place over our market, and then when Australian producers have been devastated a price hike will be imposed. The situation is an urgent one and yet the Government procrastinates. A Temporary Assistance Authority hearing was held in. Melbourne some five weeks ago, on 17 September. The inquiry was dpedited to enable the industry to meet the anticipated inflow of American almond kernels being sold at a depressed price, chiefly owing to the collapse of America's European markets as a result of currency changes.
We gather that this TAA report was with the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) in the early days of this month. Yet in spite of the immediate threat to the Australian

Adjournment

29 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2789

almond producers, the Government seems unable to reach a decision.
Mr Carlton-Did you say armaments?
Dr BLEWETT-Almond-a-I-m-o-n-d. I realise that at this late hour the honourable member for Mackellar (Mr Carlton) has trouble but I will spell it out for him. I am talking about almond production. I point out to the honourable member for Mackellar that almond production is no flyby-night operation. It does not operate on the basis of a get-rich-quick activity. It is a long term proposition for the people involved. Trees' take some five years to produce reasonable crops and another five years to reach full production. The productive life of the trees is 25 to 30 years'. This is an industry which provides the sort of 'real' jobs the Government claims it wants to create.
Mr Young-Nuts!
Dr BLEWETT-I point out to the honourable member for Port Adelaide that in his far flung electorate he also has some almond growers. It is imperative that Australia produce its own requirements of almonds. Imported almonds, mainly Californian, have comprised 60 per cent of Australian consumption over the last five years. Australian production is as efficient and its quality superior to imported almonds. United States almond marketing is erratic. Rapid price and availability changes are common. Why should Australian producers suffer as a result? Processors, workers and consumers all gain from market stability. All lose from the United States invasion. The honourable member for Wakefield (Mr Giles) is very familiar with this problem.
The limited protection afforded the almond industry has not been sufficient to aVOid the instability emanating from the United States almond industry. A tariff of 12 per cent, previously 15 per cent, is levied on imported almonds. To encourage the sale of Australian almonds and in the hope of keeping prices lower for consumers a by-law operates allowing buyers of Australian almonds some duty free imports-presently one tonne of duty free almonds for each two tonne of Australian almonds. However, unlimited imports of duty paid almonds are still allowed during certain periods. Combined with the ability to store almonds over long periods this means that prices for Australian almonds are determined by .the alternative cost of importing almonds from the United States. The present system is unworkable. In August 1980 United States almonds landed in Australia for supply over the following 12 months was approximately $4.40 per kilo, setting the price of 70 per cent of the 1981 crop for delivery from March 1981 to February 1982.

Dramatic changes to exchange and United States production rates caused the United States almond price into Australia to drop by $1 to $3.30 per kilo and since to around $2.70. The tariff component of this price is some 25c. Obviously it is insignificant compared with the price differential of $1.70 per kilo. Now most Australian almonds contracted at $4.40 per kilo are still not delivered as buyers are faced with large losses if they have to sell against the cheaper, imported almonds. The remaining 30 per cent of the Australian crop is unsaleable except at ruling United States prices which are below the cost of production. As I said at the outset, opportunist traders are bringing in cheap almonds by the shipload. The responsibility for resolving this situation lies clearly with the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon). His answer to the question from the honourable member for Kingston (Mr Chapman) the other day was unsatisfactory. I am sure the honourable member recognised that. This is an issue on which we must have immediate decisions if the almond growers are to escape' their present problems. While Nixon has fiddled the almonds have got more than scorched and smoked. It has been over two months since the Department of Primary Industry was alerted to the problem. Every day which passes increases the damage to the Australian almond industry.


